welcome to mindful AI the podcast where
we explore how to create AI that is
beneficial to humanity ethical and
promotes human values and flourishing in
today's episode we interview Rasmus
hugard Rasmus is the founder and
managing partner of potential project he
was nominated by thinkers 50 as one of
the eight most important leadership
thinkers in the world today in this
episode Rasmus shares research and real
world examples that reveal how AI can
actually amplify human qualities and
create more compassionate
organizations we also discuss how AI
acts not just as a tool but as an active
agent reshaping the way we approach
leadership and Human
Resources if you find this episode
insightful please subscribe to mindful
Ai and leave us a review your feedback
helps us bring more of these important
and meaningful conversations to you and
others
and there we live our recording at least
okay here we are so welcome rosmus thank
you so so much for accepting to be our
very first guest in the mindful AI
podcast what an honor so I'll go through
your official bio and then we we'll get
started with the conversation so Rasmus
hogard is the founder and managing
partner of potential project he was
nominated by thinkers 50 as one of the
eight most important leadership thinkers
in the world today he writes for Harvard
Business Review Forbes Fast Company and
Fortune he's a sought after keynote
speaker and Leadership developer who
coaches and support C Suite Executives
at Global organizations such as Ikea
accenta City and
unila Rasmus is also a co-author of the
best selling
book the mind of the leader
how to Le yourself your people and your
organization for Extraordinary results
and
also compassionate
leadership I'm impressed M I'm very
impressed how to do hard things how to
do hard things in a human way so Jokes
Aside uh it's an absolute honor to have
Rasmus here H Rasmus for those who
already listen to episode zero we had a
chat myself and Martin rasos is the
reason why we connected so we used to
work uh under Ros leadership in the past
with potential project so that's how we
actually met myself in Martin so uh
welcome Rasmus thank you so much and uh
yeah look forward to to the conversation
over to you
Martin yeah I don't um first of all is
there anything you'd like to add to the
the bio or anything about about your
background that we that we missed there
yeah anything that maybe the listeners
um you know something that is not your
LinkedIn in your potential project
website that people would actually not
find out about you on the web perhaps
something more personal yeah The Human
Side of more personal would be that uh
that I'm a let's say a meditation
practitioner a Buddhist practitioner for
30 years and that's how Martin and I met
and Natalie I believe that's also what
somehow gr you into potential project uh
so the whole wisdom tradition uh leading
and and doing long-term Retreat is
something that has been my biggest
passion throughout throughout my life
and also informed the the work that
we'll be talking about today so that is
definitely a big big big part of it and
I would say Martin has been a very good
close friend and brother in that in that
Journey For What 15 years at least
something like
that at least
2010 yeah 15 years
exactly um yeah so um interesting I just
recently had the opportunity to give a
presentation on this idea of mindful AI
for 3M um and and one of the ideas that
I introduced is this possibility of
actually using AI as a way of of
strengthening some really human
qualities uh so potentially using AI to
help us raise self-awareness and those
kind of things and and so um you written
a couple of articles for Harvard
Business review and you touch on this
subject on how to use AI to kind of
augment leadership and and um uh
introduce those kind of human qualities
so could you elaborate a little bit on
on what's going on yeah very happy to
and very passionate about it but the
preamble to that is when chat gbt was
launched and it was clear that AI was
out of the box for the
mainstream I was super scared like I was
literally deeply deeply skeptical I
thought that AI was going to lead us
down to
dystopian robotic mechanical dark future
where people at work would be sitting in
dark basements being told what to do by
AI
and while there is a real like there's a
real risk that it will also go that way
what we have found through our research
is the is that the exact opposite is
also possible so our purpose is to
create a more human world at work and AI
can become a real amplifier in that
journey in so many different ways and
it's been deeply deeply fascinating to
hearing the stories of how companies are
actually using AI to create more human
organizations to create better leaders
and have lots of great stories that I
can share in share in that
regard yeah that's um I think that's a
great place to start um because I guess
AI is like you said it's out of the
bottle now or the Box Pandora's Box and
it's not going back in uh and and every
single company needs to relate to AI so
it's it would really interesting to hear
some of the success stories in relation
to yeah ethics and and human values isue
some of them to share yeah absolutely I
can start with the with one of them and
for all of these stories let's use the
analogy that AI has the potential to
become like an exoskeleton as in this
contraption we can put on that makes our
muscles stronger uh AI can do the same
for the mind and the Heart of human
beings um I'll tell tell tell one story
which uh was one of the really inspiring
for me was Ellen shup the chief HR of uh
of accenta one of the biggest the
biggest Tech firm in the world probably
who shared that she would used to spend
like one hour to prepare for a
performance review conversation so 45
minutes to gather all the data from the
different systems 10 minutes to like
structure it well and then the last five
minutes to like rehearse what she would
say now now with this AI performance
review coach she'll literally just press
one button and out she gets a report
that she'll just like skim through
there's all the data there and so on and
then she will spend the rest of that one
hour to ask herself much much much
deeper questions where is the person at
in life where are they at in the career
if she really Senses Into addition like
what's the next developmental
stage and a really important question
how does she want people to leave that
conversation what is the feeling the
emotion that she wants people to leave
the the annual review conversation with
so it's a real shift from managing
people and tasks to suddenly leading an
experience leading emotions seeing
humans as the whole humans that they are
and this is just a simple basic
performance review AI coach and that's
just one example of how incredibly
powerful AI can be to augment and
support our leadership to be more human
oriented great story thanks for sharing
Ras so what I'm hearing here is and
having worked for Accenture myself I
remember the performance review process
could be very very lengthy and uh
cumbersome uh and I think is much
shorter now you know but anyhow so um
Saving Time with the data analysis which
is actually the one of the key strengths
of a
processing all the data and then using
that time instead of massaging the data
and you know running reports and
everything to reflect on actually what's
going on here what's the situation with
this uh individual and thinking more
about the the the human aspects um so
that's a beautiful example of how can AI
can be used you know in a in a very
Mindful and useful way as you mentioned
before AI can um there's still those two
scenarios right I think even researchers
very divided we have the very optimistic
note talking about the Golden Age
leveraging Ai and we have the the more
pessimistic you have maybe the the
realis is in between if you could maybe
classify that way and you mention that
AI can
amplify um can be a big amplifier so um
in terms of um using AI make sure how
can leaders if there is an answer for
that how can leaders ensure that we are
using AI in an ethical and responsible
manner
um yeah given the potential you know
slide different directions that we could
go what are your thoughts around that
yeah so how leaders can make sure that
we use AI in the most ethically correct
way they can only companies
can Preamble for that is you you said
AI being a tool that can amplify and
that's true that is what AI is it's a
tool that can amplify just like a hammer
and a hammer we know can be used for
building shelters so we have room for
our head or it can be used to knock
someone on the head and do bad things
just like any tool though the the
difference with AI is it's not a
tool you can use it as a tool but in its
Essence it's more of an
agent if we look at tools the way tools
have been designed up until a few years
ago they were let's call them passive
tools like a hammer a shovel an email
whatever all of those things we're just
sitting there and waiting for a human to
tell it what to do or to do with it what
you wanted it to do AI while it is uh
reactive as in a passive you can use in
a passive way it's also an active
anybody that has co-pilot will know that
it's already reading your emails it's
recommending what you respond it's
prompting you to do things that you
wouldn't have thought about so it's an
active it's an it's an active agent
rather than a passive
tool and that's why the responsibility
for using AI in ethical ways is actually
not very much up to the leader him or
herself because they have little agency
in changing the agents rather it is of
course the check Departments of compers
but more so it's the
HR what HR needs to make sure that they
do the first like f most important is of
course all the ethical considerations
getting all the consent and having
absolute 100% transparency I talked
about Ellen shuk and accenta before the
system that they've built you know when
I talked to her about it I was like what
do people think about this and she said
well people actually have 100% access
people can before she pulls her data the
PE person she pulls data on has the same
access to look at that system as she
does
and also has the ability to remove data
from there if they think that that's the
right thing to
do so transparency is 100% important if
we don't have that nobody will trust an
AI and I think we should learn to trust
AI because it has great potentials but
it will require incredible
collaboration so it's coming down to HR
more than anything else that they do it
in the right ethical transparent data
privacy consider ation
way thanks R was I I really want to
pause shut up and and give a chance to
Martin to jump in and ask a question
because I'm sure he will have like 10
questions in his head but just Bas on
what you said Ras if I may and I'll zip
after this um when you started I I
thought that ah I know I guess no when
rasos is going on because I think that's
probably my projection AI can only be as
ethical as the people behind it and I
was thinking about the tech you know the
tech developer solution architect
project managers design and developing
AI uh and that's one of the the areas
that I think we look here into the the
mindful a podcast we want to talk to dat
scientists and machine learning experts
because until we have um robust solid
govern governance Frameworks in place
and legislation which is still catching
up who is actually in the front line
they are making decisions these people
are making decisions right um but for my
surprise mention HR which is very
interesting so um and and how you
position AI being a active versus a
passive agent that's that's very
interesting just thinking out alloud
I'll zip now thank you over to you
Martin I'll just I'll just one comment
on it to really make clear how serious I
am about this AI is two things it is an
amplifier of Effectiveness and that's a
tech like that's just something that
Tech and it people can take care of that
co-pilot is installed and trained the
right way so that people can save time
but the much more important is all the
areas where AI serves as an agent in all
the human processes that is 100% an HR
function and therefore hrun functions in
the future are already today have to
really really really educate themselves
and become experts in how to design HR
functions leadership development
functions culture processes through AI
because that is by far the most powerful
way that you can secure you have the
right culture and right leadership
behaviors in the
future um and yeah now they don't
um don't have to SI it on my account I
uh but it is true I'm I'm storing like a
backlog of of comments and questions as
as this progresses um so I um one thing
one thing you mentioned in
uh in these articles there's the um the
capacities of awareness and wisdom and
and compassion um and so so one of the
things I've been just thinking about is
is if these are things that um AI could
actually be helpful in US developing and
I I've been thinking for example would I
would
if I had an AI that receiv received the
same kind of sensory input as I do heard
the same things saw the same things and
then uh watched my behavior maybe that
AI could point out that potentially I
have a unconscious bias to I don't know
obese people or elderly or people of
other authenticities whatever it might
be and and you can actually confront me
with those things and say hey look you
have these unconscious biases and that
could then help me develop more
awareness more self self awareness and
more um so do you do you agree with that
kind of function for AI in the future
and having you seen any seeds of that
kind of thing yeah two answers to that
one is yes AI can actually do that and
let me give a an example of a company
that's doing that well
two those qualities that you talk about
awareness wisdom and compassion I'll
come back to those why they're so
important
and no AI can ultimately not help us to
train those so it's a little bit like
the exoskeleton while it makes us
stronger when we take it off we're not
stronger anymore so for that reason AI
doesn't really ultimately make us more
that but it can alter our behaviors so
let's come back to the example CVS which
is the I believe is the largest farma
fir in the world have developed AI for
many of the leaders and and client
chasing
leaders which and I can't share too many
details but
imagine a meeting that's happening
online you have an AI agent that's
sitting and
analyzing the emotional sentiment of the
person that you're talking with so let's
say Martin and I having a conversation I
may not be the most emotionally
intelligent or empathetic person so I
may not pick up on some of the words
that I'm saying is actually making
Martin feel
uncomfortable but because of you know
our emotions showing up in the facial
expressions and so on a good Ai and
that's pretty much any AI today has more
empathy and emotional understanding than
most humans will pick up on that very
very easily and it will Trump me with a
little like scripts down in the screen
that Martin can see but that I can see
hey Rasmus you may be aware that what
you said before makes Mar
go a little bit in defense position or
it just made him sad or he's upset
here's a recommendation for you to say
the
following and then with all the
algorithms of empathy and emotional
intelligence that AI like objectively
does
have it can help me to moderate my
behaviors to make sure that Martin feels
better careed
for so that's an incorrect I mean that I
find that just deeply fascinating
because we know that there are many
leaders that are not emotional
intelligent or very
empathetic it's very hard to be a leader
we should not Point finger at those
leaders not all human beings have those
skills in the same amounts so it's not
about are you a good or a bad leader
because you have those skills or not no
it is how can AI help you to develop
more awareness of those areas of your
leadership and AI can 100% do that
that's amazing
the three areas that you talked about
Mars in Awareness wisdom and
compassion are indeed The Three core
ingredients for leaders in the future we
did a the first study we did was in the
age of AI where things will be more
alterated more robotic and so on what's
the most important qualities for leaders
it was indeed awareness wisdom and
compassion Leaders with higher awareness
wisdom compassion have employees that
have and I'll just throw some numbers
97% higher trust in company leadership
not just in their own leader but in the
company leadership which has the Ribble
effects from peerreview studies finding
that product quality financial
performance many many other things for
the company is increased significantly
and there's a whole hopes of other
benefits that came out of these leaders
as rated by their employees so it's a
real powerhouse for leaders to up their
game on those areas and therefore the
other part of the equation of AI and
Leadership apart from using the let's
say the the tech to help me be more
emotional intelligent when I'm talking
to Martin is how do we help me how does
HR leaders help each individual leader
to be more aware more compassionate and
more uh wise so that they can bring them
into the leadership in a world that is
more robotic
um so how do you um how do you train
those those specific qualities um I
guess that's not that's not necessarily
related to to AI but it seems to be
really important in in leadership in
general and and I guess it might be
becoming even more important in the edge
of AI so so how would one one
about it's great to I suspect answer
Martin
but
IP yeah so there are the the the core of
the study was really to find out what's
the most important leadership qualities
and how do we augment ourselves with AI
the three most important new qualities
is awareness wisdom and compassion the
question is how do we then bring them
into play with AI and when it comes to
awareness the role of leaders in the
future in the realm of awareness is to
be excellent in mastering
context human leaders must set context
and let AI deliver content humans in the
future will not be delivering content
anymore it's just a matter of years it
will not be a thing anymore so humans
need to be really excellent set in
context when it comes to wisdom human
leaders need to be really good in asking
the right questions to the right things
and that AI provide answers and when it
comes to compassion human leaders need
to always check with the heart what is
my intention for the person or the
people that I'm with and then Leverage
The Power of the algorithms of AI to
make sure that our behaviors or Our
intention is translate into right
behaviors as an example I had before
with me having a kind ation with Martin
so that means it's not just awareness
wisdom compassion but it's also the
implications of that which is to be good
at setting context ask the right
questions and checking in with the heart
all the time and then we in the in in
the study we looked at what are the
under pining mindsets so now I'll just
give you an an exhaustive list list of
50 mindsets to be aware and master
context leaders need to have
adaptability self-mastery equinity
presence and Clarity and to be do good
at questions and wisdom is about
critical thinking beginners Minds with
their humility and integrity and finally
to to master the heart and have great
compassions about trust courage
resilience purpose and emotional
intelligence so those are basically the
the the the three foundational qualities
and the 15 underlying mindsets that we
see leaders in the future need to master
if they want to be relevant and good in
the age of AI now that was a lot of talk
I'll
shut I have five thank sorry before you
go N I just want to say we'll we'll
extract those 15 from Rasmus and put
them I don't know in the comment or the
the description of this episode so that
uh uh yeah because my brain isn't AI
augmented yet so I couldn't uh I
couldn't keep track
of this review article in I think it'll
be coming out in in in early November so
you can also make a link to that if you
if you
want yeah we'll definitely do that we'll
link we mentioned already uh a couple
articles we'll make sure that they're
all Linked In in the episode description
and all that sorry no no no not at all
oh wow um two things that two questions
that I can still remember that I didn't
lose is listening to arasmus One was
around uh which is really the tagline of
this podcast how to Advocate um for
human values in AI so one question that
I had for you before but now is actually
evolving here um if we were to train AI
as you know know AI models can be
trained whatever you know information we
putting it lears and go be goes beyond
what programmers actually understand how
far AI you know the the AI models are
going so if we were to train AI um to
learn core vert virtues Corum virtues
and U no character strings or virtues
however we want to call know those some
of those mindsets you mention courage
integrity and so on what would be a good
framework to use and I think we
mentioned before that Martin Salomon had
put together uh as a result of his
research you know the 24
Universal uh character strengths under
the six um virtu so that's one question
and another question that came to mind
maybe you choose Rasmus which which one
you would you like to it's around
decision making because AI is making
decisions right now in sectors like
education government services uh
insurance and so on so
um yes so I think is kind of related to
that so those human values or uh
mindsets how can we actually in battles
because decisions are you know we have
the human in the loop you know St
Russell which is one of the research is
in the AI field um he's a big advocate
of having humans in the loop when a big
decision or a crossroad um it's match uh
but you know smaller simple decisions
can be made by AI so um yeah so how can
we um enabled AI with those mindset and
human virtues and if we were to do that
what do you think based on your
extensive knowledge what could be a good
model you know if any your
framework yeah yeah yeah
I don't think that there's one model or
one framework that's the right I think
it's important that different AIS are
fed with different synthetic Frameworks
as in you feed information into an AI
and say this is let's say the AI freedom
to choose based on the context with
which it is asked and I think it's also
very important that there are actually
different like by Nature
different DNA of AI out there
if you take and ask the same ex you do J
gbt you get very different answers and
it is us assum that need to learn which
AI to go to for what kind of questions
if there was just one AI that was
trained in all the same things we would
all become one big horrible Echo Cher so
I'm not a fan of that having said that
when it comes to training on emotions I
think the examples you had are great uh
called emman work on the the universal
emotions I think would be a fantastic
starting
point
Thank um yeah so and and just tying on
to that one one thing that
um you hear a lot is is how important it
is to develop ethical Ai and and you
know obviously it is but it's very very
seldom that you hear
um um people go into any detail as to
what they actually mean when they say
ethical it's like it becomes this little
placeholder and then everyone is is um
saying yes yes it means to be ethical
but there might not even be agreement
but um so so just as for me as a as a
really pragmatic definition of what is
ethical is is you know not
harming people and you know contributing
to to to well-being and flourishing so
that's that's like the that's the basic
but then uh on top of that as humans
when we do that we need to like you said
we need to check Our intention so
intention is really key in in relation
to ethics so if for example if I you
know I give you a present but if my
intention is to manipulate you it's not
ethical but
if my intention is to make you happy
then you know it's prob ethical so so we
have we have the intention piece and
then the final piece is is the wisdom
and the clarity because you know even if
we have good intentions if we lack the
wisdom we just tend to mess things up so
that's a long for example to my actual
question which is um uh can we so the
intention and the wisdom part is is that
something that we can convey to AI do
you think or are
those something that will remain in the
human
domain I don't know clearly we can
convey that to AI it's just you know AI
is nothing but what we train it to be
and granted it does get more and more
complex and we'll need more and more
training as models grow bigger and
bigger but the seeds that we put into
into AI the way we train it determines
how it responds and how it how it reacts
with
us and it is very very important that AI
is of course made with the right ethical
considerations like should never give
advice on let's say how to take a life
which it at least those models that I'm
working with they just refuse to go
there um I actually had a really
terrible situation I was working at an
animal shelter in India for a while and
there was a a little monkey that had uh
been uh electrocuted by Electric Mast
fallen down was still alive but his arm
was dead the doctor didn't know how to
take it off they didn't know how to like
they couldn't find any drawings or
anything and I thought great I find
answers to everything on chat
gbt but it simply wouldn't give me even
though I know it has access to those
kind of things it wouldn't give that
that to me is ethical even though it's
of course it was super annoying um so I
think it's it's just very very important
that we as humans program it in these
early days of AI in RS that we want it
to function because it is shaped
mirrored on how we shape it and as with
any other baby that grows up they will
start have to have a life of their own
and the same will happen with AI it will
be harder and harder to control because
the models are bigger and bigger so the
the the first seats are the most
important
I think the the interesting question at
least in my context is is is
also when companies or organizations
institutions start to develop their own
AI based on already existing AI
platforms how do they create the ethics
that they want in there and this is
something that we talked to a lot of our
clients about when they start to adopt
whether it's co-pilot or or or or chat
GBC Enterprise version like how do they
train it to have the right values to
have the right ways of giving feedback
the right culture and all of that stuff
that's super super
exciting yeah and I mean it's it's
already um
one really basic conundrum that's Arisen
is that you know we train these by
necessity we train these large language
models on copyrighted materials and then
we have lots of artists and musicians
and and so on feeling that they have
their rights being violated so um so
we're causing harm to potential harm to
to those groups of people but we're
bringing potential huge benefit
to to other groups of people and and
that's happening right now we can't
train those things without violating uh
people's impossible personally being the
author of many books and giving tons of
talks and all of that because it is
accessible for AI is impacting the
answers that AI gives I'm very happy
about that I may lose money but I'm very
happy that our thoughts on leadership on
ethics on compassion is part of
impacting AI
happy I I'm I'm very happy that you uh
don't letting your royalty payment Trump
important oh one um such a nice b a
little bit of salus is good isn't it
talking about salus um one thing that
came to my listening to you just before
Rasmus is the um the talk there was a
keynote from A lady called Shannon V I
hope I'm mentioning her name correctly
um a researcher from Edinburg univers
she was here at melb Uni in April this
year um and she deled the the kote and
was talking about her book called AI
mirror uh which was in essence I mean I
guess my interpretation was around the
fact that um AI is basically reflecting
is a reflection of where humanity is in
a way the content in terms of content um
which leads me to um you know the point
that I mentioned earlier that um AI mod
and a i Solutions can only be as good in
terms of Ethics as the people that are
behind um those projects and initiatives
and you know and HR actually coming up
with requirements as you said which kind
of makes me think of the word that
potential project does you know and and
you do with you know been doing over the
last 10 15 years more now I guess um
which is like for me is like a full
circle back to the humans right AI is
great but
yeah if we really want to make aticles
and and in terms of governance I think
having worked in the in the governance
space for business intelligence that
analytics in the past it's great to have
rules but not necessarily rules will
make sure that people are following
those rules right uh in those Frameworks
so
um
um yes I'm just thinking out all lot I
don't don't know if there is anything
that you you like to comment I don't
have a question as such but just a
reflection on your comment before that
AI Conta would be a reflection on where
humanity is which I think makes a
priority to go back to humans again yeah
yeah and and as it does that and as we
know humanity is not necessarily at its
best when it's engaging with the digital
realm don't need to talk about any
particular social media but obviously
all of them are examples of how it's
just the lowest common denominator with
the worst trash and filth and making us
deeply deeply
unhappy so and tri intentionally
triggering our our worst B emotions and
in all of that like it has everything
that's bad for fre Humanity there's no
doubt about it also has good things I'm
sure not sure what it is but there's
definitely downside there so what is it
that humans need to contribute in the
future as AI is getting better and
better and better more knowledgeable
better answers than any human
being we as humans need to really double
down on vertical development as in if we
want to be
relevant if we want to add
value in the future Marketplace whether
we're leaders or
employees we need to start with a mind
that's very clear and calm see the
bigger picture has the wisdom to step
away from knowledge and answers and ask
the right
questions so in the future of work where
AI is taking over more and more the
competitive advantage of humans is the
spaciousness the depth of our minds and
the warmth of our hearts
period yeah that's uh
um that actually
um that gets me thinking about um
something that um I find a bit troubling
um not those things you mentioned I
don't find them troubling at all I agree
that that's what's that's what's going
to be
needed but what I find troubling is that
um I often
hear experts in the field even saying
you know that um they say once AI
reaches AGI or artificial general
intelligence and then they continue the
sentence with and thus have feelings
emotions and
Consciousness then we will so there's is
and there was actually a recent study
that came out um that surveyed people
that are interacting with chat GPT and
two-thirds of them attributed some kind
of Consciousness to this chat bot that
they were um
uh interacting with and and I just from
um uh from my
personal perspective on that I don't
think Consciousness will pop out
of you know even doesn't matter how
sophisticated those algorithms will be
uh Consciousness will not suddenly
magically pop out of them AGI might you
know intelligence is even at this point
a question you know will we reach that
kind of goal I don't even know but
certainly I don't think um we'll have
conscious machines that that feel and
intend and uh all those things I don't
know what's um what's your take on that
do you do you think it's dangerous that
we ascribe already Consciousness to to
these um
algorithms I think the algorithms are
dangerous that's my first answer
there's so many predictions on where AI
is going to go a lot of it is going to
do us great good in health care and
leadership in so many
areas but it is
not it's not without reason that some of
the biggest
AI experts in the world are really
cautioning the use of it and even
someone as Reckless as Elon Musk has
been warning Humanity against AI for so
many years so I think AI in itself is
problematic let alone the climate impact
and everything but I think it's
problematic when it comes to
Consciousness I think it's wonderful
engineering tech nerd wishful thinking
to think that AI will there's no doubt
it will have free will and it will have
like intelligence at levels that are far
surpassing any human being or any being
that has ever existed I have no question
about that but there's a very big leap
from being intelligent or having having
intelligence and into Consciousness
Consciousness doesn't arise out of
nowhere emotions doesn't arise out of
nowhere there has to be someone that can
actually feel things and algorithms
which AI is cannot feel things it can
tell itself it can feel things but it
can't feel things
so I'm not so worried about that it's
not I don't believe it's going to happen
though there was one movie that really
troubled me now I can't remember the
name of it and for any listener out
there if you want to understand AI don't
read just go and watch all the great AI
movies there was a movie that came out
recently I can't remember the name but
which has the most incredible plot to it
which was basically AI were the monks
that were sitting in monasteries up in
the him Himalayas that AI were the ones
that actually had the deepest emotions
and greatest care for others and humans
as we know that were symbolized by the
US Army of course were just the ones
that were ruthless and effective and
everything else it was kind of
interesting yeah and that that M the
Creator movie that's a
title well um going back to raso's
previous state I I thought was so
beautiful I thought we should just
finish this episode there you know with
the statement that you made before but
um but thanks for for your question
Martin and
um
um something that came to my listening
to you this day Rasmus was this I think
it's live 2.0 or live 3.0 from ma tag
Mark I don't know if you came across the
the book um Mar mark tag Mark is a is a
big research in the I field and um and
his book I think is very Balanced Life
2.0 is a most check it out if you can um
he articulates know the view of the The
Optimist the pessimist and he he calls
that there is still time you know as you
mentioned there are both ways there's
still time for us to get it right but
yeah there's but there's a lot of risk
with algorithms as you said
um
so yes I think was good to hear that
that from you that um you know I feel
that I'm not alone that you also have
concerns about
algorithms um and as much um as you know
there are wonderful things that AI can
can do for Humanity we need to be very
very very mindful um very careful about
um the direction it's going yeah and and
that's know involving governments
organizations and know sorry and that's
actually what I wanted to to share with
you
um you Val the author of sapiens um when
he was interviewed by Tim feris in his
podcast Tim Ferris podcast a few years
ago when Tim feris asked him uh what was
his major concern around history of
humanity and Uval being you know Yuval
having know studied the history of
humanity uh for so long um so between
among um climate change advance of AI
and nuclear you know a risk of a nuclear
war you responded that II was his main
concern because we have so many
organizations in the rush to actually to
advance AI Without Really necessarily
thinking about the the consequences
while climate change we don't have
anyone trying to accelerate nuclear
world we don't have anyone trying to
accelerate but AI we have you know the
four largest companies in the world
trying to win the race uh let alone
government as well yeah so
um just just just wanted to
sh AI is out of the bottle out of the
box whatever we call it there are so
great capitalist interest for this to be
furthered that there is no chance there
is zero chance that AI will be stopped
zero and there is zero
influence that all of us normal mortal
beings can have on it we can impact
maybe a little bit how it's implemented
in our company or how we engage with
ourselves but ultimately it is so far
out of normal people's control and
within the control of very few men and
I'm saying men very
deliberately that where this is going is
just one big experiment that we have no
idea how it's going to end just like
with social media and we seen it hasn't
done good for us it hasn't lived up to
its promise
I personally doubt AI is going to do it
but I will also say we can't fight
against it there's nothing we can do so
we might as well learn and enjoy the
ride I I I think also
um
um as
we we get yeah so this is I guess the
question I'm trying to formulate so we
um so I'm I'm the CEO of a software
company and I got lots of programmers
working and and they are getting
massively helped by Ai and then you
think you know a task that would take
them two days before now they can do in
two minutes and initially I thought
that's great because then you know more
free time for humans but then the usual
thing tends to happen so instead of now
we do 32 minute things in an hour and we
just we constantly just keep filling up
with work anyway so yes AI is making us
more efficient but then we just cran
more work in uh and I think personally
it's great if AI takes a bunch of our
tasks and our jobs in our work because
then
maybe if we make that choice we can have
more space to cultivate exactly the
things you talked about and leaning into
it means to just be human and explore
this wonderful
experience uh and not just cramming more
 in there but um what do you think
that is going do you think we'll take
our free time and use it or do you think
we'll just kind of become hyper
effective and and even more more more
and more busy because of yeah because of
AI I can talk about it only from a
company perspective like what's what a
compan is
doing and I've talked with probably a
good
150 CEOs chief of HR and chief of
learning everybody acknowledges that AI
is a new email in that email came with
the promise we're all going to save a
lot of time so that we can do more
important things but nobody's doing more
important things everybody's doing less
important things more emails more
business so when I asked them the
question I've asked every single one of
them do you have plans to make sure that
AI does not just become a new
email only one has answered yes the chro
of IBM nigle actually has implemented
the first structure or process in IBM
whereby When leaders save time through
AI that is directly funneled into higher
value work as in having a particular
conversation with a particular person in
the area where you save that time that's
the first story I've heard and given
I've talked to so many I am a little
worried that not more people have
thought about that yet so I'm not too
optimistic yeah and I I mean I I tell my
employees that if you've you know if you
feel that You' saved an hour you know
just feel free to use that hour for
something that you
find uh meaningful and and and you know
Martin you're
very you're
very I wish wish there were more like
you but I doubt
it yeah well um I think
we hopefully we will be able to do what
we haven't been able to do so many times
before and and take the opportunity
to uh not just become more and more busy
because of AI but I guess we'll see we
will see that's the Mantra we will
see I'm I'm getting conscious of time um
and um I don't know if it's nearly time
to wrap up conscious of Rasmus time more
than anything um I just wanted to say
that
um of course I could not expect anything
less but thank you so much for your very
sincere honest well balanced you know
sharings Rasmus you know um it was very
refreshing and uh very insightful so um
yeah thank you for making time for to
talk to us about this very um Hot Topic
you know uh and uh very very relevant to
really you know not exaggerating to
through off your man really so thank
you yeah um yeah thank you so much
I I truly enjoy this conversation and as
I said we will post the links to the
things we' mentioned and you know people
can go to potential project.com if they
want to know more about your work you're
on LinkedIn if people want to follow you
there and uh and so on and so forth I
don't know is there any particular thing
you would like to mention in terms of
what people
can um where they can turn if they want
to connect with some of your work or is
does that cover potential righton
probably the best ones yeah yeah buy
Rasmus
books they're Avail they available they
available on
Audible I thought I thought you got from
um I was thinking maybe you're selling
them because you had them no I'm just
very biased I give those those books to
my clients you know that's how I the
welcome pack here it is do your homework
and then we can
talk get some Foundation ride
um well beautiful to have the
conversation with the two of you who are
well versed in all areas of the
conversation say really nice to see both
of you thank
you yeah thank you so much and um
hopefully you'll uh even though you try
not to travel you make it to Melbourne
sometime and we could maybe maybe have a
second followup conversation face to
face that would be L would love
that
they thank you
