welcome back everyone uh my guest today
uh is uh one of those that I call a
sensei in my heart even though I have
never uh met them in person Dr uh Robert
Sapori is definitely one of my big
teachers Robert is a neuroscientist he's
a a primatologist uh with countless
numbers of books I actually don't even
know if I read all of them uh but I can
always tell you that the ones I read I
absolutely love of course behave
determined why zebras don't get ulcers
fabulous piece of work a primates Memoir
the trouble with testosterone I loved
that idea uh so many of them uh truly
truly enlightening uh Robert at uh at
the bottom of my heart is the person
that basically tells us
how biology makes you the human that you
are so so that link between biology and
uh and our Behavior Uh I don't think has
ever been uh summarized as well as it
has been by my guest today Dr Robert
sapolsky this is part of our minseries
on stress in preparation uh for unstress
to be released in the US uh 30th of
April and uh in international English in
the UK on the 9th of May uh unstress is
a big uh effort on my side to take a
million people out of stress every year
as part of the 1 billion happy Mission
uh so please uh do give it a chance uh
go do your pre-orders if you want if you
do pre-order uh keep your pre-order uh
receipt go to unstress b.com and come to
our uh opening seminar uh uh on 28th of
April uh with no further Ado I have been
looking for this forever Robert as I as
I told you before we started the best
thing about having a podcast is those
moments Where You Meet Your Heroes so
thank you for being
here well thank you for having me on
this is a very nice way to start off the
morning so much appreciated it is
definitely a very good way for me to
start uh you know next week so that's uh
that's how how important this is for me
so so Robert I I'd like to start with um
where where I where I you know was
wishing to to include you in this series
was to start with the biology of stress
and how how stress actually works within
um you know humans from a biological
point of view stress seems to be this
very uh un understood thing for people
who are feeling stressed it seems so
unpredictable uh but if we do if we
truly understand the biology it's a lot
more predictable than we think it is so
maybe start as there and then we we flow
to the more interesting sides of it well
I guess for me the most critical thing
in terms of making sense of humans and
stress and stress related disease um is
of course just how bizarre of a species
we are uh evolutionarily something I'm
always struck by is you know you go back
a hundred million years and there was
some sunny afternoon somewhere where
some tiny dinosaur was being chased by a
predatory one and the little one was
running for its life the big one was
running for its meal and you know highly
stressed moment and what astonishes me
is the certainty with which we know that
both of those dinosaurs were secreting
the exact same stress hormone that we
still doing these days um or something
very close structurally to it something
like cortisol or
hydrocortisone um the fact that the
stress response is this ancient piece of
WI ing in us it's like the basic
building blocks are the same in US
vertebrates mammals
reptiles fish amphibians birds so on
everybody out there has roughly the same
one and it's been around forever and
it's always solving the same problem
which is
some emergency where you are running for
your life and everything comes down to
what happens in the next two minutes and
what did we evolve we evolve the
capacity as smart primates to secrete it
in response to psychological stress and
chronic psychological stress and
thinking about some horror going on on
the other side of the planet and we're
using it in a way it didn't evolve for
and that's where we get into trouble and
and and and we call that smart I mean
it's quite interesting when you really
think about it because you know every
every other species in in you know on
this planet would normally stress as an
an escape mechanism a survival mechanism
right to a to a clear and present danger
we we tend to to create threats uh that
are not even sensed by the amigdala if I
understand that correctly they're really
generated in the prefrontal cortex and
then affecting our stress response which
is not smart at all when you really
think about it no and would make no
sense at all to some other species I if
you sit down a a hippo and try to
describe be fears about the planet
warming or whatever and that's causing
you to secrete this particular stress
hormone it would make no sense at all or
the fact that you're doing it when
you're stuck in traffic or when you're
thinking about mortality or when you're
any such psychologically it is just
unprecedented in the history of like
animals running around on this planet to
be smart enough to be able to make
yourself sick just by thinking or
feeling or remembering so I I quoted you
in the book actually my co-author Alice
quoted you in the book uh you know from
why zeas don't get ulcers uh and the
idea that that animals will just suspend
the stress response uh as soon as the
threat is gone right they'll shake their
bodies and they're done right uh
we we keep we keep it going we keep we
we even increase it a little we add a
bit of drama and a bit of you know our
previous trauma and as as you
beautifully stated in so much of your
work we may even go back genetically to
things that happened tens of thousands
of years ago and include that in our
genetic uh makeup and and basically just
create a massive problem out of nothing
that exists in the current moment at
all yeah exactly in a way that is just
bizarre and unprecedented again my book
I wrote about stress and why zebras
don't get ulcers uh metaphor but zebras
is just your prototypical Beast running
around in the grasslands and such and
it's sitting there eating grass minding
its own business a lion suddenly leaps
out the zebra runs for its life like
crazy has a mass massive stress resp
response and good luck for the zebra
escapes and the lion gives up and
disappears and you go look at the zebra
two minutes later and clearly the only
thing in its brain at that point is what
to make of this blade of grass versus
that blade of craft just it's gone it's
gone the the capacity for just
anticipatory stress and especially
stress anticipatory stress responses for
things that never really happened um
that's where our problems come from I
mean it seems simple like when you think
about it
logically yeah if if it hasn't happened
I don't need to stress about it yet but
we're so bad at that so teach us how do
we change this well we're very very
smart and showing where we could get
into trouble is our smartness is not
just purely cognitive it has big
emotional contents to it and we're the
only species out there that could read a
book and when the the protagonist dies
at the
end you're devastated you're you're
emotionally overwrought you could sit
there and you could watch a frightening
movie and you can have a massive stress
response despite the fact that you're
sitting there and wait those really are
not they don't exist those are fictional
characters those are actors playing them
they're computer generated images you're
getting upset about
pixels it's wild that we're capable of
doing that um and it's wild that we can
thus have a stress
response as abstract as reading about
something that's happening to refugees
on the other side of the planet and it's
wild that is species we can be smart
enough that we send a drone off and we
kill somebody whose face we have never
seen we have this capacity to abstract
our emotions over space and time like
nothing else out there for better or
worse how do we stop that we're just
another primate in some ways we've got
the same blueprint going on in our heads
for how we feel empathy but if you're a
baboon out in the annah in East Africa
um the empathy you feel is maybe for a
member of your group who's having a hard
day um it depends on who they are and
whether you're friends with them and
what's in it for you and that sort of
thing and it's a very good thing that we
instead can feel empathy for somebody on
the other side of the planet or somebody
whose life experiences are completely
different from and we're able to see the
commonality and we're able to walk a
mile in their shoes and that some of the
time that enormous capacity to feel
somebody else's pain um thank God we're
smart enough as a species to do that
that could be a very good thing when
it's something we have no control over
when it's something that's purely in our
heads when it's something that's driven
by you know emotional needs on our part
that are purely selfish or heartless or
some such thing you know then you're
having a emotional responses that are
nothing but humans at their worst what
can we do you know in terms of Stress
Management tell the difference between
what you can control and what you can't
tell the difference
between information about the world
around you um that is act actually
useful rather than merely stress
inducing um tell the difference between
real sources of social court and people
who turn out to be just acquaintances or
worse than that you know and recognize
that all of those are difficult slow
processes to get good at a lot of people
will say how how can I be calm when um
when there is so much Injustice in the
world when there is a child uh you know
that fell in a well all the way in
Morocco but it's still a child anyway
right I need to be informed formed of
that stuff Mo I need to be you know
aware of it I need to find my humanity
and my heart in relating to
it well it's wonderful if that's the
only way you could do that um it's
counterproductive if it leaves you in an
ulcerated mess of anxiety depression
things of that sort because those tend
to be disorders of
incapacitation um it's not productive if
the empathy you feel for somebody else
is so painful that all you can think
about is how to reduce your own pain in
that circumstance which empathy is not a
virtue in and of itself empathy is a
wonderful thing only in so far as it
moves you to act
compassionately and if instead it causes
you to flee this is not a very good
thing I love these studies that have
shown the following okay so you're
looking at
somebody in trouble somebody in pain
somebody whatever and you were feeling
empathy for them and the question
becomes is this a predictor of you're
going to actually be able to reach out
and help them or is it going to become
too painful for you and you have to
pretend it's somebody else's job and oh
I couldn't make a difference anywhere
and there's two ways of predicting it on
two very different levels of getting at
how brains work that ultimately wind up
being the exact same thing on the
psychological level do you sit there and
say oh my God what if that were
happening to me that would be so awful
that's a predictor that's going to get
so painful for you that you're going to
decide I need to look away on the other
hand if you're sitting there saying oh
my God imagine how painful it is for
that person experiencing it that's a
ictor of having enough Detachment that
you could actually act
compassionately so
interesting yes and then physiologically
it's the exact same thing you sit there
and you look at this other person in
pain and if you have a massive increase
in your heart rate and your blood
pressure that's a predictor that it's
all all going to be much too much and
you've got too much of a stress response
and the pain you need to deal with at
that point is the pain you are feeling
if you could sit there and
physiologically be a little bit detached
that's the predictor that you're going
to be able to work on their pain rather
than your own this ability to get a
little bit of
distance it's you know every time you
have a
pediatrician that could give a child a
vaccine and the child is screaming when
pain over it and all of that and the
pediatrician nonetheless has developed
the skills of Detachment to know I'm
actually saving this child's life by
doing this you're seeing that principle
in
action so so that the this this is so
eye openening to be honest because in
the last few you know in the last many
months actually probably over two years
now because of the nature of my work all
over the world uh you know you see that
the current events in the world are
leading to massive massive um
engagements on social media and you know
anger and uh and comments and you know
people believing that if you're not
commenting on one side then you're on
the other side and so on and so forth
which interestingly I I tended to always
tell people that which I think aligns
with your first comment that you know a
comment you know is only valuable if it
makes a difference and accordingly
empathy should lead you to engage in
ways that make diff a difference but
you're also but when when you saying it
now I've actually noticed that a lot of
the shouting is not about the victims a
lot of the shouting is about the
screamer exactly so it's it's basically
I am angry that this is happening in the
world it is an issue for me it's not
that I have an empathy for the victim I
am directing my anger at the world uh
because because I because it serves me
to to to vent that anger right uh what
what you're saying is the predictor is I
am actively engaged to alleviate the
suffering of the victim that's the kind
of empathy that we're looking
for yeah and what that often requires is
for us to do something that's very
difficult in terms of feeling empathy
what are the easiest circumstances for
somebody to feel empathy and act
compassionately if it's for somebody who
is
nearby psychologically or literally
somebody who seems like a me seems like
an us somebody who you can identify with
and somebody whose troubles is something
you could imagine something that is
comprehensible to you and thus we Face
our toughest challenges which is to feel
empathy for somebody who is very distant
in some form or other psychologically
and way different than us and people who
count as someone like me and who has a
problem that is way different from
anything you've ever had to deal with
and what we have here is a prescription
for why it is so much easier to feel the
Pains of ingroup members for people who
count as an us rather than a them and
that's where the biggest challenge is
because the world is full of people
where we have to work very hard to try
to imagine the world from their persp
perspective I've waited to meet you for
a long time so let me tell you why I
find your work so intriguing because I
often respond the first time I hear some
of your extreme comments with a no in my
mind I go like no no that that doesn't
make sense like I I don't like this
right or I don't want to align with this
and then you listen to it again and then
you go like but there is so much almost
brutal truth in it you know it's like I
I I feel that in your work you're like I
don't care how it's going to make you
feel it's just what the science says
really right and and so you know you
might as well take it from me get angry
if you want but it is what it is right
and and when you when it when you when
you remember your TED Talks around five
six years ago uh the first one uh yeah
it was so intriguing I don't recall it
exactly now because it was a long time
ago but it was I think it was watch 20
million times or so and and you start to
address violence and and the idea that
somehow for some of us some violence is
good and some violence is horrible okay
and and it's the same person and you
know you you you you'd it's almost like
what you see in the movies when when the
bad guy is killed you're happy when the
good guy is killed you're upset right or
you know you sort of almost at the end
of the movie you want the bad guy to
suffer before he dies right and and
that's so inhuman in an interesting way
but it speaks to the tricks that our
biology play on us would you would you
be would you care to mention that a
little bit well it's part of our
enormous vast complexity um in that
humans there's this paradoxical thing
about us without question we are the
most Mis ably violent species on this
planet and it's horrifying and without
question we are the most compassionate
empathic Cooperative altruistic species
on this planet and often it's the same
person who's capable of those extremes
often it's the same behavior at the same
time and it's in the eye of the beholder
we have this enormous human capacity to
do good in some settings and bad in
others and what is challenging for me is
the similarities underneath when we're
looking at us at our best and at our
worst we have moments where we can act
with strong emotions to stop someone
from doing what they're doing and in one
setting that's an absolutely appalling
act and in another setting it's a
greatly humanitarian one and what that
tells us is for example we don't don't
hate violence we hate the wrong kind of
violence when it's the right kind we
love it we leap up we're excited we pay
money to see it in a movie we give out
medals for the person who has done it
and saved innocent people or whatever
and in the same way we approve of love
we don't do it in all cases because when
it's the wrong kind we are appalled when
it is someone who loves the wrong person
who brings them tremendous pain when it
is someone who loves inflicting pain we
don't uniformly hate hatred and we don't
uniformly love love because they're
context dependent damn we've got
complicated brains
going and you and you go that layer
deeper and suddenly all of the all of
the romantics realize that it's not you
know uh one size fits all and all of the
you know of the violent ones realize
it's not the one size fits all but
I I have to say the first time I heard
you say this it really took me a very
long time because I I hate violence a
lot more than I like it I mean uh uh
when when you're when you're speaking
now you you always hit that thing that I
cannot disagree with right so you know
if if someone saves an innocent Life by
using violence well I'm going to have to
I'm going to have to approve of that
actually celebrate that right uh but but
but I tend to to say say if we ever
revert to violence it has to be the very
very L resource right however having
said that I think I think the reality of
the matter is that the species in
general I think since the Gladiator
years has has been quite celebratory of
violence in in so many ways which again
gets me back to the to the biology right
like why are we like that why do humans
approve of what empathetically they
wouldn't want for
themselves
because our capacity for empathy um
comes with fine print comes with
conditions as to who we could feel it
for here's here's another study that I
love showing you know just
how terrible things can be with us as a
species um you take somebody there's a
part of the brain called the anterior
singulate cortex um and it's got a lot
to do with empathy it's the part of the
brain you you put somebody in a brain
scanner and you poke their finger with a
pin and a whole bunch of areas in your
brain activate and one area is saying
that's my finger that's not my toe and
another area is saying that's a sharp
pain that's not an abrasive pain and an
area like the anterior singulate is
saying oh what does that pain mean to me
what's the interpretation I'm giving to
it and if it's a very aversive
interpretation it will activate it's I
don't like this I am made to feel
stressed unhappy unsafe whatever okay so
now you put somebody in a brain scanner
and you don't poke their finger with a
pin make them watch their loved one have
their finger poked with a pin and the
part of the brain that says ooh that's
your finger not your toe it doesn't
activate because it's not your finger
and it's not your toe and it doesn't say
it's not a sharp paint it's not it's not
telling you anything like that but the
anterior singulate activates because
it's the part of the brain where you're
also feeling somebody else's pain wow
that's a there's neurons there that can
not tell the difference between your
pain and somebody else's but now you
look at a study where you put somebody
in a brain scanner and they're looking
at a little film clip and they see
somebody's hand and they're seeing a
needle poked into the hand and is needle
goes in you just squinted you just
exactly were oh my God I can't even look
at that and all of that and then you
look at the experiment and if the hand
has a skin color that is not your own on
the average the anterior singula doesn't
activate as much in your average test
subject you don't feel their pain as
much jesz you make the skin color purple
and it has no effect because you're
saying oh for some reason
they're messing around with like the
computer Graphics or something here but
oh my God that would hurt so much no
make it realistic and it depends on
Whose pain whose face whose skin whose
circumstance and that's the thing with
us on a certain you know neurobiological
level it's the most straightforward
thing in the world oo tell me what the
brain is doing when you pull a trigger
and I can tell you the exact
neurobiology of the command going to
these muscles calling causing it to what
cont contrast rather than extend or
whatever and it's it's always the same
but if you're pulling that trigger doing
something appalling or if you're pulling
that trigger doing something suicidally
Brave to draw fire on yourself to save a
bunch of other it's the exact same you
know male Act it's the same and it has
such different if you move your hand to
put it on top of somebody else's that
could be a moment of great empathy and
compassion that could be a moment of
enormous betrayal of a loved one and
it's all context wow it's not the it's
not the action it's the meaning of the
action and boy is that complicated when
it comes to us as humans at the end of
the day though it is a it's interior
singular that is basically telling me I
I can relate to another human and that
also could be uh which I I don't
remember which book you mentioned that
in uh can be altered with stress so if
if 2 minutes before I was feeling
stressed because I was in the traffic
jam uh I would actually have less uh uh
um empathy to another human's pain
because of my
stress exactly which is Thoroughly
discouraging and totally familiar yeah
when the world is horribly stressful um
your your sort of landscape Your Horizon
as to who counts as someone whose pain
you feel becomes very local and very
narrow and very parochial and very built
around people who look like me or pray
like me or love like me or eat food like
me or or any such thing like that it
becomes very very local and what's
research has shown sort of my lab about
a decade ago we did a collaboration
showing with this that part of what goes
on during stress when you feel less of a
capacity for empathy is this class of
stress hormones cortisol
glucocorticoids um are working in the
brain and part of involves the anterior
singulate and makes it more more selfish
and more focused on his own needs and
you know translating out into
neurobiology it makes it neurons they
less responsive to stimuli to somebody
else's pain it makes the threshold much
much higher stress does that stress
makes some people at their best and I
think what we've seen you know
flagrantly since the start of the
pandemic is it brings out the worst in
an awful lot of people and fear does
that and anxiety and pain and insecurity
and uncertainty and a sense of
helplessness and hopelessness it brings
out the best in some of us but it does
awful things to an awful lot of people
and that's the neurobiology about why a
brain that is very very stressed is a
brain that has a whole lot of trouble
feeling the pain of somebody who counts
as a them rather than as an
us do you think this is from an
evolutionary biology point of view like
sort of we we survived because of our
tribal come together somehow so I need
to be closer I need to care more about
those who are like me and I need to
protect them more and so on but those
who are further away you know they could
be the enemy or at least not related to
my
survival yes but in such an interesting
way when it gets to us okay this is this
is like the most depressing literat out
there take volunteers you put them in a
brain scanner once again it always seems
like these depressing stories the first
sentence is always you put somebody in a
brain scanner so you got somebody in
there and you're flashing up pictures of
faces and you flash up the face of
somebody of A different race and in
about 75% of people there's activation
of the amydala the amydala a part of the
brain having to do with fear and anxiety
and aggression okay that's awful what's
even more awful is the amydala activates
in under 100th of a second in a fraction
of a second what thought even begins
before you even consciously know what
you are looking at your visual
processing system has a shortcut that
sends information to the amydala the
amydala knows what you were looking at
if it's an emotional arousing thing it
knows it before you were even
consciously aware of it by about a half
second or so oh my God that's the most
depressing thing on Earth because it
activates in response to the face of
somebody who's a them oh my are we are
we innately wired for racism for example
and the answer to that is that's the
craziest thing on Earth because you take
a non-human primate and you show them a
picture of the face of them somebody
from an outg group or and their igula
activates you show this has been around
for millions and millions of years and
races in so far as that's even like a
scientifically valid concept races are
only about 30,000 and 40,000 years old
or so like nobody ever used to encounter
somebody who looked very different from
them we're
hardwired to divide the world between us
and them but it's really really easy to
manip ulate us as to who counts as in us
and who counts as in them and this is
shown in the followup studies now you
take somebody you put them in a brain
scanner and you get somebody who is a
sports fanatic they're a soccer fan and
they have their home team their soccer
team that they would kill for and they
would die for and they're a fan of that
team and all of that and there's the
soccer team that's the hated enemy and
the Rival and all of that and now you're
flashing up faces once again for this
person in the brain scanner and each one
of these faces is wearing a cap either
with the logo of your home team or the
logo of the hated enemy team and now
your amydala is responsing to is
responding to the Hat they're wearing
the amigdala doesn't care about skin
color who is an us and who is a them it
has changed in a fr action of a second
we're constantly changing our categories
with that so it is very very innate in
us I think exactly as you say along the
lines of you know millions of years ago
as to divide the world into us and them
and to not like the thems but who counts
of them we could change in a second's
notice with symbolic stuff with things
like that God oh my God I mean what
would do to Shadow you for a day what
what how do you come up with those
experiments well no I I did not do those
experiments I I I I mostly have just
done things to rats and and monkeys and
I have not done a whole lot to actual
humans but no this is reading
astonishingly good work by lots and lots
of colleagues out there but they're
amazing ones because they show but then
look at look at like the world around us
somebody calls you up on the phone and
says hi I'm on the other side of the
world and a kid has just fallen in a
river and I'm thinking about jumping and
to save them but if I do that like I've
got my airplane ticket back home this is
like ancient times where like it was
actual piece of paper I've got my
airplane to if I jump in the river it's
going to disintegrate and it's going to
to be ruined and I'm going to need money
to buy a new plane ticket will you give
me the money for that and you'll say oh
you know that's kind
of I I I I would love to but here's the
reason why yet if you were standing
there in that same moment on the edge of
that River and you saw this kid whose
face you have never seen before and
they've fallen in there and everyone's
saying oh my God and there's a decent
chance that you would be the person who
jumps into the river to save the child
wait a second you were unwilling to like
pay for a plane ticket on the other side
of the planet to in effect save this
child's life but if it's right there in
front of you this child feels like
you're and its
context it's this crazy sort of thing
where in the moment whose pain just rips
us to
shreds and very
enormously and you'll never see that
child again and you had never seen them
before and that child may have belief
systems that are utterly alien to you
but for that Split Second and for that
Split Second the empathy overrides all
of that if you're one of the ones who
has that capacity to do that and it
depends on who you are and who they are
and if you've gotten a good night's
sleep and how you were raised and raised
to hate and yeah and it's very dependent
on
context I mean I can't help but think
that this is so magnified by our modern
world though I mean when you really
think about the idea of the hats and and
how who who you define as your tribe and
who's the enemy uh and and look at
social media and how social media
divides us into those you know if you
look at if you look at that idea of the
distant uh uh um you know events in the
world even if they're affect ing many
but they're not within your domain or
within your neighborhood uh and and how
you would feel differently about them
and how mainstream media is is playing
that card in a in a very interesting way
and and and you have to you have to
recognize how much more stressed we
become because of the way the modern
world is designed because of our our
connection to those kinds of magnifiers
that are playing to our
weaknesses oh are weaknesses that
sometimes have the potential to bring
out wonderful things in us but are
weaknesses that very readily can do
exactly the opposite and you know you
you you mentioned the word before
tribalism which is such an apt
appropriate world for making sense of so
much of what we're about um as a primate
as a ape as a human thing and often
because of how complex we are um the
signals we're building ourselves around
as to who counts is an Us and Them is
remarkably arbitrary I me this you can
look okay here's two people one of them
is wearing a big cowboy hat and the
other one is wearing a
sar and merely by looking at that you
can tell one of them thinks that cows
are good for eating and one of them
think that cows are good for worshiping
yeah you can tell which one or you look
at two men and merely by the type of hat
they're wearing you can tell who they
think should be able to control access
to the Wailing Wall and the Temple mount
in Jerusalem whether it should be
someone Muslim or someone Jew just by
the hat that just by the way they trim
their beard like whoa we're doing some
very interesting stuff there in terms of
how we could signal to Strang
wow I've never met that person before
but I know I'm willing to kill for them
or I'm willing to die for them because
they've got the same ideology or
Theology and I can tell just by one
because they look like they've got the
same they they don't even know that they
do yeah exactly because you can go on
that showing how abstract of wow we're a
species that's willing to kill over the
color of a flag
like whose flag are you waving what gang
are you wearing the T-shirt colors of
what you know any of those things and
that is a very complicated species
that's going on there and it is very
very very hard to sit somebody down and
say hey you're you're willing to kill
that person because of their ideology or
theology or all of that but you want to
know something amazing if you happen to
have been born there
you would think like one of them you
would be willing to kill one of your
folks now you'd be a different per it is
totally arbitrary that you have these
beliefs because you would be a
completely different and You' really
think and no no no but this is what
makes sense to me people have a very
very hard time understanding just how
arbitrary their hatreds and their loves
and their
loyalties their obediences and their
things of that sort how arbitrary it is
and yet we feel it our brains process it
with an intensity that it's unimaginable
to us that he you could easily have been
a very different person you didn't pick
that womb that you spent nine months in
you didn't pick that mother you didn't
pick that culture you were born in and
you would have been a very different
person and the thing you were willing to
kill for a die for now would be
incomprehensible to the same you if
things had gone a little bit differently
for you yeah I I want to I want to come
to determinism but uh but I I'd like to
keep that a minute more be because I
think that's a very interesting part of
the conversation uh you mentioned uh you
know cortisol and all of how how those
hormones work on us and and I and I
heard you speak of dopamine once in a
way that was so eye openening once again
you know dopamine being the the reward
hormone uh and uh and uh you know the
idea that we we we chase that reward but
that dopamine is not actually triggered
upon the reward would you would you so
kindly explain that I thought that was
so eye
openening it's eye openening and it
explains so much of the misery on this
planet okay dopamine um it's usually
functioning as a neurotransmitter but it
is a hormone some of the time dopamine
it's about reward it's about pleasure
cocaine works on the dopamine system all
that's what people used to know yeah and
then people figured out as you were
saying
dopamine usually it's not about reward
or pleasure it's about the anticipation
of it you get somebody and you have
trained them to do some task they get a
little signal saying okay this task has
begun
and if you press a lever 10 times now
you're going to get a reward and what
everybody used to think in the past is
when you get the reward that's when the
dopamine gets released from reward
centers in your brain and what turns out
instead is whether you are a human or a
monkey or a rat or whatever when do you
get the dopamine when the signal comes
on saying it's one of these moments if
you press the lever now you're going to
get a reward as soon as you realize it's
one of those moments that's when the
dopamine comes you're sitting there and
you're saying this is going to be
fantastic this is great I know how to
press levers I know exactly how to do
this sort of thing I'm on top of it this
is going to be great it's about
anticipation it's about the motivation
you then feel to press the lever and all
of that it's that's what it's about okay
so that's great it's about the pursuit
of pleasure
rather than the pleasure itself it's
about the
anticipation and we could do really
amazing things as humans in terms of how
much we can keep dopamine going in
anticipation it's what causes us to
function along those lines I wanted to
interrupt because you you mentioned a
quote at the time that was
so uh profound you said it wasn't the
pursuit of happiness it's the happiness
of the
Pursuit and that's exactly it yes yeah
we're looking we're looking for when
when we're under the the the influence
of dopamine if I could call it the
influence what you're doing is you're
just it's not even about getting the
thing that makes you feel high it's
about anticipating that you're going to
get it yep
and sometimes that's great because that
makes you work hard your entire life to
bring about some massive project or
whatever and sometimes it's about things
that are never going to happen sometimes
we could do stuff that no other species
can we can have dopamine released in
part of our brain for anticipation and
motivation for entire lifetime because
we think there's going to be an amazing
reward of some kind after we die what
the afterlife like that could be the
version of so that's one version of how
bizarre it is
but I think the even more fundamental
strange thing we do with dopamine is you
know you you look at a chimpanzee and
what counts as the sort of things it
could anticipate maybe food or sex or
safety or getting to beat up somebody
they're feeling Vengeance about it
that's a pretty small list of things
that could be a source of pleasure or
anticipatory pleasure and what do we
have as humans we can feel anticipatory
pleasure
about food and sex and survival and all
of that but we can we can feel that way
over reading poetry we can have a sense
of pleasure over smelling a flower over
solving a math problem if you're the
right type of crazy human so you know
any I am that guy for sure yes exact
like whoa we're a species where you can
have like a massive release of dopamine
when you smell the first flowers of
spring and then 20 minutes later a
massive release of dopamine because of
an
orgasm and the amazing is you release
the same amount of dopamine a lot in
both cases whoa we're a species where we
have a range of a capacity of pleasure
that's just thousandfold bigger than any
other species out there how do we have a
brain that could do that the only way is
some of the time the dopamine system
going from zero to 100 a 100 is hearing
a good line of poetry or solving a
coding problem and some of the time
going from zero to 100 is winning the
lottery or whatever you have to
constantly be resetting the gain on your
system correct on your dopamine system
yeah and it needs to be able to an inst
say okay right now we're doing 0 to 100
for the smell of flowers oh no right now
instead we're doing 0 to 100 for doing a
stock option an IPO or whatever and you
got and it needs to be able to reset it
needs to be able to habituate very
quickly and out of that comes what I
think is one of like the deepest sources
of human misery which is you get some
amazing reward from out of nowhere
yesterday
and it's wonderful you've got a massive
release of dopamine and today the same
reward is going to feel like what you're
entitled to yeah and tomorrow it's going
to feel like it's not enough because
your system is constantly re so we're
always hungry and the more we eat the
hungrier we get and the more we want and
the more we want because we're
constantly saying oh now it's this big
of a gain on the system we have going
from zero to 100 is the fact that we as
humans can do dopamine for both poetry
and eating a meal when you're
desperately hungry or if you're a
certain type of human giving food to
somebody who's desperately hungry that's
that range that what was amazing
yesterday is what we feel like we
deserve today and it's not going to be
good enough
tomorrow and and accordingly of course
being aware of that I think is the is
the whole idea it's it's not clicking on
Amazon to buy a new thing every minute
to get yourself a little kick it's
actually falling in love with the thing
that you have or actually finding the
thing that would really give you Joy
before you click right and and it is it
is quite a challenge for most of us who
are trained by the modern world to just
want more and more and more and
more and we're a very vulnerable species
because people who are very smart and
very well trained understand exactly how
to make you feel that way for whatever
the next new thing is whether it's a new
car or a new spouse or a new name or a
new persona or a new whatever there
there's a very well understood science
for making us feel hungrier and less
satisfied with whatever it is we have
right now the bit of your work of V last
year uh in determined
that I'm still really struggling with to
be honest is that from an a biological
point of
view your view is that we have very
little choice if any choice at all like
you know the the the the reason I like
your work so much is not something that
I had any choice in you know the way I
was raised the the you know the events
that happened that conditioned me the
way my parents were before I was even
born and so on determined where I am as
a human which you know I I I have to say
mathematically is very accurate right uh
but but at the same time I sort of
recall times in my life where I really
resisted my nature and and I really
tried to you know to do what I'm not
biologically designed to do so you know
in determined uh you you're saying we
don't even have that which I think is a
bit uh
a bit disappointing that I have
no I have no control on what I choose at
all well I I should emphasize like the
the book is called determined the
science of life without Free Will and I
don't think there's any free will
whatsoever and my argument is when you
look at where a behavior comes from it's
from your neurons that did something
half a second ago but it's also from the
environmental stimuli in the last three
minutes that triggered those neurons and
it's your hormone levels from this
morning and it's whether you had this
trauma or this wonderful event a year
ago and it's your childhood and your
fetal life and your genes and the
culture and all of that and my argument
of there being no free will is when you
look at how all those pieces of
biology over which you had no control
interacting with environment over which
you had no control there's no place in
there to put in the sense of Free Will
of a sense of there's a me that's
independent of all of that biological
and environmental history okay so give
me an example of a time where you acted
against your
nature uh when my daughter was 5 years
old and I was a very serious business
executive and you know she comes into my
uh office at you know 10:00 a.m. in the
morning jumping up and down on a
Saturday saying Papa you know we're
going m said we're going to this place
I'm going to have popcorn and we're
going to have cotton candy and can we
please pass by that ice cream place and
I looked at her and I said and I one of
the determining moments of my life
honestly you know being driven by all of
the conditioning I've had until that
moment I looked at her and I said can we
please be serious for a moment okay I
was busy with my email right and she
burst crying she burst crying to the
point that I literally could see with my
own eyes how my little daughter's heart
art broke and and I and that moment
maybe it's part of my conditioning again
maybe it was determined but that moment
flipped me upside down changed my life I
remember I closed my door and I started
crying and I said I never want to be
that person again and I I started to act
against my nature right in a
very you know um attentive way a very
you know this a decision that I made to
change right so I I agree agree with you
that all of my life was leading me to
that moment but my daughter's action
changed my behavior does that count as
no free will I I I I want to tell myself
I I made a choice to not break my
daughter's heart
again which
is heartbreaking heing that story of the
the the the pain that we can cause
inadvertently by how much our own
hungers Drive us
yeah but no that's completely compatible
with how nonetheless there was no free
will there for a very simple reason
there's lots of other people who would
have been sitting there other Silicon
Valley overachievers who having the
exact same experience would have said
I'm not kidding I need to get some work
done go go ask your mother and you would
sit there afterward and say I'm trying I
I told my partner that I need to get
some work done why can't they sort of
this or that or why oh my God this this
child yeah yeah I guess I was like that
but so irritating and and they would
have a completely different response how
did you become the sort of person where
that would be one of the moments that
would define your life it was not by
chance because a zillion other people
could have been in that exact same
moment and May maybe they would have
just gone back to work or maybe they
would have felt badly for a few minutes
or maybe how did you become the sort of
person where that was a transformational
moment in your life that was not by
chance you know two people go to see a
movie some inspirational movie and one
of them comes out of there changed by
The Experience they come out and they
choose to do something different they
say oh my God I'm going to devote the
rest of my life to this like good cause
I'm going to go give away all my money
to Doctors Without Borders and somebody
else comes in and sees the exact same
movie and they're Changed by it they
come out and they choose to do something
different they say oh my God that was
the most emotionally manipulative movie
I've ever seen in my life I hated that
movie I am going to go and demand to get
my money back right now whoa same movie
same moments and because life had made
them into different people who experence
that moment in that way and it is not by
chance that even amid all the ways in
which you were viewing the world as a
very different place up to that moment
that that moment how did you become the
sort of person so that moment was a
moment for you because it wouldn't have
been for lots of other people so I I'm
I'm with you on that I mean remember my
my the scientific mind of of the the
half of me we will know that very well
in physics right so in physics in
classical physics we always assume that
if we knew every the location of every
particle in the universe and its
momentum and its speed and its you know
mass and so on and so forth we can
determine the next moment of the
universe with high accuracy right
everything is just following the laws of
physics basically those particles some
of them are in my uh eyeballs and some
of them are in a tree but you know we
know that the eyeball is going to hit
the tree it's you know it's very clear
having said that there are those
moments where something changes and and
I I'm asking the question because it
relates to the bigger picture of our
world but but let's stay at the micro
level first you know because are we
telling people look you are who you are
there's absolutely no no way you can
influence that so if you're a depressive
you're going to end end up being
depressed the whole rest of your life if
you're you know a a as a person who has
accepted the stress in their life you're
going to be stressed for the rest of
your life where where is our agency in
changing our own
life well we don't have it but what we
have is a capacity to act upon our
knowledge you've got somebody who's
paying attention to this podcast and
hearing that incredibly moving story of
yours and that may trigger their moment
that may cause them to sit there and say
oh my God I once had a moment like that
where a loved one and I didn't do that I
just got irritated and turned away
and you by telling that story could have
caused that moment in someone else let's
turn That Into neurobiology You by
telling that story you by having become
the person you are so that in that
moment you told that story you by do
changed the brain of somebody
else they didn't show free will that
changed and because we're a species that
can have a meta level of knowledge about
it when they think about that and when
they're transformed by this but tonight
when they go to bed they're thinking you
know that's great but maybe I really
shouldn't quit my job and devote the
rest of my life to this they have now
figured out let me think again about how
I
felt when I heard that story let me pull
up some other examples in my mind of
things where I could now have the same
emotional response let me go read a book
tomorrow that will reaffirm that in me
even more so how did you become the sort
of person who would have a respect for
let me reflect on what happened to me
today how would you become the sort of
person who would have respect for and a
capacity for going out and getting more
experiences now that will reaffirm that
yeah it is it's so interesting when you
because I I I sort of get it in my
scientific mind I'm just not able to put
it in word it's that every single
Collision of two particles in physics
will trigger a slightly different
trajectory that you can capitalize on
right and and basically reconfigure your
mind in the case of neuro Neuroscience
you can you can take that one moment and
and that one moment was not within your
free will it just happened to you and
then you can choose to take that and
reconfigure your entire life with a lot
of
neuroplasticity over time to get to the
right place um the the the reason I
asked this question and and I know by
the way I with with a ton of respect uh
Robert what I normally do is I make the
most amazing conversations I have on
that podcast shorter because I encourage
my listeners to go back and listen to
them again so as much as I would like to
speak to you for six more hours i' i' i'
I'd ask your permission to perhaps maybe
grant me another opportunity to invite
you and have another conversation and
one more question and we close this one
um the one of the things that really
really really uh got to me is that if we
take our
individual um you know Destiny if you
want to call it but biological Destiny
you know the from the womb to to a
million years before or two what happens
3 seconds ago determines our neural
response to something and you take that
cumulatively to our world today and it
seems to me that our world is heading in
the direction of more of the violence
more of the competitiveness more of the
US versus them as a cumulative species
species and and with that determinism in
a in a very interesting way uh it it
sometimes feels like we can't even
impact that anymore that you know there
will be more Wars there will be more
economic challenges that are creating
gaps between the rich and the poor and
so on and so forth do you believe that
to be true is there is there a way to
change that at
all yes you can do it if you turned out
to be the right sort of person by going
and reading history and realizing oh in
a place like Western Europe 300 years
ago would have seemed okay for a
5-year-old to be worked to death in a
factory and it's a different world now
wow the world changed it we could get it
from historical evidence or if you the
sort of person where what does it for
you is to read about somebody else's
amazing acts of compassion and making
the world better or if you're the right
sort of person you can look at a point
where you thought I wouldn't be able to
do I can't do that that's too much but I
did that I succeeded I was able I have
the power to do like and maybe you have
become the sort of person who could
reflect enough to figure out which of
those are the types of experiences you
should go try to experience because you
know that's the sort of thing that makes
me feel more of this and makes me feel
more empowered and makes me feel and
like to go
read about the how they managed to get
the Good Friday truce in Northern
Ireland and ended violent conflict there
that seemed impossible to ever end and
whoa like that's po there's reasons to
be op or the time you were about to be a
jerk and cut somebody off in traffic and
you had this thought and you decided to
you know let them in to be wow think
about how you
felt figure out what it is that did that
for you because you could make a
difference and I think what the
underpinning is of that is like every
other living species out there we're
just biological machines but we're the
only ones who could know that we are
biological machines and learn where the
buttons are and where
the read the manual and realize if I
press this button again I'm going to
feel this way even more because I'm
going to have more examples to draw
upon and go and do that go figure out
what it is that gives you hope in a
world in which there's so many reasons
not to and you know my guess is there's
an awful lot of people who will use you
as an example for precisely that and
thus their biological machines can work
different L afterward and feel a sense
of
efficacy um that they didn't before and
thus they Free Will lacking biological
machines who could now go make the world
a better place because of
you
that's wow I mean you see this is this
is why I always I never resist any of
your views anymore I just investigate
them a little more you see this is the
whole point we started at a the
conversation that said this biological
machine can trigger amazing things can
trigger empathy and can trigger evil it
can trigger violence it can trigger
everything and that while the entire
configuration of your machine is the
result of a
million probably a gazillion little
triggers that that you never had any
control over you can reconfigure that
machine by actually finding out exactly
how it's working right now and and and
then finding out how it's behaving right
now and then slowly using your strength
to to to be basically become a better
contribution to this world and to
yourself and to others and it to me this
is fascinating in every possible way I
mean uh I I have to say I I really want
to end here if you if you'll allow me to
say to do this uh give you more time but
also give our listeners the opportunity
to listen to this twice instead of
listening to a longer conversation that
there were so many so many gold nuggets
in this conversation that I think would
change lives so uh guys if you're
listening please do uh go back and and
take the time to listen to this again uh
Robert what an honor thank you so much
for your time for everything that you
contribute so uh
simply uh you know even though it has a
massive depth be you know underneath it
so I'm really grateful for your time and
for you being here well thank you and
and you've just taken the words out of
my mouth of exactly what I would say to
you
so it's it's an honor it's an honor here
you're very very kind um I I hope you'd
allow me the opportunity to host you
again and maybe you have another
conversation I'd be delighted to and for
all of you listening this has definitely
been one of my favorites you know me
when I am really into a conversation I'd
really urge you to go and listen to this
I'd really urge you to share it with a
lot of people and I'd really urge you to
read uh Dr uh uh Robert's work it's just
so eye openening challenging to our uh
our main ways of wanting to believe that
we are at first but so so deep and so
valuable underneath uh at the end of the
day we are a biological machine that is
highly affected by the stresses of this
world uh but we can actually uh have
make a difference if we understand how
the machine really works uh uh part of
that of course is what I always Advocate
every single week to take a tiny bit of
time to slow down and reflect and learn
oh and yeah before I go uh I just want
to remind you to go pre-order unstress
it would really help me spread the
message if you pre-order pre-orders uh
tend to count for the first week of
sales and the book industry is quite
interesting because it's only the first
week of sales that really matters to put
you on a bestseller list uh my mission
uh with Alice this time is a million
people out of stress so your pre-order
will make a difference uh keep your
pre-order receipt uh go to unstress
possible.com and register so that you
can uh come and join us in our uh launch
webinar for two hours uh me and Alice
where we will explain the main Concepts
and allow you uh to ask us as many
questions as you want uh as I say always
take a few minutes to slow down reflect
go back and listen uh to uh Robert's uh
conversation today I think you'll find
it very very useful I love you all for
listening and I will see you next
time
