hello everyone welcome to bold
conjectures with Paris Chopra today I'm
with Conor Lee CEO of conjecture AI
where they're trying to build
controllable AI systems that don't cause
the Doom of humanity uh he was ex- head
of UA a nonprofit research lab that gave
us wonderful open source models uh like
gptj uh Conor is known for his views on
the massive risk AI systems posos to
humanity uh in fact Connor has been on
this podcast before three years back
when gbd3 was um super new uh we had a
conversation about how it is a fire
alarm and V we need to act before it's
too late uh and three is a lot of uh
time in the world of AI now we have gbd4
anthropic Opus and the progress just
seems to be accelerating uh so what does
it all mean uh let's take an update from
Connor uh so welcome again to the
podcast Conor yeah thank you so much for
having me back it's been a while yeah so
we talked on this podcast three years
back um how has the world changed in
terms of AI risk ever since
then well unfortunately I must report
definitely not for the better um so to
my great Chagrin it seems that many of
my predictions turned out to be not only
correct but too optimistic um I think
things went even worse than I expected
them to go I was a bit naive three years
ago about some of the economic and like
political realities I think we're going
to talk about some of those a bit later
in the podcast as well through a kind of
a different lens um is that I if I if I
could if I could summarize the state of
the world right now it it would be no
one has a plan there are no adults in
the room no one knows what they're doing
and we're just accelerating as fast as
possible towards Doom straight on no
breaks no lube that's like how I would
describe our current state yeah I mean
you sound much more worried than you
were three years back when I didn't
sense this kind of worry but it seems um
well you know seems like a very strong
statement I mean it's exactly what's
happening right we have for-profit
corporations building smarter and
smarter agents with zero oversight zero
input zero Democratic you know oversight
any ways they all admit themselves even
that they do not know how to control
their systems they do not know how they
work they do not know what they're
capable of until they build them there's
no plan on the government side there's
no plan on the economic side of how to
deal with anything from you know even
praic hars you know like we have like
deep fake massive you know
disinformation and like identity death
and so on no one has a plan for that
that works there is massive job
automation looming in the Horizon no one
has a plan how we deal with that there's
a usual thing where people are like you
know you bring up job automation and
people are like oh don't worry you know
if we work less it'll be great because
then we can just relax and do art and
I'm like okay who pays for that like
right who grows your food um by default
all the resources will either go to the
owners of the AIS or the AIS themselves
they not going to go to the general
population unless you have some kind of
you know massive government you know
backed redistribution and which
government is currently working on doing
that I I don't see anyone currently
working on that and then the existential
risks you know we're building systems
that are you know every single year that
are like massively smarter 3 are go jup
3 you know a thing that's like you know
could write some cute little kind of
incoherent you know paragraphs or
whatever now people get upset that oh my
cloud Opus uh it it it it didn't quite
finish my you know deployment of my nccl
you know distributed programming bug in
one shot GH wow so Ting it's it's like
has supp be frank here it's like it's a
joke like like you know just this
morning I think there's also
announcement of this new robotic startup
using like AI models like humanoid
Robotics and so on like it's not even
it's like not like at this point I'm
just kind of like I stopped making even
fun of it um there's a there's a great
so there's a fable one I think it was as
off's Fable of the frog and scorpion and
the way The Story Goes is a frog wants
to cross the river there's a scorpion
who also wants across the river and the
Scorpion asked the Frog if the Frog
could bring him across the river River
and the Frog says no you're a scorpion
you're going to sting me and then the
Scorpion says no that doesn't make any
sense if I stung you well then we would
both you know drown so I'm I'm not going
to do that so frog thinks okay yeah
makes sense to me so frog takes a
scorpion they go halfway across the
river and scorpion stings them and the
Frog's like why would you do this now
we're both going to trown and the
Scorpion said LOL L I think that's how
the story goes yeah I think it's in the
nature of Scorpion to do so uh and in
fact that whole thing is just so so much
in parallel to what's happening wherein
people just can't stop themselves from
just eliminating them it's kind of funny
like that the Devon model that came
across um and nobody would have guessed
5 to 10 years ago software Engineers
will be the first to eliminate their job
why would you do that uh it just doesn't
make any sense to me uh before we dive
into that corner I wanted to um uh
ensure we on the same page for number of
audiences who have not a lot of
background how would you convince them
that AI actually poses a grave risk and
what risks would you broadly classify
as if you build systems that are smarter
than all humans better at politics
business science and everything else and
we don't know how to control them which
we don't currently know how to do
what do you think
happens that's it like just think about
it what
happens um in that sense I wanted to go
into this question a little later but
since you mentioned it there are
parallels between how people react to uh
climate change and the risk with climate
change and this uh do you notice them to
I mean both are a little bit abstract
risks uh you can't feel them in your gut
um but has there been like uh discussion
around this is there
similarity course there's many
similarities they're both large
catastrophic risks that are pushing
against a very strong incentive gradient
there's a lot of vested interests that
benefit from not addressing climate
change the same way that there many
vested interests were interested in not
addressing uh AI risk if it was in
everyone's interest to address these
risks they were legible understandable
cheap to solve then we would solve them
I mean hopefully um the climate change
is a good example of a risk which
through very very hard fighting after
many many decades is like start you know
kind of now at a position where it has
like pretty good Global consensus to
various degrees but even then like are
we on top of climate change do you feel
like our governments have this under
control and we don't have to worry I
mean not really so in a sense climate
change is an easier
problem than AI risk not that it's an
easy Problem by any means but it's a
problem which we have Global consensus
on is goes over decades before the you
know worst harm there already harms
today but the worst harms we still have
a couple years or decades and even then
we're not on the bow now take a problem
which is uh 100 times thousand times
faster you know that un folds over years
not over decades that is even harder you
know relies on even more abstract weird
you know technical things which are not
quite so understandable even so I kind
of disagree that the AI safety problem
is that abstract I think a lot of people
present it as this weird esoteric thing
while I think it's actually not that
weird an esoteric it's just like what do
you think happens you know you make
things that are super smart and that
want to make profit and you whatever
what do you think happens if you don't
do this properly like like of course you
know if you have chimps and they create
Homo sapiens and like what's the worst
that could happen like the worst that
could happen is pretty bad like
yes so yeah yeah on that I mean I notice
sometimes people have this um baseless
optimism because when we talk about job
loss to AI some people say that that's
always happened people always find a new
job similarly with climate change I I
know some of my friends have faith in
technology that we'll end up we've
always solved problems uh what do you
have to say about that at I'm I'm also
asking in terms of at two levels one at
a practical level
but also at the level of human nature
have you thought about it where does
this come from this naive faith and
optimism that will just figure things
out so there's nothing to worry about oh
of course like this is a very common
reaction especially on like tech people
and stuff like that um it's always much
nicer just pretend the problem doesn't
exist or it's someone else's problem
like of course like I think this is kind
of trivially true it's kind of like one
of the most obvious Co mechanisms just
say don't worry I'll be okay like it's
the OB psychological defense mechanism
and it's also one of the obvious um
responsibility deflection mechanisms
where um you don't want to be
responsible for this right you want to
do your thing you want to make money you
want to I don't know build your whatever
you want to do right um and now if
someone comes to you and they're like
hey there's actually this monumentally
large problem then that's kind of also
like asking for your time and then
you'll be defensive about this and I
understand and I think this is a good
heris so
generally if you see someone come to you
and say like here's a monumentally
massive thing you have to dedicate all
your resources to right now you probably
shouldn't listen to them this is a
generally good practice um this person
is you know un unlikely to be very
calibrated unless there's more to it so
if this what the only thing we have it's
just like some guy is saying this is the
case but there's no evidence there's no
consensus there's no first principles
thinking there's nothing if there was
nothing then yeah you shouldn't take
this seriously but like this is just not
the case like laughably so like look
look around you bro like a lot of my um
so when I look at these like optimistic
things a lot of it I think boils down to
the quote I think it was optin Sinclair
who said um it is very it is very hard
to get a man to understand something
when his salary depends on him not
understanding it so realizing the the
fact that you work at an oil company and
that you don't think change is that
serious are not independent variables
this is not how humans work humans are
not perfectly rational beings that you
know evaluate evidence completely
disconnected from the social context if
you work at a soil job there's both
there's two fact at least two factors
here the first factor is you're unlike
if you're working there you don't want
to feel like a bad person you like you
know oh you know your colleagues they're
all nice people you know I'm sure the
people who you work with you in your oil
company I'm sure they're wonderful
people and you like your colleagues and
so on or maybe you don't whatever but
like you're a good person right so now
this guy telling you that actually maybe
you're a bad person because you're doing
a bad thing well nah he must be wrong
and the second factor is you don't get
hired for a job like this if you think
climate change is a big problem if you
think climate change is destroying the
planet you don't you a don't accept but
also you don't get offered a job as an
oil exec so the fact that oil execs are
unusually L fair about this is not an
independent variable this is not like
these things are deeply entangled I
think with tech it's the same thing the
fact that a bunch of Engineers at open
AI are pretty chill about the AGI risk
thing is not a coincidence it's not like
there is a selective pressure towards
this kind of thing so
ultimately you can't just always
Outsource just think about what happens
like just sit down for five minutes say
we succeeded building these things we
can argue about you know will we build
these things when will we bu bu sure we
can argue about all that later but just
assume we succeeded building these
things which a lot of experts think we
will in the next couple of years and a
lot of experts agree that we don't know
how to control them then what
happens true um so Tech is a very I mean
AI researchers that Community is very
interesting in the sense
that uh you have very some very smart
people deny the risk so on one hand we
have someone like Jeffrey Hinton uh who
quit his job in Google to raise alarms
about AI but on the other hand we have
someone like yakun who's head of AI at
Facebook who actively denies there is a
risk uh and both are presumably smart at
top of the game in terms of the research
capabilities so how do you explain this
dissonant View and completely polar
polarizing view from the very similar
kind of
people I think this is a very important
thing to understand smartness isn't
everything just because someone is smart
doesn't mean they're right just because
someone is smart doesn't mean they're
telling the truth just because they're
smart doesn't mean they're rational it's
actually there's a lot of there's been
some funny studies from back in the day
where people with very high IQ actually
were less rational because they were
better at at coming up with
rationalizations of things they wanted
to believe that were so smart that no
one could debunk them this is a thing I
account of quite often when I'm talking
to really smart people is they will
believe whatever  justifies
whatever they want to do and they will
justify it using super complex super
brilliant arguments that are really hard
to untangle um and so you you can use
your own intelligence to troll yourself
and this is actually quite common that
people use their intelligence to troll
themselves um rationality is a skill is
actually hard
to eval and it's an important thing to
understand about rationality about
making good decisions about seeing the
world for what it is is that it's not a
purely intellectual skill so much of
what it means to actually evaluate
systems objectively is emotional it's
about knowing your own emotions your own
biases your own how you relate to these
things how you can control and how you
can select for these things and it's
also a deeply social process science and
rationality are deeply social things
there is no way sorry I was just asking
can we go deeper into it I'm very
curious about your definition of
rationality especially also how does
emotion and like social skills come into
the play so it might be useful for me
to introduce theology I kind of use when
I think about this kind of thing is when
I think about a mind I like this kind of
split it into four things um this is
just my personal way of thinking about
it not saying this is the one true way I
just find it a useful way to think about
intelligence or a mind I split to four
parts the first part is its World model
or its knowledge so this is what it
knows about the world what questions it
could answer what things it could
simulate what knowledge has collected
etc etc the second thing is it's
epistemology this is how it updates its
World model what procedures does it do
given a new piece of information what
updates does it apply to the world model
how does it reason about this the third
thing is the decision Theory or
rationality decision theory is how given
a world State a piece of information and
certain things you want to accomplish
how do you decide what to do M and the
fourth is your values or your aesthetic
and these are things that are completely
disconnected from everything else
they're just what you like and it can be
anything so in humans there they usually
cluster around you know fun happiness
you know family friends Etc or you know
sex drugs whatever um but they can
theoretically be anything you know some
people like classical music some people
like heavy metal that's what it is so
the values are what you spend resources
on and the other things are about
gaining resources to spend on on your
values whatever your values are so
rationality is what I'm calling decision
Theory here is if you the more rational
they are the better you are at not
making decisions which are predictably
stupid so let's say I give you two
options either I give you an apple or
you give I give you an apple and you
give me
$2 the rational Choice hypothetically is
you pick the Apple because why would you
give me $2 you don't have to give me $2
like there's no reason to do that so um
this is a very technical definition of
rationality um so what I'm not talking
about is like you know Commander Spock
you know like this is the like straw man
version of rationality you know uh who
talks really monotone and you know says
some stupid numbers or whatever that's
what I'm talking about for me
rationality is much closer to not being
stupid than it is to being smart being
smart is far more about like your world
model your epistemology one being
rational is just about not being
predictably stupid like if you don't
know a piece of information like maybe
if you take the Apple they'll give me $2
you know I'll you know shoot you
afterwards and I didn't tell you about
that or something or I'll poison the
apple or something if you didn't know
about that that's not a mistake per se
because you didn't know about it but if
you did know about it and you'd make the
decision anyways well then you're
irrational to some degree import it's
these things get more complicated once
it gets into social things
so unfortunately once you deal with
social scenarios things get even more
complicated because now irrationality
often becomes a good strategy because
your the the actions of other people
depend on your actions and your mind
so if you perceive me as someone who is
fanatically loyal to you you know just
completely delusionally loyal to you do
anything you want whatever even if it
doesn't make sense for me well you might
promote me to you know High Commander
you know it seems like a good right-hand
man for me the dictator or whatever so
if you want to be the right-hand man the
dictator it can be useful to damage your
own your own rationality your own
epistemology and decision theory in
order to rise the ranks as an example so
things get very messy very suddenly when
you're dealing with social situations
where other people are thinking about
your mind and like who you are as a
person this is very hard to reason about
there's no easy way to do it there's no
simple oh here's how you solve all
social problems and we go it's
hard right um is it fair to say um like
I mean ultimately we're bundles of
evolved biases and pleasing a local
group who we feel Affiliated to is one
of those biases and I so I justlike the
bias framing personally I think biases
are a thing but I think they are vastly
overhyped especially in like online high
IQ istic nerd circles a lot of biases
quote unquote exist for actually very
good reasons like wanting toe your tribe
might be a bias but it's there for a
good reason it's because in fact often
pleasing your tribe in many situations
is a good strategy it might involve you
compromising in other things such as
compromising on your epistemology on
your rationality in various ways but in
a sense this can be a good strategy it
can also not be of course and so biases
are real I'm just saying it's actually
tricky like there's no aha I have a list
of biases and I simply won't do those
unfortunately it's not that simple okay
so getting back to the question of let's
say uh very smart people doing Polar
Polar opposite things uh let's say
Jeffrey Hinton and yakun uh am I
understanding correct that they are
applying their rationality towards
different goals and ends or maybe they
hold different values even though they
might be equally smart yeah and they can
also just have be less rational or more
rational I mean look if I told you CEO
of you know General oil says climate
change no big deal is your update wow
the CEO of General oil he's pretty smart
so maybe maybe this whole climate change
isn't real or is your response well du
he's the CEO of General oil like what
like duh I'm sure he's smart and he's
using his smarts to prevent us from
lowering his stock
price yeah but again I mean I see let's
say Jeffrey Inon would have had a very
highp paying job at Google and
prestigious job also there was something
in his character to quit it and start
going around talking about this AI risk
so obviously incentives would explain
partially people's behavior but there's
something else that's driving some of
the people on the
frontier risk their
and other things humans are not simple
like this is like um incentives you know
people do have personalities it's very
fashionable to think of you know humans
as purely products of their environment
Blank Slate you know just incentive
gradients and whatever but this isn't
actually true it is to a large degree to
to a larger degree than many people
think and there are some people who are
fully explainable by their environment
like there are people who you know I
have in the past said unkind things
about um involving corpses um and they
are fully explainable by their
environment and now maybe it feels like
them internally they have some kind of
personality they have some core they
whatever and and they might right but I
don't know what's in other people's
brains like I don't know what's inside
your soul I don't know what's in your
mind how how could I so the question is
far more can I predict your behavior
from a given set of variables and for
some people the set of variables need to
predict them includes a lot of internal
state and their family history and
whatever for other people nah you just
look at their job title and this predict
their
behavior okay got it so I'm going to ask
you to dissect the long reply you made
to run recently uh uh I think it was
fascinating I've read it a number of
times um I think he said something like
this it's okay to watch and wonder about
the dance of gods and The Clash of Titan
but it's not good to fret about the
outcome political culture encourages us
to think that generalized anxiety is
equalent to civic duty so can you break
this down and maybe also explain if who
run is and what's your interpretation of
this tweet was and generally what you
make of it yeah so I'd like to S the
content warning um so so far we've been
um engaging on object level questions
we've been talking about things in very
clear modern rational terms um you know
whether you agree with me or not dear
listener I've been trying to communicate
things that are like actual claims about
actual things
or at least are about my opinions um
where we're about to go is kind of a bit
of a different territory a different
kind of epistemological the so run is a
Twitter user who works at open Ai and he
has a great sense of humor he's a really
great writer he writes really funny
weird quippy crazy stuff um he's a
really interesting guy like I like
reading his stuff a lot I think he has a
really fun personality I think he's very
smart and says a lot of funny things um
and he also uses a lot of mystical
language and mystical thinking and so on
in his brand of humor and thinking which
I think is is fun and cool and
interesting and so recently run wrote
the thing that Paras just um read out
and this kind of sparked me to wanting
to reply to this as you can see it's
written you know the dance of gods and
so on in a mystical language so the what
we're going to go now is into what I
would call Mystical language or
mysticism so if you don't mind Paris I'd
like to like like five or 10 minutes to
maybe talk about what is mysticism in my
perspective would that be would that be
that would be great great so um so my
response to this TW which we're going to
get to in a second is a is very dripping
with a certain in non-rational language
it's less about science and biases and
so on and far more about spirits and
gods and magic and so on and in our
modern culture it's usually these things
are very frowned upon they're seeing you
know old superstitions from a previous
era an unenlightened era before we
understood you know the modern
scientific method one and to First
approximation that's correct to Second
approximation that's not quite correct
um so when I talk about mysticism what I
really mean is metaphors the using of um
IR rational language the point is to
eliminate a concept to enumerate a
concept I'm like okay I want to make
this claim I make this claim and maybe I
provide some evidence or whatever and
then we combine these these various
pieces using logical rules to get to
some kind of conclusion of course in
practice it's never that perfect but
hypothetically if I was in a academic
con context I'm supposed to make
arguments that are logically coherent
that follow a certain structure that
don't contradict themselves and that
result you know that follow to some
conclusion that we can evaluate and
think about mysticism for me is
loosening those
constraints it's loose it's going from
you know like the most extreme form of
rationality is like formal proofs formal
logic like mathematics then there's the
intermediate kind of like you know
science uh Academia which is like not
quite as rigorous as mathematics it's
actually a lot less rigorous than people
think it is uh but there's still rigor
there like you're still trying to use
rational reasonable logical thought and
then there's a spectrum that goes even
further towards the mystical where it
becomes more about metaphors it becomes
more about vibes feelings emotions
stories it no longer becomes about
statements so much as stories so when
when in a fable you know you talk about
a frog and a scorpion you don't
literally mean there was literally a
frog literally at a river with literally
a scorpion and they were literally
talking this is obviously not what you
mean so um so Mystic language is more
like fiction writing and fiction um is
cap is actually very capable at disuss
Ing and pointing at useful Concepts that
are very very very hard to talk about in
formal language especially emotions
relationships between people how people
think about themselves um and stuff like
this it's quite hard to elucidate you
know F fervor love or hate or whatever
using just a math proof it's possible as
many mathematician will tell you but
it's not easy and it's not legible to
most people because the natural way for
humans to communicate is actually
mystical
it's actually normal for people to
communicate through religious metaphors
and storytelling more so than modern
rational thought this is actually
relatively recent
invention the oldest civiliz like
artifact of civilization we know like um
gobec tee and um turkey is a temple it's
not a Grainery it's not a it's not a
thing it's a temple like humanties
started with religion and my I think the
reason this is still useful is that
there are just some things that have not
been digested yet like for me
rationality is the most digested
powerful refined version of Mystic
thought it's so powerful it's so refined
that there's no ambiguity hypothetically
we know I say a thing and like we're
like yep okay cool fully understood
there's no misunderstanding
hypothetically Etc and so Mystic thought
allows you to and Mystic language allows
you to talk about more things but things
become more open to confusion Mis
interpretation wishful thinking Etc so
was a trade-off so where we're going now
is talking about things which don't have
good rational simple com like compact
words I think they can I think you know
after years and Decades of digesting
this stuff of coming up with new ways of
talking about this better theories of
psychology better theories of sociology
and so on we could develop rational
methods for talking about these things
but we don't really have that right now
so I to metaphors so for the Ral you
know audience here don't take the things
you know I said to r or the says to me
as literally true try to think of them
as metaphors and think of them what they
might be metaphors were what are they
pointing to in your concept space so ran
over I just want to have that little
disclaimer here is that I understand
that this is not literally true I'm not
 I'm not I'm not crazy I'm not
schizophrenic like I understand that
there aren't literally spirits and
there's not literally magic duh
everything is mechanistic um but it can
be useful to use this language to talk
about these kinds of things yeah so I
mean all this I mean this of course
makes it so much more interesting
because uh there's some Concepts that
you simply can't explain efficiently
unless you end up using metaphors so
Concepts like God underworld Spirits a
lot of things I think they uh they take
on this um character which is just super
hard to communicate and maybe it'll uh
diffuse the whole meaning if you try to
put them into literal rational words yes
it can be very difficult I think it's
possible but it's hard so like it's
often useful to use these like mystical
languages like underworld Spirit God and
whatever to conjure a set of properties
like a big you know multi-dimensional
embedding of a bunch of stuff and then
it can be very helpful to combine these
Concepts in different ways to create
intersections to narrow in on like look
I'm pointing at something right and it
can be frustrating because people might
say well you're not literally pointing
at something and I'm like yes I'm
pointing in a Direction look there so
like a lot of mystical language is not
about here's a solution write it down
it's hey you see this direction I'm
pointing it there's something there keep
looking I can't I would love to show it
to you precisely but I can't so you have
to go looking yourself so a lot of what
I'm trying to do here is not to say here
is literal solution that applies
literally to you in your leral life it's
more like hey if this here's a I'm going
to point out a little teeny corner of
your brain that you may have not
considered before start poking around
there and see what you find so this is
how I think about this so to return to
the W tweet um yeah so what is the dance
of gods he's talking about and yes why
does he recommend not threatening about
the outcome and what outcome possibly he
must be meaning by this so I of course
don't know exactly what run thinks in
his head but my interpretation of what
run is saying I hope he he thinks I'm
not misinterpreting him here the dance
of God is Gods is the idea that there
are structures there are things that are
larger than individual humans that are
the primary drivers of what happens in
our
world um in a physical sense this is
nonsense you know of course everything's
made out of people to some degree you
know good people in their machines and
their livestock but
if if you rephrase this even slightly it
actually becomes pretty obvious what
these gods are they're stuff like
Nations corporations you know is where
where is Google where is Google located
where's the physical sure you can point
to their office but let's not Google
when Google sues the EU who is Google
and who is the EU sure they have lawyers
you could point to the lawyers but
they're not the EU so who is this EU
and you know what's he made out of and
so these are what you know
interchangeably can be called
egregor Gods emergent agentic structure
whatever you want to call it
basically H there are ways in which you
can view reality where it is more it is
useful to speak about groups or emergent
Gods as themselves agentic entities when
one of my favorite examples which is
like a bit mystical tinged of this is
from I think it was one of yubal hari's
books where he talks about how the
Egyptians believed in the god sobec the
crocodile God that he controlled the um
flooding of the N now of course in some
sense this is not literally true but um
I forgot which century which Pharaoh it
was but one of the Pharaoh basically God
who was you know the story when that he
was the Incarnation of soc and he
collected you know this massive amount
of workers who over like 40 years built
this incredibly complicated huge Dam
system which allowed them to control the
flooding so in a sense who controls the
flooding of the Nile now the answer
sobec is not insane it's not insane to
say that sobec does in fact control the
flooding of the Nile in the situation
now soic is not a physical thing there's
not actually a guy with a crocodile head
who is like wav his hand and making
theal go up and down but in a
non-trivial sense if you told someone if
you went to this land and you asked who
is controlling the Nal and they say SOC
this is a useful answer this is a
sensible way to make sense of this
similarly when you know you say who
developed gp4 and you answer open AI
this is a useful answer to me even so
open AI is not a guy somewhere on a
computer who developed gp4 it's still
useful to say G you know open AI so we
can think of Corporations Nations groups
of peoples as Gods this is the closest
concept we have from our ancestral
environment the same way we would call
sobec a God we can call open AI a God or
the United States of America a God and
so on and as we know from our histories
and our mythologies gods are very fickle
and strange creatures who don't really
they have a lot of human traits but
never quite they're always odd they have
weird demands and they sometimes in
bizarre ways sometimes they're extremely
good and sometimes they're extremely
evil sometimes they just do  that
doesn't make any goddam sense and this
is points to a real phenomenon and how
bureaucracies you know groups can act in
ways that are very bizarre like no
normal person would act this way but
they can also accomplish great things
they have great power they can they can
cause incredible things to happen in the
world that an individual human can't
cause at least not without becoming a
God or part of a God so another way to
think about what a God is is that you
could kind of think about um human Minds
as computers that are running software
and you can think of gods as computer
programs that are running distributed on
many human Minds shards of the of gods
run on many Minds A Shard of the H you
know the you know United States
government runs in my mind you know
because I believe in them to some degree
and I act in accordance to them a Shard
of um you know my company conjecture
runs in my mind because I act in the in
the name of this God this Corporation
this entity and so on so you can think
of them as distributed computer programs
that are running on society and so when
he talks when run talks about the dance
of the Gods he's talking about how these
computer programs are interacting how
these groups these entities are fighting
or allying or mutating or otherwise
doing things and if you look at the news
and you like listen with this in mind
this framing in mind you will hear that
they to a massive degree talk about Gods
Not about people they talk about and
often they talk about people they only
talk to people as avatars of gods you
know Joe Biden the president of the
United States of America the Avatar of
the god of the United States and so on
so massive amounts of global events are
basically fully in the hands of God
they're not in the hands of people now
people are parts of gods and people
could affect Gods but they're it's
useful to think of them as two different
things there two different layers of
exraction so to speak does that make
sense yes um this relates to I mean a
couple of points one is that with God's
U I think an automatically a sense of
being
powerless uh comes that's a connotation
that the word god implies and I think
that relates to what you said that SF is
where you go if you want to sell every
last crap of your mind body and soul
which is related to giving up agency in
front of gods um is that what you meant
by that we shouldn't necessarily feel uh
powerless in front of gods that we can
impact how they behave what they behave
so gods are made of people or at least
they run on people and the way a God is
shaped and formed depends on the people
it is running on and the way people
interact with it there is a kind of
helplessness here where some gods are
extremely powerful and many of them are
predatory um this is so in dawkings book
The Selfish Gene he introduces concept
of selfish Gene we talked about that
through Evolution um the actual selfish
bit is a is a piece of DNA is that DNA
is trying to get itself copied now this
is not because DNA has a mind it's
because if you're a piece of DNA that if
it's in an organism causes more of that
organism to exist well then there's
going to be more of you so if you look
into the world and look at the DNA in
the world you should expect to find DNA
that is good at copying itself this is
not a value judgment just a thing that
happens and Dawkins in the same book
also introduced this concept of a meme
which is you know nowadays is a word for
a joke on the inter but what it mean
originally is the is the like the
psychological or informational
equivalent of a gene it's a piece of
information that copies itself a piece
of information that will you know keep
itself you know known and it kind of
makes sense right if you are introduced
to a new culture you've never been
before you don't know anything about
them and you look at what art is the
most wellknown it's probably going to be
good you know like on average if you
sample the art randomly some art will be
vastly overrepresented
either because it has some historical
consequence or because it's really easy
to remember or it's very cheap or it's
very cool it's very fun it's very good
whatever there will be some reason that
this is the most widely spread art it's
not random it's not like art is like um
evenly uniformly distributed that every
art is equally well represented this is
obviously not how it works it makes
sense because there is
competition but like in nature you know
nature red and tooth and Claw the best
strategies for are necessarily nice it's
not necessarily being the best at
something it can also mean being the
most predatory so if you have for an
example of this is evangelicalism or
Evangelical religions in general not
specifically Christianity but just any
form of Christian any form of religion
which is which has a very strong
component of spreading itself right if
you have a religion which says we're the
best religion and maybe it is but don't
tell anyone about it what happens to
this to this religion in one generation
yeah well it's gone it could have been
as great as it wants if you didn't tell
anyone it doesn't matter now let's say
you have a religion let's say it's a
pretty  religion it's like really
bad it hurts people whatever but it
fervently like forces people you know at
gunpoint to spread it to as many people
as possible well that one might stick
around yeah makes sense and so obviously
there's a huge trade-off between all
these different things um but yeah
so it's very tempting as an individual
you see you're you're kind of at at Sea
you're kind of like there's all these
like Gods Vining for your brain space
there's all these entities so sometimes
I use words like psychic or spiritual to
talk about really what I mean is
mimic is that you being constantly
everything is trying to get your
attention because the things that get
your attention are the things that
survive you know those are the things
that will you produ if some meme can
convince you to convince your friends of
it well that Meme will stick around
so there is an evolutionary arms race
the same way that we have an
evolutionary arm race with like viruses
and bacteria is that of course viruses
and bacteria they want to they want to
use all our nice cells to reproduce
similarly memes want to use our nice
brains in order to reproduce so we are
constantly in an evolutionary arms race
against these things they're trying to
take control of us they're trying to
make this things this is a small caveat
here um I mean these memes or gods they
obviously have to be at least somewhat
beneficial for you to give your
attention uh at least in the short term
so you'll only adopt something even if a
religion was uh really really bad in the
long term but uh you would only pay heat
to a God if that God offers you some
Solace some benefit or lers you into
something uh that you find beneficial
otherwise you know you wouldn't give
that your mind space hypothetically yes
but in practice man do I spend a lot of
time on
Twitter so this is correct you are
correct in general the problem is is
that the mind is not perfectly shielded
like we don't have also
like the like the mind is not some like
our immune systems are themselves mtic
and um it's the same thing is like well
we would never allow a virus into our
cells if it was not beneficial so the
viruses must give for some kind of
benefit well the answer is no sometimes
your immune system just  up like
sometimes you just make a mistake it can
be a useful way to get past your medic
immune system to offer you a short-term
benefit this is a very common strategy
especially in memes to do this but it's
not necessary and there it's not
necessary there are ways to infiltrate
your mind without giving you anything
beneficial this is possible not saying
it's the best strategy or it's the most
common but it is
possible I mean does any example come
into your mind where in some which is I
can think of many examp yeah uh here
here's a here's a really Stark one
anorexia so anorexia can be spread
medically um there's a lot of studies on
this where if young girls are exposed to
people talking about anorexia or showing
anorexia they can develop anorexia at
much much larger levels than they would
otherwise there's you know like for
example I say South Korea and Japan the
word like the concept of an didn't
really exist and then psychologists
start to introduce these terms and
suddenly the W is shot up and now some
people will say well anorexia always
existed but wasn't diagnosed but this
doesn't match up because anorexia in
particular is so bad that people often
die or have to go to the hospital
because of Mal nutrition so you can't
hide it so this is a very specific
example of a very virulent mic virus
which gives no benefit it just makes
them miserable it's a horrible
experience I know if you've had anyone
in your family or something that Ina
it's awful it's a terrible experience
for people they no benefit from it it
hurts them severely it can kill people
um this is unusually clean example um
there are many examples that are on the
Spectrum from this unusually clean
example got it um so I mean you also
said um you watch many good-hearted Tech
folks practically giveway agency is that
related to what you're talking about
because their minds are
infiltrated by some gods or memes that
are necessarily um on their side
absolutely there's always a large as I
say it's a predatory world you know
we're swimming in a you know a swamp a
primordial ooze of you know evolutionary
pressure of viruses there's um it's
surprising how bad our neuromas around
epistemic hygiene are about mic hygiene
like people just like turn on the news
or like scroll through Twitter for hours
per day and like yeah this is fine like
the way you should think about is like
it's putting your hands into like dirty
slime like wash your hands like what are
you doing like if you just if you just
dunk your hand into the infected slime
yeah it's going to be bad for you you
know and like wash your hands godamn um
and people truly don't wash their hands
to a surprising large degree there's
surprisingly so we talked a it earlier
about how people feel this helplessness
I think a lot of this helplessness is
that people don't have these terms to
talk about it so before we had germ
Theory this was how we were dealing with
physical illnesses as well is we didn't
have a concept really that like drinking
things some things were bad or that not
washing your hands before during surgery
is bad like when doctors first said we
should stop start washing our hands um
before doing surgery surgery mind you he
was run out of medicine he lost his job
he was vilified he was like lost
literally everything it's a great story
you should I forgot his name
unfortunately but yeah everyone was like
like hated this guy destroyed his entire
career I'm not sure if he committed
suicide but like at least was close to
it um so truly awful story and now from
our perspective like what the like what
like of course you wash your hands
before you do surgery what the hell are
you thinking about and I think we're in
a similar phase right now where we're in
the preh handwashing era of like
information consumption I think part of
this is because for a very long time
there wasn't that much slim you know
like we didn't had before we had radio
before we had television before we had
the internet the amount of like negative
medic information could be exposed to
was relatively low so the pressure
towards
developing mtic resistance was
relatively low um it still existed but
it was relatively low the same way how
before we had cities that weren't really
pandemics there was much less
evolutionary pressure on viruses and
bacteria to develop pandemic level
replication without cities and then
after like there's a great um one of my
favorite like you know Mysteries quote
unquote is when the Spanish came to
America you they brought small pox them
and it ravished the North American
continent why didn't the Spanish get
sick with mysterious North American
diseases like why didn't they bring you
know America pox back to
Spain and the usual explanation for this
is is that there weren't very dense as
many dense cities with bad sanitation in
North America there were some cities but
they were smaller and there weren't as
many as them and general sanitation was
not quite as bad as in European cities
so the viruses and the bacteria that
developed in Europe were just just a
million times more vent and you know
evolved in a sense than the ones that
were common in North America at the time
there's a similar thing going on with
the internet right now where the
internet is a cesspool of mimic
Evolution it's a spawning ground a
primordial ooze from which like you know
we have like this extense competition of
like more and more mentally ill you know
teenagers coming up with more and more
deranged memes more and more derange
culture War issues more and more
whatever to hack people's minds as
quickly as possible and this is kind of
where we're at
right now and so when talking about
these people you're talking about these
like gooded nerds um years ago when we
talked last time you know I was more
optimistic about this um because I
hadn't yet witnessed in its full horror
how much like I kind of thought like
what you were talking about earlier like
well but you know Lon is a is a smart
man so why is he doing this I used to
believe a similar thing I was like well
if people are smart they'll be able to
resist memes and like you know think for
themselves right yeah right but there's
a saying where like people think Cults
are for stupid people and those people
themselves are probably vulnerable to
Cults um Cults are not just for stupid
people um like Cults affect very smart
people all the time this is a very
common phenomenal and it's one that I
think people are so uncomfortable with
this fact like most people in the common
world are so uncomfortable with the fact
that many of the worst Cults attract
very intelligent and very academic
people that they don't even think about
what they should teach us like what we
can learn from this I'm fascinated by
like and like other extreme like Elite
Cults which are deranged like you read
their literature whatever and it's
insane it's complete Madness yet it
attracted top
intelligencia top scientists top
Engineers to their ranks and and this
should teach us something it should say
what's going on here and then to pull
from the extreme example back to the
concrete example how many of us have
heard you know it's become a meme in the
western spear you know of like I was
just following orders but let's be
honest we all know someone who said
something like that before even of
ourselves you know you work for a big
company got to do something you know
maybe not quite as comfortable with but
I mean it's your boss's fault he makes a
decision so you you can let it happen
right right you know sure you're
building AGI which you know might kill
everybody you don't really have a plan
but look you're just an engineer you're
just following orders it's not your job
to figure out how to solve it you just
build
technology right and this is very common
so is is that what run meant by don't
fret about the
outcome so I think I think this is the
uncharitable interpretation which the
one I'm
picking I'm not instantly charitable
just for fun um I think charity has its
point and sometimes you shouldn't be
charitable sometimes you should
sometimes shouldn't be um I think the
charitable interpretation is that he's
saying look bro if you're just some guy
 it like you can't do anything
you're too stupid you're too weak don't
even try and this is a harsh
message but there is some truth to it
and this is something I struggle with as
well I don't have a good answer to this
question is that man the world is
actually complicated like like  me
like the world is actually hard right
it's like I could I could I could tell
some oil you know grad student be like
bro like climate change and he will
answer like okay well what what do I do
you know I I have 95 IQ and uh full a
family that I have to feed and also my
mom is dying of cancer like what do what
do I do and this is actually a good
question like I want to have sympathy
here so there's a there's a cynical
snarky version of this where you're like
people are bad like people have no moral
Consciousness they have no spine they're
cowards they will just do what's locally
good best for them whatever and I mean
this is true but it's
not it's not compassionate it's not the
proper compassion I think should be had
here the proper compassion that should
be had here is that the world is 
hard and being human is  hard
taking care of your family is 
hard taking care of your mental health
is  hard there's no like we're
all in this together right it's a human
condition this is it is actually a
struggle and sure we could be like haa
look me living in a first world country
you know from you know loving middle
class background I'm going to look down
on you because you you know because
you're like a struggling you know single
mom you know who can't you know has no
time to think about serious
issues but that's just not productive
like what the like what the  are you
doing like like shut the  up like
it's it's easy to fall to cynicism it's
easy to be like well you know no one's
going to do anything everyone's bad blah
blah blah I understand but this is not
productive we have to Simply see that it
is actually hard fighting Gods building
Gods is hard it takes resources it takes
luck it takes you know being healthy you
know if you're just sick like well damn
like well you do like  you know it's
just so I have a lot of compassion and I
truly truly have compassion for people
and I do think it is true and this is
something I struggle with so in my
personal relationships a pattern that I
often struggle with is that sometimes
people will like very normal nice people
just normal people their normal lives
you know people I meet at a party or
whatever they'll want my opinion on
something they want to know like what's
really going on they want that like
Conor like tell me how it is or they
want me to psychoanalyze them or
something because like often people get
a feeling that I'm good at reading
people or whatever and they want me to
like psycho analyze them they want me to
talk to them about spirituality they
want me to tell them what's wrong with
them and I usually don't um partially
because this is not my responsibility
and like I shouldn't do this like and
also it's because it will just hurt them
often like I I can tell like um but what
happens quite often with my mom is like
you know I'll have a call with my mom
I'll tell her how I'm doing and so on
and she'll be like she really wants to
know what I'm doing and like really
what's going on in the world and you
know I'll tell her what's I'm doing
whatever and she gets so scared um you
know about the world about politics
about Ai and so on and almost always it
concludes which is like but you're okay
honey right I say yes Mom I'm okay don't
worry about it and I think this is
actually compassionate and like I love
my mom and she loves me more than
anything in the world um but she can't
do what I do um she has responsibilities
to the rest of the family she doesn't
have the same kind of personality traits
the same set of education that I
necessarily do to be able to run a
company to run political campaigning and
so on and I do not think it is a good
thing both I don't I think it's unfair
to these people to look down on them but
also at the same time what's the point
in making them upset like what's the
point in like making them fret and
scared and frightened I can make them
aware of all the Towering Titans all the
monsters and the Devils that are around
us but does it help so I think what ruin
is singer I think is actually something
comp passionate and I want to give R
credit for this I think this comes from
a place of love I don't think run is a
bad person I think what he's saying here
is coming from a place of love I think
what he's saying is like if you're all
just worried about all these demons that
you can do nothing about you're just
going to be scared you're just going to
be upset and it's not going to help
fight the demons so like don't fret
about it enjoy your life be good to your
neighbors be be good to your family you
know do what you can and I do think I do
respect this and I struggle myself with
this dichotomy of on the one hand yeah I
you know I want my mom to just take care
of herself take care of her family you
know back home um be happy and like just
don't worry about the politics like I'll
I'll handle it but on the other hand I'm
also like God  damn it someone
has to handle politics yeah yeah and um
on that note I mean uh keeping almost
everyone apart who can't really
influence uh the course of AI but there
are people who have a huge amount of
influence run I'm sure has influence and
open a is probably 400 500 people um
what do you have to say about them like
what moral responsibility they have and
and it find it I mean of course everyone
notices this let's say sam Alman goes
around talking about dangers of AI
yet he and his group of people are the
same ones building it and that to me is
cognitively dissonant so what's what's
happening there yeah so there's a reason
that I yelled at R and not my mom let me
put it that way um yes the reason I
wrote this long Twitter post calling out
run rather scathingly um is because like
bro like this is cope like Ru is
obviously not my mom like you know my
mom obviously can't do what R can do
obviously run is extremely intelligent
he's extremely capable he's Charming
like he's in a good spot he has Capital
both social and otherwise
like so it's in my Aesthetics so
sometimes I'll meet someone like this
and when I meet someone like this I like
to hit them with the equivalent the
verbal equivalent of a bamboo Rod so
like in Buddhism there's this thing
where you uh the student when the
student gets distracted you hit their
hands with a bamboo Rod because it
doesn't really cause permanent damage
but it hurts like hell I know You' ever
done oh God it hurts so bad um and so
the the point is to attention to
something to be like wake up like like
what the  are you talking about wake
up wake up wake up wake up and this was
kind of like this post I wrote was not
really meant for other people it was for
R it was like I saw like a man who has
great potential where I think is
sleeping and I want to hit him and be
like wake up in practice this never
works um sorry all you all Buddhist
Masters out there and so on or like
people who hope but in practice this
doesn't work um hitting people and
making them wake up doesn't work um
there's reasons why it doesn't work it
usually works temporarily and they
usually just go back to sleep because
their social environment is optimized to
put them back to sleep usually you need
to hit people with a rod and then also
move them out of their social context
into a different social context which
reinforces reflection
or you need to do what I call
bootstrapping which is a whole other
topic I hope to write more about in the
future ever since this post and even
before that I was thinking a lot about
this question of okay but what if you
can't move social contexts and you want
to keep awake what do you do and the
process I call is bootstrapping which is
this idea of what are the things you
need to do to not fall back asleep and
keep going and what is the minimum set
of things what is the smallest
commitment that if you do this or like
something in this category you will
continue to improve and you'll reach
escape velocity kind like spiritual
escape velocity you'll start reflecting
it'll get better and better and better
it has to come from within right it has
to be initiated by the person yes
ultimately if you don't want to whatever
like
ultimately to go to the underworld you
have to want to go to the underworld
otherwise you can always turn back it's
like you need to escalate your
commitment so that you ultimately come
out of the situation you are in there
needs to be something you're fighting
for or there needs to be something you
need to you want to protect the most
common way other than accidental or
forced entance on the world the The Call
to Adventure is usually not um an active
thing like on the part of the adventurer
per se it's usually that the valley is
threatened it's usually you are
protecting It's usually the adventurer
wants to save the valley it wants to
protect other people and to do that they
have to go to the underworld this is how
the things usually go having something
to protect is a very powerful um way to
motivate and to reason about yourself
and keep yourself accountable um I think
it is in a sense a more healthy driver
than the will than the raw Will To Power
I think the raw Will To Power is
predictably disruptable if you just want
power for
yourself there's like no way to not
become a villain if you want to protect
and you need power the will to power to
get there I think this is how heroes are
made is you know the hero is the is the
intersection between the will to protect
and the will to power um because you
need both otherwise you know you just
you're just you're just another demigod
you know ascending for his own selfish
needs um and a new predator in the field
I think everyone has a self-image in
which they are doing whatever they're
doing for the good and I'm sure open has
a narrative where they're trying to
create a lot of value in the world and
they don't actively see themselves as of
course this is who could be could could
be doing evil things right exactly and
so this is exactly why I gave the
warning about Mystic talking mistake
language is that a story isn't
sufficient to be a hero like you're not
the good guy because you follow a
narrative structure this is simply
insufficient there's no way to take I
think I'm a good person and therefore
concluding you are a good person the
step doesn't exist and you can
take the the the reason mysticism is
dangerous is that it allows
anything you know the in a proof system
in the maass system you know if you
construct it correctly it should only
allow you to make correct proofs like
incorrect ones are just you know just
you know at least in a constructive
system blah blah blah you can't even
make wrong ones like it's just not
allowed or you know they get a sign
false or whatever this is not the case
outside of
mathematics I can you can give me
literally anything right now I promise
you you can give me anything and I can
justify it I can come with an argument
that justifies
anything any sufficiently smart can do
this like anyone who has aici verb IQ
and has read fiction and a little bit of
psycho analysis can justify literally
anything in any context and the concl so
one conclusion you can draw from this is
that well I guess morality is completely
arbitrary I'll just do whatever the 
I want  you this is one thing you
can draw from this another thing you can
draw from this is that huh wow morality
is actually hard and I can't actually
justify I can't actually guarantee that
I am good just by thinking it this is
just not sufficient and then you have to
think about larger things you have to
think about your social system you have
think about your own incentives you have
to think about yourself as a from third
person you have to think about not just
you know who do I think I am but like in
practice what is the entity that
inhabits my body what is it what is it
doing and where is it steering because
by
default the humans are really good at
convincing themselves that you know
whatever they're doing is good and it's
very very hard to evaluate this in any
objective sense in any funable even
non-trivial I'm not even saying the one
true goodness I'm saying just like not
obviously stupid even this is really
hard and if you're in a bad social
situation or an irreflexive system if
you don't have control over your
emotions if you don't eat well sleep
well have family and friends if you
don't have these things it's almost
impossible like it's almost impossible
it's really hard it's really hard it's
it's possible but it's really hard and
it takes effort and it takes energy and
it takes under a will to power to a
certain degree like you have to be
willing to fight Gods right like um
another blogger called z um wrote a
little bit about that post I wrote and
one of the things he said is that like
at the end of the post is that like um
run is kind of saying is that well look
the world is run by cthulu cthulu is
some powerful God you know we're 
you know just live with it
and from his perspective what I'm saying
is um to a certain degree like yeah the
world is r p cthulu and you have to
punch him and this is insane you know
punching Kulu is insane cthulu is much
stronger than you you're bu a human but
this is the only way out like either
cthulu eats you or you find some 
way to punch him I don't I'm not saying
I know how to punch him but like you
need to find out something as someone
needs to you know if you don't do it
someone needs to punch cthu and this is
kind of a lot of how I think about these
kind of things I'm not saying look I am
the Messiah here's the things you do in
this order and then everything turns out
fine not what I'm saying I'm saying is
holy  cthulu is running the planet
um no one seems to currently have a plan
how to build a cthulu killer weapon uh
or what to do with the corpse afterwards
um we should probably figure that out
like right yeah and and apparently a lot
of smart people are sort of infected by
these mind viruses Gods which of course
there a not even acknowledge there is
this thing going around oh yeah like one
of the biggest like the biggest quote
quote spiritual skill or magical skill
like the most important one is
reflection the ability to reason about
your own thoughts this is much harder
than people think it is especially
because your emotions will actively
hinder you gaining access to your own
mind
it's actually hard like people think
many people think that we have like
privileged access to our own minds that
you know whatever you think you think is
what you think but that's not true yeah
um what you think you think is often not
what you think um you know say that
three times fast um and um this is
actually tricky like you are like the
human condition is you are a faulty
algorithm running on faulty Hardware
with incomplete access to itself that is
supposed to reason about itself to
improve itself while surrounded in
adversarial environment of constant
programs made by much stronger
programmers than you who are trying to
hack you this is The Human Condition
this is the Underworld the underworld is
the thing below consensus narrative
reality it's the murmur the the the the
sludge the the creatures the the the
worms you know everything that underlies
the infrastructure the the pillars upon
the psychic pillars upon which
everything stands and once you actually
look down you be like oh  there's a
bunch of  down there and a lot of
that shit's in your head a lot of is
like trauma and like weird you know
desires that you may be not reflective
upon lack of Education you just never
learned how to think about your own
thoughts you just never practiced it's
just like there's so much  like yeah
in a sense if it was only Gods that's
already bad enough but there's also a
bunch of other  there's like so this
psychop you know like Psy you know like
psychic creatures gods are one of them
but there's other ones as well there's
various kinds of demons that are in your
head and they can come from all kinds of
trauma or even for you know physical
injury or whatever you know can cause
demons um to appear in your head that
you have to deal with or that will
inhibit you in some ways and it's truly
very hard to deal with this and there's
no General purpose solution so and like
and so there's one more thing I want to
bring up before we move on to any other
topic which
is there's no easy way to talk about
this this is the hardest maybe the
hardest part of this to talk about I
didn't talk about in my tweet because it
was too hard to talk about um I'm going
to try and I'm probably going to
fail there is a deeper sense where there
is nothing in our brain but Gods is that
separating you from the other things
doesn't actually make
sense you isn't really a thing um there
is
various patterns that claim to be Paras
choa and these patterns are very
different depending on the time of day
which person you're around what social
context you're in whether you've eaten
recently or not um whether you got hid
on the head or not and many other things
the soul is not only in your brain brain
it's very
distributed the thing that you would
call the soul like the person is
distributed to your your friends your
family your social networks your tools
your writing your the art you have
hanging in your in your house it's all
part of you in some sense and in a sense
you are a very big thing like and
there's some things that are less you
know the the the paintings on your wall
are less you than the brain in your head
is you but it is you a little bit it's a
little bit you and I am a little bit you
because we known each other and we've
talked not a lot I don't know you
particularly well but there's a little
bit of par chakra in my head a little
bit and there's a little bit of me in
you a little bit and
so this is very messy so it can be
useful to think about just like okay I
am a fortress and these gods are trying
to enter my Fortress but this is
actually an a not true it's more like
you're also a spirit you're also a God
you're also this thing spread across
psychic reality and you're mixing with
all these other things to various
degrees and you don't have full control
over the mixing like you know you can
meet someone and they'll just like say
stuff to you and enters your brain and
now you think differently so it's very
hard to reason and to think about how do
you build yourself how do you create
this God this entity this Hero whatever
it's not just you decide one day yep I'm
a good guy now hell yeah this is what
I'm going to do now that easy you're
made of many parts that's that's almost
like one God that you identify with as
self trying to control of all other gods
and that rarely happens exactly you got
it like this is a good way of thinking
about it it's like the Buddhist way I
think about so the self is just another
illusion it's just the punch line they
talk about in the post it's the punch
line
of like going all the way into the
theworld the full shanic Enlightenment
is there are no
Spirits there never were any spirits but
like of course not like the world is
mechanistic there's no magic there's no
Spirits there's just people and words
and language and stuff like it's not
it's all mechanistic it's all atoms deep
down that doesn't mean it can't be
useful to talk about them but
fundamentally there is no mystery here
it's nothing magical it's a
understandable it has it's a hard thing
to understand it's one of the complex
parts of reality but it's just reality
everything adds up to
normality and so the takeaway of like
good in I I claim if you take my
spirituality here it shouldn't be like
you come out of this and you're
completely destabilized you're like whoa
my soul is everywhere dude when you
should come out of this is like oh yeah
huh and then you know you just like
you're still you like it should change
who you are you were always like this
and the whole like like the Zen position
might be like you were always
enlightened like you've always been
enlightened you just didn't notice like
it's like it's just how it already I
don't quite agree with the Zen position
on here but I think it's a nice
aesthetic um and it's it's similar here
it's like look it's not like if I inform
you about the existence of gods it's not
like they didn't exist previously if I
inform you that you're this psychic
Cloud it doesn't mean you weren't a
psychic Cloud before it's just you were
listening to this one story about you
being oneself in your brain this one God
this one you know monom monotheistic
like even more monotheistic than
monotheistic God that's in your head
that is not only is the only God you
worship it's the one that is you that's
like a whole privileged position and
it's a very useful position it's a very
useful for people to think of themselves
as one entity because it's useful
coordination and stuff like this right
but it isn't quite true
yeah acknowledgement of this view does
help you become more charitable and
compassionate and it sort of um diffuses
the boundaries between good and evil
because then these things are also
diffus if people are people are much
more porous than they would imagine
themselves to be then they're very
porous and the thing I also want to
thing that I I I I think is important I
an interpretation of this I don't like
is that people are like wow I'm like
everything dude and the whole universe
is one and therefore everything is love
and I'm like no no no you went too far
go back like no no no no no no hold on
hold on like some things are less you
than other things some things are more
you um this is what is called continuous
agency and like for example um I might
say some words to you that convince you
to go do something you know you go grab
me a glass of water or something are you
part of my
body like not like we wouldn't say that
but technically my brain outputs some
neuron signals which caused a chain of
events that caused a glass of water to
come to my hand so in a sense I could
think of you as part of my body but
doesn't really make sense right like
that's not how not how we would use
those words so you're like less me but
there is a causality there like there is
a causality between like and this ises
especially important for example with
corations so corporations when well
constructed to a large degree can be
thought of extended bodies extended body
minds of you um especially for like
startups like smaller groups of people
where you have like a strong founding
figure or a small small group of strong
founders with a lot of support um you
can think of it as a entity that is
acting in a coordinated way this is how
people often treat CEOs implicitly like
when they say sam all man you know did
this in the name of open Ai and but like
did he or was it this massive process of
dozens of Engineers and support staff
and personal assistance and operations
and all these things that through a long
convoluted chain resulted in this thing
happening where Sam was involved in this
CH in this chain of course um of course
he does but can you say oh he did
this it's a spectrum and I think this is
a useful way to think about causality
and it's also a good way to think about
blame and credit is there's very
tempting to say like you the guy who
pulled the trigger he gets all the Bing
or whatever but is this actually a good
way to think about how things work like
we have an intuition that like no we
should probably get the guy in charge
and we should put him into prison but
even then does that make any sense so
like recently I've been playing um this
video game called cyberp punk 2077
that's a really video game I like it a
lot and it's a cyber Punk world so it's
like dystopia like corporations control
the world blah blah blah and as part of
the plot one of the characters is like
you know ah you know these evil
corporate guys you know we we have to
like find the CEO we're gonna you know
like kill him we have to defeat him
whatever right and me as a player I'm
just like no that doesn't help even if
you find the CEO of the evil Mega Corp
and even if you kill him it doesn't
matter he just gets replaced the next
day like what's the point the board will
just elect a new CEO who's just as evil
like killing the CEO doesn't help and so
this is like a
very this kind of interpretation of
these kind of things like it's not use
like you know a thing that's happened to
me multiple times is a well-meaning
journalist will come to me and ask me a
question like is Sam Alman nice is he a
good guy like does he care about safety
or is Demis you know is he a good guy or
a bad guy or whatever and my answer to
this question is it shouldn't matter mhm
it shouldn't depend on whether some tech
CEO is a nice guy or a bad guy that
whether or not the future will go well
this is a bad system like we should just
not have a system which allows this to
be the case so I don't care if Sam
alman's a nice guy or a bad guy I don't
care if demons is a nice guy bad I've
met both of them lot of positive things
to say about them some negative things
also a lot of positive whatever but
ultimately I don't care they there
should be no one who makes these
decisions it the causality of whether
AGI gets created of how the future goes
shouldn't depend like there should be no
dependency node on this Tech guy is a
nice guy yeah and so this is where I
think this thinking is very important is
I think run is completely correct AGI is
being built by gods it is not being
built by people this is really important
to understand the entities that are
building a that are ruling the world
that are making these decisions are not
people they don't follow people rules
they're Gods but that doesn't mean they
don't follow rules gods are part of
nature they're mechanical they can be
understood they can be modified they can
be fought they can be hunted this is all
possible but if you approach them as if
they were people if you use the methods
you use on individuals on
gods you will completely fail like for
example common strategy is appeasement a
lot a lot of times people good-hearted
people will join a company that they
don't agree with because they want to
you know change it from the inside you
know they want to they want to get on
its good side so when it matters they
can put in a good word and seared in a
good direction so this does work with
people except sociopaths but like
gaining the Loyalty of a person Eng
grating yourself with them so that in
that moment of Crisis they come to you
for Aid or for advice that is a viable
strategy for people it is not a viable
strategy for Gods this is not how Gods
work and you will consistently be
disappointed over and over and over
again if you naively approach Gods as if
they were people they're not you have to
use completely different methods in
order to hunt have you found ways to
communicate or Reason with Gods like I
know this is the biggest problem but um
yeah how how do you do so many many many
ways I mean we have very complicated one
called the legal system that's a whole
protocol for the god language this is
itself of course well it's it's
implemented by various gods and has
various god-like properties but like
legal our legal system is one of the
most fascinating attempts at codifying
and like writing down actual God code
and God language and God structure and
God and spells like how to affect Gods
like it's it's so  right I I
signed some piece of paper in Delaware
and now there's a new God mhm like you
know you it's true and but it works and
people believe you I could just like
sign a piece of paper Delaware and they
be like okay I am now ex Inc and people
just believe me they're like yeah you're
EX in cool you're a company good job
nice like it works you just cast the
magic spell you sign the stupid piece of
paper and if you don't do it it doesn't
work if you don't sign the stupid piece
of paper in Delaware well people don't
care then you're not really a
corporation like you're just like some
guy pretending to be a corporation but
if you sign a piece of paper in Delaware
well that counts so the legal system is
a and the and government and so on is a
fascinating attempt to control Gods to
shape Gods this is what regulation to a
large degree is about a large amount of
Regulation is not about controlling
people it's about controlling Gods it's
about controlling how gods are allowed
to interact also how they're allow to
interact with people how they interact
with each other you know legal
personhood like we literally give God's
personhood in in legal context and this
is actually good this is actually based
um this is actually a good way I think
this is good and like we should be
reasoning on this level so yeah you can
you can interface with Gods through the
legal system for example you can
interface with them through the
spiritual social marketing realm you can
interface with them through narrative
you can interface with them through um
you know the commercial realm obviously
like that's what most gods are doing is
Commerce um most of them are trying to
make money in various ways that's what
most of them do and so most gods are
very receptive to money and if you have
a lot of money you can make Gods pay
attention to you and do a lot of things
you want them to do um and vice versa so
gods are not a magic weird out there
thing it's daily life it's a question of
how do you interact with the bureaucracy
how do you interact with a nation how do
you interact with a company is the same
question as how do I interact the God
and the answer is it's not not that
weird like we're used to we do this
every day we constantly interact with
various gods and sometimes it's really
frustrating because a lot of the gods
are not super aligned with our you know
human worlds so now the more interesting
question is all right cool we have some
basic interaction protocols or whatever
but this is obviously insufficient
what's the advanced stuff how do you
hunt Gods how do you build New Gods now
this is the interesting stuff and you
will see as we when we map this into
normal language is mapped into how do
you build a company how do you win a
political campaign how do you um create
viral marketing these are the same
questions as how do you do Advanced
things with Gods how do you build Gods
how do you control Gods how do you shape
Gods how do you kill Gods all of these
things are fundamentally the question of
how do you get large groups of people to
do or believe something in various ways
and there's many ways to do that from
marketing and campaigning politics um
and to you know money you know building
good products narratives fiction there
are many
ways got it uh so Conor since we at the
end of the time I wanted to talk about
conjecture AI um you mentioned somewhere
you want to blaz a path through on the
underworld to build underworld to build
infrastructure is that what you're doing
are you try to build
infrastructure about it unfortunately
that is more of a side gig at the moment
um I have unfortunately many many things
I need to do um so conjecture itself is
more focused it is a it is a company it
is a R&amp;D company we are working on
developing AI systems that are useful
commercially viable um so we can get the
benefits of AI while being controllable
and understandable and in particular
that we can know what they know and what
they don't know and they don't
accidentally become more powerful um one
of the things that most worries me about
the current path of AI is that we have
no idea how smart AI systems are we have
no idea what gp4 can actually do in the
limit we don't know what cloud 3 can do
there was that funny post where someone
was like well look Claud seems to have
noticed it's in a test isn't that funny
didn't expect that so the problem isn't
that result like okay whatever the
problem is then not predict it if they
were like hey we we TR our system such
that we predict it will be able to know
this and then it did I'm like okay fair
enough that's all right but no it's
complete Black Magic it's complete dark
arts no one knows what's going on inside
of these things and this is a big
problem so even if we wanted to prevent
super intelligence for coming existence
we currently can't because it'll happen
accidentally so forget all the people
who want to do this on purpose even the
people who don't want to do it on
purpose currently cannot prevent it from
happening accidentally there is some
number in such that
gpn becomes super intelligent and we
don't know what that n is maybe it's
maybe it's five maybe it's six maybe
it's seven who knows I don't think it's
eight but we don't know right it could
be five it could be four for all we and
we just didn't notice I don't know so
we're building systems and developing
novel beyon of the AR methods um that
allow us to have much more control over
what AI systems actually learn and what
they can actually do and not do um still
R&amp;D phase there and the
the separate thing of like blazing
infrastructure through the underworld is
kind of the thing I alluded to a bit
earlier about bootstrapping um currently
a bit of a side gig um but unfortunately
like when I talk about the AI problem
it's tempting to only talk about the
technical problem but the true question
of how do we build a good future for
everybody is not a technical problem
it's also a technical problem wasn't
only a technical problem it's a
technical problem it's a social problem
it's a political problem and and to some
degree it's a spiritual problem and I
think all these problems need to be
solved
I'm willingly or not working on all of
them kind of in parallel I hope there
would be more people um you know who
join me and others to try to solve these
problems and work on these extremely
hard problems because I think we need to
solve every single one if we skip even
one of them think the future is going to
be that great but it is
possible yeah on that note uh
uh thank you so much uh I think it's
wonderful to have people like you think
about these problems and then sort of
going into great depths to tease apart
all the nuances I'm sure a lot of people
will find this wonderful and I'll keep
an eye on uh hopefully uh lot of
contributions from your side that
prevent us from very obvious risks that
are just out on the horizon so thank you
Connor for your time it was wonderful
chatting with you thanks so much
n
