hello everyone welcome to a new episode
of the D Center I'm your host as always
Ricard lops and today I'm joined by
Grace Blakeley author journalist
political commentator and we're talking
about her latest book vulture capitalism
corporate crimes backd door bailouts and
the death of Freedom so Grace welcome to
the show it's a huge pleasure to
everyone thanks for having me it's great
to be here so the first thing I would
like to get into when it comes to your
book is that uh one thing is how
capitalism actually works and another
thing is what people commonly think I
mean what are their common ideas about
how it works so before we get into some
of the examples you explore in the book
to illustrate how capitalism works and
some of the tactics that capitalists
have to sort of exploit the system or
make the system work in their favor what
would you say some of the most common
ideas that people have about or what
they
think how they think capitalism
works yeah so I suppose I wanted to
write this book to address some of those
misconceptions about how capitalism
Works um and I think the first and most
prominent one is this idea that um
capitalism is like a free market system
um and a system in which um the the
state is completely separate from the
market so you have this idea that in
capitalist societies you have economies
that are governed by the principles of
free market economics and then you have
governments that exist separate to those
economies that kind of regulate the free
market um and the idea is that if the
government gets too big relative to the
economy then that becomes socialism
effectively so this idea that capitalism
is is a market economy and socialism is
a big state deciding everything um and I
think those misconceptions come back to
the legacy of the Cold War basically
when you had uh the US which painted
itself as this kind of free market
Utopia um and the USSR where you did
have a centrally planned economy where
the state uh kind of determined the
production and allocation of resources
um so I wanted to kind of really respond
to that uh that miscon ction that a lot
of people have um and I did that by
looking both at whether or not
capitalism is a free market system and
also the role of the state within
capitalist economies yeah um so in the
book I show that you know capitalism
isn't a free market system um and that
the state actually has a very
significant role in determining what
goes on in capitalist economies and the
example I use is uh to start the book is
Boeing so uh some of your readers some
of your listeners sorry might remember
the Boeing 737 Max disasters which took
place um in about 2018 2019 uh and in
those disasters two Boeing planes fell
out of the sky killing nearly 350 people
in two separate plane crashes um and
there were lots of Investigations that
went on into why this had happened It
ultimately transpired that senior
Executives at Boeing had known about the
problems with this plane
before uh the crashes took place um and
had done nothing about it despite the
fact that there had been whistleblowers
coming forward there had been people
within the firm saying this plane is
unsafe we cannot bring it to Market but
the senior Executives within this
company said nope we're gonna do that
anyway um and to understand how this
This Disaster and this kind of you know
Corruption of what was once a kind of
Great American firm took place you have
to understand firstly that Boeing wasn't
operating in a free market context and
secondly that it is deeply in meshed
with the American state so firstly
Boeing doesn't operate in a free market
it is um operates in a a duopoly so
basically there are two large firms
Boeing and Airbus that dominate um the
aviation industry uh there's you know
there is competition between those two
firms um but it is a very specific
specific type of competition it's not
the kind of competition that you would
expect within a free market system where
there's lots of small producers
competing to produce things and the
pressures of competition keep prices
down um and you know it's a maximally
efficient system instead you have these
two big firms um and they are competing
to keep costs down as low as possible um
so that means kind of underpaying
workers making sure unions don't get
recognized cutting Corners in production
as we saw with Boeing um and uh
generally kind of stripping out as much
cost as possible to maximize their
profits it also means that they pursue
other avenues to try and consolidate
their Market power so for example um you
know getting favorable deals with
governments um making deals with Airline
carriers uh so Boeing had this deal with
Southwest an airline provider um that uh
basically kind of you know allowed it to
uh maintain uh production and and and
ensure demand was maintained um so you
kind of have deal making that goes on
quite a lot within this context um and
uh also this close relationship with the
state um now Boeing was one of the
biggest recipients of corporate welfare
in the US in 20 uh I think it was 2018
and that has continued so it receives
massive subsidies tax breaks huge
amounts of support from the American
state it also has a lot of contracts
with the US states with different parts
of the states with you know the Pentagon
Department of Defense Etc uh and so um
the US government has been very involved
in the Boeing scandals since they've
since they've started um in the sense
that you know the regulator was really
asleep at the wheel during the 737 Max
disasters Boeing was actually being
regulated by um a unit of the Federal
Aviation Authority that sat inside
Boeing and whose workers were being paid
by Boeing so it was effectively
regulating
itself um and it was receiving all this
money from the government even after the
737 Max disasters during the covid-19
pandemic um the US state distributed a
huge amount of money to Boeing um after
all of these scandals had come to light
even after it had been charged with a
Criminal conspiracy to defraud the
United States it's still got all this
money from the government um and so I
think what this shows you know this is
the context in which the the disasters
took place right it was um a
monopolistic Market structure in which
boing was operating where it had no real
discipline from the market no
accountability from Regulators because
Regulators were so close to it and no
Democratic accountability from the US
state because you know Boeing's
lobbyists were working in all different
areas of the United States uh govern
government um to get contracts to change
legislation to change regulation uh and
all that means is that you have this
massive powerful firm that is
effectively insulated from any
accountability it doesn't have
accountability from the market because
there's not as much competition and it
doesn't have accountability from the
state and it just means that basically
the senior Executives of these really
big firms are able to kind of plan who
gets what even though this is supposed
to be a free market economy where nobody
can plan anything because the market is
supposed to decide um so that I think in
another number of other examples shows
this lie that capitalism means free
markets it doesn't it means a kind of uh
it means basically massive corporate
power um the power of large firms over
the rest of society that isn't
constrained by the market and that isn't
really constrained by the power of the
state as well it's kind of this toxic
Fusion of public and private power in
service of maximizing the wealth and
power of people at the
top so let's talk more about the that
idea or that misconception that people
have or that capitalists promote that we
actually have a free market I mean
whatever that means because for me at
least it's always been
weird what how an actual free market
would work without any state
intervention any State regulation
enforcement of contracts and all of that
but but anyway we can also get into that
later but um in what ways are businesses
planned and I think it's very important
for us to address that question here
because uh since this is a very common
misconception people actually tend to
believe that businesses are not planned
just because business owners and other
people like that say so
yeah so to understand this argument that
I have about planning we need to
understand as you were saying what a
free market should look like right in
like if you pick up an economics
textbook what are they going to tell you
the free market looks like and the idea
is that you have um lots of
similar producers all producing the same
commodity let's say in a market for I
don't know um like cars so you've got
lots of different producers all
producing their own cars um and they um
are competing with each other on costs
and on prices so that if one firm
produces cars less efficiently than
another firm there are loads of other
car firms that produce cars more
efficiently at a lower cost so no
consumers by the car of this inefficient
firm and the pressures of competition
mean that the inefficient firm goes out
of business business and only the
efficient firms survive uh and that is
supposed to be how a free market economy
maximizes efficiency it's the pressure
of competition means that only the most
efficient producers are able to survive
um because the others out compete uh out
compete the less efficient ones um so
anything that kind of gets in the way of
that competitive pressure
undermines this kind of free market
Market uh idea basically um and what we
see in kind of modern capitalist
economies is that it doesn't look like
that at all so we don't have lots and
lots of little firms all competing to
produce things you know the only context
in which that's really true is if you
look at like a local market in your town
there you have little you know producers
competing to produce things right that
is like a kind of free market but if you
look at production of the most important
Commodities like cars for example um
like airplanes whatever then you have a
number of large and Powerful producers
um that are that have very close links
with governments um and which are to a
greater or lesser extent insulated from
competition um so you know there are
barriers to entry which mean that new
firms struggle to come in um there are
regulatory barriers um there are cost
pressures um and there are these kind of
these links between firms and states
that keep existing firms within the
market and mean that even if you aren't
the most efficient firm in your sector
you can often survive anyway because you
can ask the government for a bailout or
you can just buy up your competitors for
example if like a new competitor
threatens you you can use all your cash
to buy that firm and integr into your
firm you have better access to to
finance because you probably have very
close relationship with big Banks so the
banks will be more likely to lend you
money um and all of these things mean
that you're kind of insulated from
competition um so you don't have this
pressure of the market that is keeping
firms um operate operating at the most
efficient level um and which is kind of
making sure that um like comp ition
continues to hold sway over over the
economy you just you you lose that and
in its place uh rather than having kind
of competition you have a form of of
economic planning basically because in
this competitive scenario nobody can
really plan like the leaders of all
these little firms they can't plan they
can't um make long-term decisions
because they don't know what the future
of that free market system is going to
look look like they don't know what all
of the other actors in that system they
don't know how they're going to behave
um and if they make a decision that goes
against the market that kind of
undermines um efficiency for example
then they'll go out of business it's
like if if a manager makes the wrong
decision let's say he starts producing
cars in a way that's more expensive than
his competitors then his firm will go
under so he doesn't really have any
power within that system he's very much
constrained by what the market says you
should do whereas in the economy that we
live because you have all these barriers
around firms that come from politics
that come from finance that come from
their relationship with other firms um
economies of scale all of these things
it means that the managers within those
firms have a lot of power to plan even
if they make the wrong decision and they
mess up like for example they did at
Boeing The Firm isn't going to collapse
because it can rely on the fact that
it's got friends in the government it
can rely on its size it can rely on it
its relationship with financial
institutions um to make sure that that
firm stays alive even if everything has
kind of even if its managers have have
made a series of really bad decisions
and so that idea that the people at the
top of the most powerful firms have the
power to plan kind of undermines this
idea that we live in a free market
system and it also um it really kind of
undermines this idea that we live in a
in a true democracy right because
firstly a huge amount of um decision
making about the world in which we live
takes place within firms now in a free
market scenario it doesn't really matter
because the market is is telling
everyone what to do they don't have any
power but in this in the world that we
live these people do have power they're
making decisions over what Innovations
are taking place where investment is
going um you know which country they're
being located in the wages they're
paying workers all of these questions
are being decided by powerful people at
the top of big firms without any
accountability so they don't have
discipline for the market and they don't
have Democratic accountability because
they also use their power to Lobby
governments to make sure that those
governments do what they say so instead
you have really big powerful firms that
don't have Market accountability don't
have Democratic accountability and are
instead just planning our world based on
their own interests you see this in the
fossil fuel industry for example xon
mobile is one of the biggest um fossil
fuel producers uh in the world
scientists at Exon Mobile knew about
climate breakdown knew about the impact
burning fossil fuels would have as far
back as the
1970s so instead of spreading the word
about that Exon Mobile took funding out
of its climate research team and used
that funding to uh spread climate deny
ISM so to say climate burning fossil
fuels doesn't cause climate breakdown um
and to Lobby the US government you know
that exxon's former CEO eventually got a
very senior position in the US
government under Trump so there was this
really close link between Exxon and the
US state and now you know they're still
they were caught an epon lobbyist was
caught on camera talking to a Greenpeace
reporter saying we're we've won massive
results um by lobbying various different
governments they were saying that they
were lobbying for a carbon tax on the
basis that they knew a carbon tax was
never going to happen so it was a way of
kind of undermining the fight against
climate
breakdown sorry for interrupting you
there but I I mean actually it's not
that we do not have several different
examples of that same sort of thing
you're describing there because of
course the biggest ones tend to come
from the US but another example would be
our tobacco companies
with what they they already knew were
the elf consequences of smoking cigars
smoking tobacco cigarettes and all of
that and they uh hided it from the
public right yeah exactly and so you
know that decision was taken by Leading
figures within the the tobacco industry
to push smoking and everyone else has
had to deal with the consequences of
that decision yeah and there's been no
accountability so there been no way to
say you took the wrong decision we're
holding you to account right you know
instead they were just able they made
billions and billions of dollars off
basically making people really ill and
it's the same with with climate
breakdown so basically this creates this
problem we don't live in a free market
economy there's not enough Democratic
accountability um so how do we hold the
powerful to account how do we start to
take control over our economy and over
our
society yeah and we're going to get into
that question later on in our
conversation but let me just ask you
because this is also a topic that you
explore in the book and I'm personally
also very interested in when it comes to
relations between employers and
employees between capitalists and labor
in the capitalist system and the history
of labor labor movements it seems please
correct me if I'm wrong but it seems
very obvious to me that particularly
from the 19th century onwards if it
wasn't for workers organizing themselves
uh organizing collectives to strike
protest and try to pressure capitalists
and governments to create labor laws to
increase minimum wages to amili orate
working conditions to get more benefits
and stuff like that that would have
never happened alone I mean at least
that's what it seems to me looking back
in history and the the common idea that
we hear from many uh capitalists from
many people who economically fall more
on the liberal side of the spectrum is
that oh if the market was just more it
was just Freer if we were able to do
things more freely then it would just so
happen eventually that workers would get
higher wages more benefits and all of
that kind of good stuff but is that
really
true yeah so this idea again relies on
uh the world viiew that liberals have
which rests on this idea of the free
market so it doesn't just apply to
Consumers it also applies to workers you
know the idea is if one firm offers
lower wages bad conditions and another
firm offers higher wages and better
conditions workers will leave this firm
and go to that firm um now that
kind of doesn't really account for a lot
of different factors like you know
whether or not this firm is is hiring
enough workers whether or not there's
enough jobs to go around whether or not
you know what kind of employment
contracts uh these workers are under um
whether or not they're able to move
around the country like around the world
all these different things because
workers have far less power uh but you
know this is allegedly how free markets
are supposed to work the issue with the
kind of economy that we live in is that
we have not only Monopoly power but also
what's called monopsony power and that
means when a firm is not just the
largest seller in the market but is by
far the largest buyer in a market
including a buyer of Labor so when one
firm dominates the labor market in a
particular area it basically has the
power to just set wages to just set
conditions Amazon for example in certain
areas of the country employs you know
nearly 50% of workers in a particular
small area so all the working conditions
will be set by Amazon in that area
because basically it has such power over
the labor market and that really
undermines this idea that you know you
have this free market for labor where
workers can kind of move around but the
kind of deeper and more fundamental
issue here um is the question of the
balance of power within Society so I
don't have this free market liberal
interpretation of the capitalist economy
I have a Marxist interpretation of the
capitalist economy which means that
rather than seeing it as a system that's
based on free markets and exchange and
that sort of thing um I argue that
capitalism is a system based on the
class division of society so Marx starts
his argument by like looking at Adam
Smith David Ricardo all of these
theorists who said capitalism is great
because it creates you know it's based
on this free market system which you
know maximizes efficiency um you know
creates wealth for everyone creates
progress Etc uh because they were all
studying exchange they were studying
what takes place within markets Mark
said it's not enough to study what takes
place within the market you have to look
at how the Commodities that are being
sold in that market were produced so you
have to go back into the firm and look
at what goes on within the firm which is
not something that the early political
economists did and so when marks looked
at the firm he discovered this division
of labor so there's this division
between owners who own all of the means
of production and workers who are forced
to sell their labor power for a wage and
then a kind of Strat of managers of top
who are paid by the owners to kind of
manage the
workforce and this is like this is the
the class division of society it's the
social division of labor um and it
creates it is based on an inherent
balance imbalance of power so there are
a small number of people who for
whatever reason own everything they own
the land they own resources they have
you know political power and they are
able to use that to um you know create
businesses that other people are then
forced to work in now workers don't have
that power they have to sell their labor
power in order to survive right because
you know we don't have assistent
agriculture anymore whatever um so
they're they're forced to work for these
people who own who own the means of
production and that imbalance is the
basis of a capitalist Society it's what
makes capitalism work if you didn't have
some people who had all the power and
other people who could be forced to work
then you wouldn't get commodity
production and you wouldn't get exchange
um you know that that system would not
have emerged in the same way so this
imbalance of power sits at the heart of
capitalist societies is the source of
exploitation so capitalists profits come
from the fact that they don't pay
workers the same as the value of the
goods that they produce that's
exploitation um and the kind of
Oppression of workers so you know
keeping them in their place dividing
workers into different kind of
categories dividing them geographically
so that some workers in very poor
countries can be paid very little
whereas other workers can be paid
slightly more um you know all of these
strategies are designed to kind of
exploit and oppress workers keep them
down stop them from
organizing to like um kind of even out
that B that imbalance of power this
imbalance of power basically is like the
foundation of capitalism it has to be
that some people are in control and some
people are oppressed and exploited so
when workers start to come together and
organize in trade unions you know
organize politically and political
parties as they do in the kind of late
1800s and uh and early 1900s that
becomes a real threat to the development
of capitalism because suddenly you know
you have workers who can say we want
higher wages we want better conditions
or we're going on strike and you won't
have any labor to produce the
Commodities that you're selling for a
profit
um so when this starts to happen this is
you know around the time that that Marx
is writing as well um he realizes that
this you know organizing worker
organizing is this massive threat to the
social division of labor because when
workers have real power they're able
to really kind of make demands of of
capitalists and ultimately he argues if
they get enough power well workers will
be able to take control of the
production process and just do it
themselves right and this is what I look
at in the book is um this question of do
workers need to be managed and
controlled because it's like a key part
of capitalist ideology to say that
workers are stupid kind of um irrational
like lazy they need someone telling them
what to do and actually there's lots of
examples of workers kind of organizing
themselves and managing themselves and
doing so better
than the people who had been managing
them before so this idea that you can
move from this Society based on just a
really sharp imbalance of power so some
people up here with all the power all
the wealth some people down here forced
to just do as they're told through to a
democratic egalitarian system where
power is shared where decisions are made
collectively where production is um
undertaken by workers working together
that's the kind of socialist argument
really and it all rests on workers being
able to organize themselves and take
that power back from the people at the
top of the
economy so before we get into how
workers have and can organize themselves
let me just ask you about this because
it's another thing that really bothers
me a lot when I hear it on the news and
when I hear politicians saying that
whenever there is an economic crisis and
in 2008 for example we heard a lot of
that we constantly hear politicians and
business owners and people like that
saying on the media for example how
common citizens should be more mindful
about they spend about the way they
spend their money how public spending
should be cut how we how we are spending
too much on state subsidies State
support for the more most vulnerable
people and stuff like that but doesn't
that happen for businesses and companies
I mean don't they get public subsidies
State support and sometimes they also
get bailouts has happened a lot in the
2008 financial crisis actually so I mean
is isn't that a thing yes it's a a
really big thing and um it
really undermines the argument that is
made by free market neoliberal
economists and and policy makers they
say they say that they want free markets
and a small state right um so they want
less State spending they want greater
competition all of these sorts of things
um because that is supposed to be a good
thing that maximizes efficiency it you
know makes everyone more wealthy it
Spurs Innovation Etc they have these
great arguments for free market systems
that also rely on this idea that free
markets make us all free because we're
free to choose what we consume where we
work etc now there's problems with that
argument in itself but the biggest issue
is that that is not how capitalism works
it's like a a veil that argument is
designed to obscure what's really
happening so neoliberals will use this
argument we want free markets but when
they get power they will undermine the
free market when it comes to subsidies
for big businesses bailouts for banks
bailouts for large corporations you know
tax cuts for large
corporations um they'll you know
undermine regulation for big businesses
so they'll create a very
uncompetitive Market almost corrupt
environment a lot of the time for big
businesses that often fund these these
politicians right so the free market
doesn't apply to those at the top but
they'll impose very very rigidly these
free market principles on those at the
bottom so they will cut State spending
on Health Care on Social Security um on
public services they'll often raise
taxes on um the less well off they will
um you know uh undermine Union
organizing they'll impose anti-union
legislation all of this stuff aimed at
imposing very very rigorous
competition on workers and removing
State support for workers whilst
undermining competition and increasing
State support for big businesses and
financial institutions now from a free
market perspective that doesn't really
make sense it's like
incomprehensible um it it means like
competition for some people and no
competition for others but when you
understand the the economy from a
Marxist perspective which is about who
has the power right and it's actually
capitalists and bosses you have a huge
amount of power over our society and
over our politics it makes a lot more
sense because what the capitalists have
done has effectively um
manipulated the government to make sure
that they get all the support and that
workers don't get any support now this
is kind of always how things have worked
right like you know this is how things
have worked from since the origins of
capitalism the issue is that today we
have this
ideology that says you know the
government is just um promoting
efficiency it's just enforcing
competition um it's just you know making
sure that we don't spend too much money
right so people believe that the
government is acting in everyone's
interests when actually it's generally
acting in the interests of those at the
very
TP so let me ask you now because the
things we've been talking about here are
mostly about what
happens mostly within Society is within
countries but in the book you also talk
a little bit about how countries from
the global North continue to exploit in
different ways countries from the global
South and their respective populations
even after the supposed end of
colonialism so could you tell us a
little bit about that yeah so Empire and
imperialism is a really important part
of how the system works um and the kind
of starting point for that um is the
fact that like large powerful businesses
and the people who own them are
concentrated in rich countries whereas
the workforce now is concentrated in
poor countries so you'll often to hear
people saying Marxist analysis doesn't
apply anymore because most people in say
England or Europe or the US are middle
class so they're not workers they're not
bosses they're kind of middle class
managers or you know professional
managerial workers right what this
argument misses is that this class
divide still works it just works at the
level of the global economy so when you
look at the global economy it's very
very divided between a very very tiny
class of people who own everything who
own the businesses who own the land um
who kind of you know distribute all the
money then a slightly larger but still
very small class of professional
managers accountants lawyers uh you know
financiers you know a managerial class
who manage the production process on
behalf of those people at the very top
and then a massive class of workers and
those workers are generally located in
very very poor countries and are still
paid very low wages still face really
horrendous conditions when they're
producing things um and you know are
not well off and don't have very many
prospects so this divide between workers
and bosses it exists with within all
societies but it's clearest at the level
of the global
economy um and the way that this is
enforced is basically Rich companies are
located in the US the UK you know all
around Europe they list on stock markets
in those countries they Lobby the
governments of those countries they rely
on banks that are located in those
countries so owners are concentrated in
the global North whereas workers are
concentrated in the global South um and
to an extent those powerful companies
have like bought off the governments in
the rich countries and concentrate
slightly higher paying jobs in those
countries so that workers don't Rebel so
in the UK Europe um there are lots of
kind of managerial jobs that are all
about managing a global production
process that pay slightly better and
mean that those relatively more powerful
workers who live in democracies who you
know have like a significant amount of
power of production process they're paid
slightly better wages whereas the people
who are doing the most kind of dirty
horrible low paid jobs are less powerful
have lower wages but also
are under authoritarian regimes they
don't have many rights they kind of
struggle to organize because they're
often kind of you know beaten down and
and and prevented from doing that and
they're not able to move so this is the
thing there's a big wage gap between the
global North and the global South but
because borders are so rigidly policed
core workers can't move to rich
countries but businesses can move
everywhere so rich powerful businesses
can produce all their Commodities with
low paid workers in the global South
then sell those Commodities to
relatively better paid consumers in the
global North but the two can't move
around this capitalist can move around
everywhere then they can offshore the
profits to a tax Haven somewhere so they
don't have to pay any tax and generally
kind of you know make use of the fact
that Capital can move all around the
world but labor is is stuck that's the
kind of foundation of imperialism it's
like the the global division of labor
basically the international division of
labor and the way it's enforced but what
I look at in the book is how this system
is is policed and enforced by
International institutions and by very
powerful governments and this is you
know really interesting because we think
that we have this kind of liberal
rules-based International System that's
governed by international law um that's
about kind of promoting the free market
and all that sort stuff when actually we
have a highly unequal global economy in
which International institutions are
used to kind of beat down poor countries
and enrich powerful countries and an
example of this I have is um the case of
uh a um a vulture fund um that bought up
the debt of the government of Zambia in
the like just after the financial crisis
so the Zambian economy was really
struggling um the revenues for the
government were falling and it was
obvious that Zambia was going to default
on its debts so this Irish fund bought
Zambian debt knowing that the country
was going to default and when the
country did default they sued the
Zambian government so basically took
money out of the one of the poorest
countries in the world to pay these
powerful investors and this is a tool
that's used to keep poor countries poor
and enrich countries enrich rich countri
at their expense and there's loads of
other examples I look at in the book
that show that the international you
know the International rules-based
System is all about maintaining that
divide between the rich world and the
poor
world so just before we get into the
last part of our conversation here today
and I ask you in what ways can people
fight back against or perhaps try to
change the system in the ways that are
possible that people can do it and
perhap
you can also give us a few examples of
how people can collectively organize and
stuff like that what do you mean by
freedom in the book also to contrast
with to contrast it with uh what
capitalists usually mean by
Freedom yeah so I think you know those
on the right have this pretty
individualistic view of Freedom uh and
the idea is that you're free if there's
not very much kind of standing in your
way um so uh you know if you are able to
work wherever you want if you're able to
consume what you want to buy the
products that you want um to kind of
have you know free free speech and all
those sorts of things um and that
individualistic view of Freedom has some
Merit but it's very limited because it
allows you to make decisions within your
life but it doesn't allow you to have an
influence over the structure of society
so you know you can choose what products
you consume but you can't choose you
know what products are on the shelves or
how much carbon has been used in
producing those products the working
conditions of the people who have been
producing those products you're faced
with a bunch of different products made
by all these huge multinational
corporations that have little Democratic
or competitive accountability and you're
just presented with an option and
actually today most of the products that
you see on your shelves when you go to
the supermarket say they're all produced
by like five different companies so you
don't even have that kind of very
limited view of freedom but that's like
the view of Freedom that they have on
the right and that is supposed to
underpin this idea that we need a free
market economy I argue that the kind of
the Marxist view of freedom is much more
expansive than that so it's like yes you
have freedom and autonomy within your
life you are free to make decisions but
you also have freedom over the structure
of society so you have the freedom as a
worker to shape the the decisions that
are being made by The Firm within which
you work so you know you have Democratic
control over the economy basically um as
a citizen you have real democracy so not
not the kind of like semi democracy that
we have here where you have you know you
vote once every four or five years um
but you don't get to choose the
candidates you don't get to choose the
policy agenda you struggle actually to
kind of hold politicians to account once
they get into office and you actually
aren't a ble to influence democratically
large areas of what goes on in the state
so there's real democracy politically
and there's also crucially Democratic
control over where you live and over
your community um so you know you have
control over how your local Municipal
budget is spent um you have control over
kind of community institutions you're
like engaged in what goes on in in like
your place basically and all of these
things require just a massive
transformation of the way Society work
works it requires decentralization of
power it requires a transformation of
political parties a de democratization
of the states and crucially a
democratization of the economy so giving
people power and ownership over the
economy basically um and what all this
is supposed to do is shift the balance
of power in favor of workers so take
power away from capitalism give it to
workers and the only way to do that
because they're not going to give power
away willingly the government isn't
going to take power away from them
because politicians are in the pockets
of big corporations workers have to
organize citizens have to organize
everyone has to organize you know get
into a union organize to like you know
in your community even get out onto the
streets and and you know have take part
in protest movements there are lots of
different ways that you can organize but
basically people have to come together
to demonstrate their power um and you
know what I like to say is that we
should be living in in an eon in a
country where politicians are as scared
of the people voting for them as they
are of the people who are giving them
money so tell us then about ways that
you think people can organize themselves
in this context to try to take back
control over planning and democratize
certain institutions and perhaps even
businesses themselves yeah so the first
and most important thing uh is to
recognize that we live in highly
individualistic societies now this is
the big difference since Marx was
writing um you know in Marx's time uh
people were still kind of quite
Community oriented they were kind of
other oriented you had to cooperate in
order to survive with other people
within your community with other people
within your workplace so it was kind of
easier to convince people join a union
you know join a political movement like
really kind of take part in what's going
on the biggest Triumph of
neoliberalism has been to convince us
that we are these isolated atomized
individuals who can't trust each other
can't work with each other we have to be
governed by someone else because we
can't
cooperate um and what this does is it it
kind of breaks us up and it makes us
less powerful and it makes us feel
powerless because if you think about it
if you're part of a big Union right and
like loads of you it's your whole
workplace and you're organizing for
higher wages telling your boss we're
going to go on strike if you don't give
us High wages you feel powerful you feel
part of something right if you're just
one worker and you aren't getting paid
enough but you go to your boss and you
ask your boss as an individual for a
raise they're probably going to say no
and then you're going to blame yourself
you're going to feel powerless you're
going to be like I don't have any
control over my life I don't have
control over you know the conditions in
which I work
and so that like powerlessness is a
really important part of what keeps our
system functioning because most be
people think I can only rely on myself I
can't organize with other people I can't
trust other people so it's all up to me
and it's just on me to kind of compete
and to struggle and to push other people
out the way in order to get what I want
right um and that undermines our
capacity to hold those at the top to
power because they're not going to
listen to any one person it has to be a
kind of collective movement and a
collective uh process of of kind of
organizing and of struggle um and like
individualism has really undermined our
capacity to do that or even to imagine
that you could be part of a political
movement that would change the
conditions of of your existence um and
like it's been that's been pushed in a
number of different ways so Margaret
that in the UK famously said there's no
such thing as Society there was a big
effort to break up the unions so to use
the police use Force basically and the
law to like pull people apart um there's
been a lot of centralization in big
cities so little so communities have
been kind of broken up um and all of
this along with kind of mass
consumerism has really promoted this
ideology of um of
individualism so kind of pushing back
against that and encouraging people to
trust each other and to work together
and to organize is like the number one
priority for anyone who wants to see
social change happen um and you know
there there are lots of examples as as
to how that can be done and I look at a
load of those examples in the book um so
one of my favorite examples uh comes
from the UK and it's the Lucas plan so
there was this firm called Lucas
Aerospace that was kind of potentially
GNA go under um it wasn't you know
competing internationally so the workers
um went to the government and said we
need an B we need you to nationalize
this firm so we can keep our jobs but
the government said we can't do that but
why don't you try and put together uh
you know a plan to save the firm so
these
unionists uh all basically like worked
together and they consulted all of the
workers within this firm and said how
can we save the firm what can we start
producing that will make us competitive
again and they came up with this plan
called the Lucas plan which was designed
entirely by workers so all of the
workers within this firm said we're
going to stop producing weapons which is
primarily what they were producing and
we're going to start producing health
care equipment environmental equipments
like wind turbines um just socially
useful products that we can feel proud
to make and they then designed a whole
business plan about has showing how they
would transition from the current model
to the new model um you know basically
saying that you know the workers would
be uh would be owners of the firm they
would run the firm um and just kind of
Designing a whole new system for
operating this uh this giant company and
what that shows I think is it really
undermines this idea that people need to
be managed and controlled and that's
really the foundation of a capitalist
economy it's the idea that we can't
trust each other we can't work together
to achieve our Collective goals we have
to give our power to someone else so
that they can tell us what to do it's
also it's also that very common idea
that we hear many times that there's
supposedly an elite of people who are
highly intelligent highly capable you we
just need the to give them all the money
because they will make all the right
decisions and they will grow the economy
and everything will be better forever I
mean something like that right yeah
exactly and that's actually what a lot
of kind of NE liberal and free market
economists believe um you know I I start
the book by looking at this quote from
and he says freedom of thought will only
ever be of relevance to a small minority
basically most people are too stupid to
take advantage of the freedoms on offer
to them um whereas you know the kind of
socialist view is that everybody
has um intelligence the capacity to
control their lives to work with other
people everybody has skills you know
everybody has these unique
capabilities that just need to be kind
of encouraged and developed so that
everyone can flourish and that we can
all work together and the best way to do
that is for us to come together and
teach each other right um so a lot of
like the workers movement in the UK and
like around the world comes from groups
of workers who would come together and
study Capital they would study the
Communist Manifesto often this was you
know they would learn how to read in
this context right it was through
cooperatives of work workers that would
teach each other and would learn from
each other and would work together to
develop themselves and to strengthen the
group um and that I think is something
that has has definitely been lost as
we've moved to this individualistic
society and if we're ever going to get
out of the mess that we're in today we
have to move away from individualism you
know there's not going to be a powerful
workers movement or a powerful social
movement capable of resisting the power
of capital if we all are just focused
solely on ourselves we need to have this
open Collective Consciousness that is
going to kind of drive forward
Progressive social
change yeah it's actually very
interesting that at a certain point you
mentioned there that of course workers
have their own expertise and skills
because I mean isn't that obvious isn't
it obvious that in different Industries
the workers are the ones who actually
have the EXP
in the specific kind of area they've
been trained on and they work on because
many times the higher ups are just there
to try to extract money from labor and
they know nothing about how the products
are created and anything about I don't
know engineering computer science or
whatever it might be right yeah exactly
um I have I know someone who's a
Management Consultant and uh they said
say you know whenever they're hired to
go into a firm the first thing that the
Consultants do is go and ask the workers
how is the product made what goes on
around here they don't you know waste
their time asking managers what's going
on they try and like you know um they
try and kind of please the managers so
they'll spend a lot of time talking to
the managers being like this is what
we're going to do D but they get their
information from the workers because
those are the ones who are actually kind
of producing the Commodities and
understand how these firms work um and
you know there's loads of examples that
I look at in the book of like workers
who have taken control of the firms that
they work in um all throughout history
and have done so to great effect there's
lots of examples of worker
cooperatives and not also just in in
Commodities production also when it
comes to house building for example we
have this idea of Community Land trusts
where a community comes together buys a
parcel of land builds housing on that
and then the houses are all owned by the
community and support all the people
living in that Community um and all of
this I think you know the biggest one of
the biggest things that underlies
individualism is this idea that we're
all kind of
competitive individuals who are just
desperate to push each other out of the
way to get to the top right and if you
look at human psychology and
anthropology and sociology that isn't
how human societies work you know we
have learned to cooperate we're one of
the most Cooperative species
alive we compete between groups so you
see that quite a lot you know there
there's competition between groups but
as groups we have learned how to
cooperate and to work together to
survive that's one of the like
distinguishing features of of humanity
but those Cooperative impulses have
basically been crushed by a system that
realizes that if we
cooperate then we'll have power and that
will undermine the power of those at the
top um so individualism is this really
important feature of most capitalist
economies um and it's particularly
important in the wealthy capitalist
economies because those are the places
that workers have potentially a lot of
power you know if like the workers in
America say were able to form powerful
unions powerful political parties and
take you know put put into into
government a political party that was on
the side of organized labor that would
transform the global economy not just
the American economy so it's very very
important to the development of
capitalism that they don't do that that
they're divided by you know Race by
geography um by this ideology that tells
them that they can't cooperate with one
another because if that wasn't the case
capitalism basically wouldn't
survive so let me ask you one last
question then looking at the current
state of global capitalism and
particularly for example something that
I'm very worried about the rise of the
far right across many countries in
Europe the us as well or at least some
of the farri discourse that we hear now
very commonly are you optimistic about
uh I mean people organizing themselves
to really try to take over the the
system because it's I mean I would like
to be a little bit more optimistic
myself but over and over historically
and we're seeing it again right now
people seem to fall very easily for the
sort of extreme rightwing sort of
narratives about oh it's immigrants
fault it's the fault of poor people
they're taking too much from the state
stuff like that and they never ever ever
point the finger at uh the ultra Rich
the company own and stuff like that so I
mean are you optimistic or not and
particularly also let me just add one
last thing the current levels of
economic inequality that are rising I
mean that also worries me so what are
your thoughts on that yeah so I wouldn't
say I'm optimistic that if things
continue we'll end up in a good place
but I am optimistic that we can change
things I believe that if we start now we
can change the economies and the
Societies in which we live and I think
the reason that we're seeing the rise of
the far right at the moment is that
we're in this unique historical
situation where the vast majority of
people recognize that capitalism isn't
working that democracy isn't working in
a lot of places because it's been
undermined by extreme
inequality um and so they know that this
system is broken that they're living in
but they feel powerless to do anything
about it so you know there lots of
people who feel very angry about
inequality about the fact that they're
not paid enough to feed their family um
they are you know angry about they don't
have housing they're anxious about the
state of the world and everything that's
going on but they don't have a sense of
their Collective power to change
anything because everything is as you as
an individual so you as an individual
feel very powerless because you're not
paid enough money you can't afford your
house you know the world is collapsing
around you and you don't think oh I need
to organize with other people to change
things you think you look at other
individuals and you think oh that person
has more money than me that person has
you know more money than me or whatever
and you think oh I'm going to blame that
you know those those individuals over
there or that group over there for
taking something away from me right
because you don't think the people at
the top of society need to be held to
account that's not because you don't
think that like taxes should be higher
or there should be more Public Services
or that you know billionaires should uh
you know should be constrained and and
kind of controlled a bit more you do
think those things but you don't feel
powerful enough to take on those at the
top of the economy you know you look at
politicians and you think they're all
the same they never listen you look at
kind of the owners of big businesses and
you just think well they're operating on
a different planet from me there's
nothing I could do to kind of control
them or control businesses so you just
think how can I control my little world
and all you see in that little world is
you and then a few other people who are
kind of poorer than you but you think oh
they're taking something away from me
right so migrants or people who are on
social security or whatever um you don't
feel powerful enough to actually change
the structure of the system you just
think I just want to you know move some
pieces around in the very unfair world
that I
inhabit so if we want to tackle the rise
of the far right we need to confront
this sense of powerlessness that makes
people feel angry and angry enough to
say it's migrants it's benefits scers
and also angry enough to elect
politicians who say I'm going to drain
the swamp I know that the system isn't
working so I'm just going to burn it to
the ground it's quite like a nihilistic
conspiratorial ideology that people on
the far right often have which is that
they know that the system isn't working
they know it's really unfair but instead
of trying to organize together they
project their political agency onto
someone else like a Donald Trump or
Marine Le Pen and that person says I'm
going to save you I'm going to kind of
tear down the whole system and build
something better in its place so it's
again a very individualistic thing it's
like that person over there is going to
rescue me um and you know I think the
only way to push back against that is to
give people to respond to that sense of
powerlessness by giving people a sense
of belonging in social movements and
that could be any different kind of
social movement so it can be like
organizing in your workplace as part of
a union it can be organizing in your
community um it can be you know getting
involved in a protest movement in the
environmental movement in tenance Union
whatever as soon as you start pulling
people out of this
individual box mindset and start
encouraging them to see much more openly
the system in which they live by
organizing with other people by
realizing that they're not alone that
when they work with people they have
power you start to chip away at that
individualism and you start to encourage
people to think well actually if I can
let's say get involved in this campaign
to save my local library why can't I get
involved in a wider political campaign
to change the structure of the society
in which I live um so that's why I think
it's so so so important to start
attacking individualism by getting
people involved in almost any kind of of
collective organizing to shift their
consciousness
great so Grace let's perhaps uh wrap up
the interview here let's send on that a
positive note and the book is again
vulture capitalism corporate crimes back
door bailouts and the death of Freedom
I'm of course leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview and
would you like to tell people where they
can find you on the internet yeah so you
can find me on uh Twitter X Grace leley
on Instagram Grace leley and on Tik Tok
at
Grace great so Grace thank you so much
again for doing this it's been a really
fun conversation yeah thank you so much
for having me it's been great thanks
Rado hi guys thank you for watching this
interview until the end if you liked it
please share it leave a like and hit the
subscription button this show is brought
to you by enlights Learning and
Development done differently check their
website at enl lights.com and also
please consider supporting the show on
patreon or PayPal I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and payal supporters per Garson Jerry M
Frederick sundo Bernard SES Olaf Alex
Adam Castle Matthew witting bir Arno
wolf Tim holl Eric alen John Connor
Philip for Conelly then theet Robert
wind Marin hook Phil Mel stor samel
Andre
Francis mad Jonathan Li
J Eric Mark Smith
Tom
H
wisman Charlotte ni barbar Adam Hun
pavak Gary G Alman
adri Barosa julan price Edward Hall edin
Broner Douglas fry Franco balotti
Gabriel P Cortez Ula litski Scott
Zachary fish Tim Duffy Sun Smith John
wisman Daniel fredman William Buckner
Paul Arno Luke laki georgeus CH
Williamson Peter woin David Williams di
Costa anthon Ericson Charles morray Alex
sha Mari Martinez Coral Chevalier
Bangalore rist Larry D Jr old aring Bon
St Michael Bailey then sperber Robert
grai zoren Jeff McMahon Jake zul
Barnabas radx Mark kle Thomas doer Luke
niss Chris story Kimberly Johnson
Benjamin galbert Jessica noi the Brandon
Nicholas Carlson is myel benley man
George corat is Valentin Steinman per Cy
is Kate V goer Alexander Albert Liam D
be massud Ali mamadi perpendicular
jonner OV Gregory Hastings David pinsof
Sean Nelson Mike LaVine and Y NE a
special thanks to my producers is are
web Jim Frank Lucas Tom ven Bernard ctis
Benedict Mueller Thomas Trumble
Katherine and Patrick Tobin John car mon
negro Al Nick Ortiz and Nick golden and
to my executive producers Matthew
Leander Serio quadrian Bogan canitz and
Rosie thank you for all
