hey everyone welcome back to the asset
Horizon podcast I will keep today's
intro quick if you listening on the
weekend of January 18th or 19th on
Monday at 11 a.m. for those people who
get up early in the morning on a week
days maybe have that weekday off we're
going to do something called leidal
lunch in the Discord server called the
skitso analysis project and we're going
to have an informal discussion of themes
from chapter one of antibus including
Desiring production the body without
organs and so
forth I have it linked to the skitso
analysis project in the show notes and
please go ahead and click that to join
and as you do so become a member of our
patreon where you can then join the
anti- edus files today we have a
fantastic guest someone who many of you
already know and that is Jason babach
mohageg to talk about his new short book
evil a study of lost
techniques let's hop
in welcome to acid Horizon the evil
podcast for Millennia philosophers
pondered the problem of evil probing the
paradoxes looming behind the notion of a
negativity infusing every corner of the
cosmos and despite any of their
achievements or perhaps even because of
some of them in some cases the image of
evil persists or should I say it thrives
in our world enjoying an apocalyptic
tenure in our predominantly secular age
but rather than probing the essence of
evil ontologically today our Focus turns
to a different research the lost
techniques of evil its organization as a
series of principles its diagrammatic
coordinates its archival aspect and its
correspondence with clandestine
geographies with us today we have the
inimitable Jason bobc mohageg who has
returned to our podcast to guide us on
another descent into the underworld with
a glimpse of his newest piece of writing
evil a study of lost techniques
forthcoming from scarlet Press Jason is
also the author of omnicide 1 and its
Companion omnicide 2 out on urbanomic
press among many other fantastic books
we have discussed in the past Jason it's
a pleasure to have you back on the
podcast we have been craving a dose of
your magic for more than a minute I'll
be careful what you wish for but uh
thank you very much I'm honored to be
among good friends again well for this
particular podcast I made a certain
promise to myself coming to this episode
that I would try to avoid bringing up
any philosophers or any named prior
knowledge coming to this text on evil
because one of the things that I think
your work Intimates to me is its own
demand for a kind of Innocence or
vulnerability but also that the tools
that have been imparted to me by most of
the philosophy that I focused on
throughout my life is in some ways
inadequate with respect to the
unadulterated encounter with the kind of
intensities that you try to evoke in
your books and that that's something
that I really appreciate about your
writing but part of the reason that I
want to suspend my philosophical
predilections is that well sometimes
philosophy itself is evil and may even
be included among or seen as an
inheritor of some of the evil techniques
that we may discuss today which I think
brings me to my first question what
compelled you to write a book on the
techniques of evil and given that we're
a philosophy podcast maybe you could
comment about how this work differs from
the metaphysical approaches familiar to
various figures and schools in the
history of philosophy that has taken
evil as one of the objects of its
study absolutely so the first thing if
you're looking at techniques I always
like to elevate the acute specificity of
a concept if you put evil before a space
all of a sudden it transforms the space
it casts a kind of enigmatic shadow that
makes that space operate distinctly so I
mean for for instance the evil of the
garden the evil of the the mountain the
evil of the desert they're going to be
wildly different things
phenomenologically sensorially
narratively that emerge just from that
coupling of the term evil with a
particular spatial Zone if you did that
with an object the and you imagine the
evil of the Box the evil of a diamond
the evil of sort of of a blade you know
and all of that which you see in
mythologies and storytelling throughout
history all of a sudden you transfuse it
with different potentials and
intensities so it's almost it makes it
impossible then if you take that
approach to speak of evil in some
all-encompassing definition which has
been what philosophy and religion have
attempted to do you know throughout
history evil is X well the evil of the
experience of the ocean in Mobi dick for
instance you know what I mean the
possibility of the Shipwreck of drowning
of being devoured Alive by the white
whale is not the same as the evil of
someone for instance Michelle S talks
about when he had to escape a ship that
was on fire and half his body was in
Flames as he was trying to go through a
window and he got stuck in one of the
sort of the the panes of glass and half
his body is in Frozen temperatures
outside and half is in sort of this
Inferno and it's he describes it as
unbearable and incomprehensible to have
sort of the Equator of his own
physicality split into two extremes and
all that so these are these are widely
different Sur and then there's the evils
of the figures you know I mean widows
have been tied to evil throughout
history albinos have been tied to evil
throughout history Kings there kings and
queens who are evil there are Rebels who
become evil so there's all different
typologies here so just just to say that
right there already puts you in a matrix
and a labyrinth that is so intricate and
full of singularities sort of in a sense
that you have to treat each one of them
like its own its own kind of vital
little music box that plays on its own
never never mind genres so if you want
to know actually I never gave the origin
story to my interest on evil it actually
came through the prism of lullabi I was
looking at the genre of Lis and I I
Adore lullabi because it's one of the a
lot of people don't know this it's one
of the most ancient genres of writing so
there's an ancient Babylonian lullabi
that's from 2000 and something BC
where it says and who has angered the
house God the child has angered the
house God come before me says the house
God it's like this very threatening
ominous refrain that's warning of sort
of offense and violation of dark Forces
and all that and the possibility of
Wrath and Punishment it opens up all
kinds of things you have to wonder why
the first civilizations on Earth would
one have such sort of evil sort of tales
but then two why they would m them in
these sing song seemingly innocent
children's genres and so that that
intrigued me and the reason is I
honestly think I think Lis are brutally
honest I think they're ruthlessly clear
about our material condition in the
world in the way that political
ideologies social discourses religions
are not so Lis are about pretending
pretending to me is not metaphysical or
Transcendent the way that religion or
politics or Society are if you watch
children play and I have a good chance
of doing that all the time I have a
two-year-old daughter so I watch her
play all the time I play with her all
the time play is about engagement with
material conditions you play in a space
whether it's the forest or the pool or
the the room you know or the corner even
and you play with the things that you
have at your disposal just like magic in
its Origins is actually sorcery in its
Origins is all based on material
combinations you look at witches Brews
you look at cauldrons they're not other
worldly substances they're eyes of
creatures they're the skins of other
creatures they're certain herbs and
toxic B sort of botney properties so so
for me the lullabi actually confronts
our mortality it confronts death in the
way that politics and religion defer and
disavow by providing sense of progress
or Destiny or a prime mover to the
universe or an afterlife you know the
wonderful thing about children's games
and Lis is that they end and they know
they're going to end the whole point is
that they end soon because it allows the
possibility of return but also of a new
game and that's something that societies
have never gotten right you know despite
the bloodiest revolutions civilizations
have not learned that lesson which is
that regimes should consider themselves
games or forms of pretend and if they
did then at least all of the ceremonies
and rituals and spectacle we see in
society would have a little bit of a
dose of creativity and lightness to them
rather than the the totalitarian
severity that we see so I started
looking just again to to make the point
I started looking at the genre of
lullabi started going way back in time
to seeing how the Ancients structured
them and you know seeing sort of their
really amazing ones by the way one
figure in a LBI from this is a Sumerian
one wears your face and then goes around
doing terrible things in your name
and then ransoms your face back to you
but only if you do something
terrible so so they imp they implicate
you talking about evil they they
implicate you sort of by necessity in
this cor they corner you that's why it's
a book about techniques that's a
technique of manipulation right it it
places you with no options but to
surrender to the opponent's strategy and
by the way just to say quickly that's
the Book of Job too that's what the
devil does God in the Gamble says hey
give me a shot at your creation over
here and I'll I'll mess with him I'll
disturb his life and God falls for the
BET doesn't matter if God wins the
better or not the fact that he's
wagering with evil means he's DED and
drenched in evil playing the game but
anyway I'm sorry you're going to say
something no I just wanted to say like
there there's also something about about
especially in the Cadence of
contemporary lais we we don't have to go
back to you know 4,000 years necessarily
but there the the the function of the
lullabi is a is a very Placid command
you know and I think I I love what you
write where when you ask why is aabi
evil and you don't you did you decided
you forego on the entire style of this
book just for one moment and you just go
because it is manipulative and I think
that the the common cradle of Melodies
no not just as a game of sooth saying
but of
directing and of creating out of out of
nency a vessel for the continuation of
evil is is is really a remarkable
anecdote but I also wanted to to to talk
to you about what the relationship in in
this lullabi you speak a little bit
about um the lullabi being
futuristic rather than just in that
moment right we think of we think of if
we think about if we're singling out
this technique of the lullabi we think
about it as a necessary intervention in
the behavior of a child in this instance
in order to create this outcome can you
talk a little bit about why there's this
futural part here absolutely well so and
I make this strange technological jump
from you're right from an ancient genre
to a futuristic Destiny because evil in
almost every tradition that I've
encountered is tied to intelligence uh
and so when we're entering an age of of
artificial intelligence and all of the
paranoia surrounding the possibilities
of this incomprehensible leap in
sentience in Consciousness in scale
right uh obviously then we're we're
talking about something that
definitionally meets one of the criteria
of evil you know that evil has been
linked to knowledge has been linked to
intelligence you if you even look at the
fact that and I I I know that you you
all talk about societal issues a lot of
the time as well sociopolitical issues
and then you have me on to do the the
Wonderland strange strange things but
I'll talk about Society for just a
second and say something which is that
if you've ever noticed uh for centuries
premeditated murder gets exponentially
more severe punishment than manslaughter
which is killing someone in the the Heat
of the Moment in a state of Rage in a
state of super emotion now this
empirically makes no sense whatsoever
because a dead body is a dead body to
the corpse it's the same outcome to the
family it's the same outcome and so why
is there death penalty extended in many
instances to someone who plans and plots
a a death as opposed to someone who has
an uncontrollable burst of anger or
something like that and the reason is
because Society punishes
intelligence it fears intelligence it
wants
society that is full of of ignorant
people and that's the Garden of Eden and
so the serpent in the garden is not
wrong to whisper in in Eve's ear and
that's why I named my daughter Eve by
the way to whisper in her ear that you
know what kind of God doesn't want you
to know the secrets of the universe that
you're in you know and so to some extent
we're we're we're talking about that
when we talk about technology and the
the Unbound sort of thresholds that we
are about to cross with it uh by the way
you know I mean when you just look as an
as an academic uh I say that I say that
somewhat shamefully but as an academic I
can tell you that most people when they
do comparative research they look at one
two three examples you know of something
whether they're looking at corruption in
local politics around the world or
they're looking at climatological
examples they look at two three can you
imagine a force of analysis that can
track everything in real time and also
the entire history leading up to it the
things that AI will reveal about human
behavior Human Society they're going to
be deeply troubling to every every
Paradigm and every assumption that we've
uh based our house of cards of reality
principles upon we're not going to like
what we see about ourselves when we're
actually watched by a semi omniscient uh
gaze this is why n says the death of God
happens God has to die because you can't
bear this ultimate witness who sees
everything can can I interject with a
question then about you know you said
earlier and I think it was I just want
to put a pin in it where you say every
evil I've encountered is tied to a
notion of intelligence and I was just
joking with Craig I was I was spamming
him nii and Jason nii and Jason but we
we often represent AI as a black box of
course it's very helpful to the
technicians and technocrats who are
promoting this for personal reasons for
it to be seen as the obelisk in the
movie you know 2001 of Space Odyssey and
you're talking a lot about intelligence
and I'm wondering if maybe you can talk
about the relationship between the
representation of intelligence and
information and where you you speak
about the archive in zone 7even of your
book on evil so you're right the whole
third section of the book on evil is a
library of evil with the catalog sort of
of of various types and I just couldn't
help myself from trying to be the
architect of a library of evil it just
sounded like such a great task and you
know one of my favorite short stories of
all time was was bores Jor Luis bores
his library of Babel and so it's it's
such an amazing elegant you know
universe that he constructs of people
looking for the answer the ultimate text
and and what bizarre strategies and
methods they come up with that's why it
fits into a book on techniques because
if you're in a library that's an
Infinity machine you know how do you do
you go left or right you know and some
people they resort to throwing Dice and
they just use chance and luck and some
think that they develop a very
sophisticated Criterion of navigation
you know through and they see Clues so
when we're talking about information
it's a it's a it's a wonderful question
because to me you know I just taught
another seminar on on Madness and this
time around you know it's a seminar that
goes from Mania schizophrenia hysteria
Obsession Melancholia and then we try to
find new new typologies of those that
weren't covered in the psychoanalytic
literature but the one for me that this
time around hit me as my absolute
favorite and it's just it's it's the the
sort of the the flavor that that got me
this time run was
paranoia and you cannot find you can
call it a pathology or state of mind
that is more about information
collection than paranoia deeply parano
oid subjects are looking at everything
and archiving every modality every
appearance every individual that passes
them on the street and almost
instantaneously classifying them in the
most complex ways and this is
interesting to me because actually
there's a there's a there's a
psychoanalytic literature on states of
emergency so how people behave for
instance when a house is burning right
and what intrigues me about that is that
it's discovered that
actually people make amazingly elaborate
decisions as they're fleeing burning
flames so category one in your hierarchy
are living things you grab the baby you
grab the dog right category two valuable
things you grab the diamonds you grab
the you know whatever whatever is the
money and all of that three sentimental
things you grab that necklace that your
grandmother gave you you grab something
that is a is a momento or is
irreplaceable four documents things that
are hard to to go and get again your
driver's license your wallet your
passport things of that nature right so
all of the and and on and on and on
meanwhile you are cross dividing and
cross analyzing those complex categories
with categories of portability can I
carry it so if the most you know sort of
valuable thing in your house is an
antique table good luck it's going to go
up you know in Flames but also distance
from the fire so if that necklace of
your grandmother is on the third floor
and you're on the first it's also a lost
cause and you do this instantaneously
and so this is the interesting thing
that barau found out he's the
psychoanalyst who looked at this is that
very few people regret what they didn't
take from a burning fire they seem to
have made the correct decisions and he
says this is not reason or rationality
which is plagued by doubt plagued by
misgivings plagued I mean the fact that
we even think shows that we have a kind
of schizophrenic Consciousness all of us
universally otherwi who are you talking
to you know I mean if you ever watch the
way a cat moves through a house it is
the pure symmetry of thought action
movement sensation desire it knows
exactly what it wants it knows exactly
how to synchronize its musculature to
its to its awareness there's no doubt
there's no guilt there's no mommy daddy
issues there's no bad psychology right
we are plagued by all these Rifts and
schisms and we give ourselves credit and
call that profundity but in the state of
in the state of emergency you notice
that it's the animal that wins it's the
an it's the animality in us that guides
us the the instinctual level so and
that's why intriguingly I'll just
without going off on on a ledge but just
as an thing to that if we look at who is
the most the next step in evolutionary
progress in our horror imagination it's
the vampire vampire Empires are superior
to to us they're smarter than us they're
more agile than us they're more
ferocious than us they're more beautiful
than us in many ways they're mesmerizing
hypnotic seductive creatures but they're
they're more powerful than we are at
almost every register and they're more
animal than we
are right they obey the the laws of
their thirst they they synchronize
everything through the fangs right and
yet that allows them to read minds to
teleport to levitate to walk up walls to
invade your dreams to manipulate you so
extreme intelligence and extreme
animality or sensoriality are actually
not ex mutually exclusive the way that
in our Enlightenment modernity we're
taught that we're only you know knowing
subjects if we split ourselves and so
I've always said it's a kind of pitiful
consequence of modernity that we can
think something we would never say say
something we would never do do something
that we don't dare think about I mean
that's
it's it's an absolutely weak condition
you know and that's what when the talk
about schizophrenia that's actually what
they're talking about anonin arto does
not hesitate there's no slack in his act
there's no Split Second of lapse in his
game when he wants something he goes
after it what he thinks is what he says
is what he does that's what Badu later
would call the event but he would never
dare incarnate it in a human being but
you all you have to do is watch videos
of arto and you see there is no
separation between his mind his body his
nerves you know and the way he moves on
the world and so for me that's that's
that's actually one of the Criterion of
evil as well look at how stylish the
devil is right God is abstraction God is
vanished God has no face no body the
devil is is knows how to work every
facet of the world of appearances and
the world of thought and the world of
language right so there's the inform AAL
sort of Dimension yes it reminds me a
lot of the something we did a long time
ago which was go through our friend ver
syney sort of lecture course on the
history of Satan as to your freedom also
an embodiment of really in in the in the
both the gender sense and the general
sense of man and I wanted to ask in so
far as intelligence is always
correlative to a certain technique of
evil I mean one of the ways that human
intelligence has tried to Grapple with
evil and you deal with this a lot
particularly in in the the sequence that
derives itself from mystical and
Theological literature on evil with' and
this this is the idea of theodicy the
idea that humans have tried to explain
evil either as a lack of good or as a
dialectical contrary to good but instead
in looking at us in technique in terms
of techniques especially in terms of
looking to literature you know as far
back as possible as
well evil becomes something much more
concerned with I think if if I in s
right narrative and it's a narra logical
technique POS possibly even a technique
of intelligence trying to explain its
own capacity and its own failures to
itself in this schizophrenic kind of
mode so I guess I go to ask her and I'm
gonna break Craig's Rule and mention one
philosopher which is bai of course
because he wrote you know literature and
evil and in the sense you he's argument
that literature gives us a kind of
complicity in the knowledge of evil
because it is all that is manipulating
us to think of to Bear witness to things
of evil or the possible possibility of
evil how does I guess literature and
narrative feed into evil and indeed it
to know to understand techniques of evil
how does that amount to the knowledge of
evil and does does this implicate Us in
evil in the sense of of knowledge is
inherent disposition towards it it's
it's an it's an excellent question and
so I I don't mind saying this just
because I you know there's that old line
that bad artists plagiarize and great
artists steal right so I don't mind
confessing my influences and my
adoration for certain figures n
obviously is the is the prime one for me
has always been a since a young age but
batai is probably my second favorite
philosopher ever to walk the earth um
and and just absolutely stunning writer
one of the most elegant thinkers that
that one could ever encounter and an
impassioned intense sculptor of words to
his fragments are like are like no one
else's
so I adore these figures for sure among
many many others the only thing that I
would say you know this is an
interesting one for me why is it that I
don't want to start a territory fight
here but why is it that Del and guari
but particularly jelo has almost no
interest in George bai's work now now he
he cites almost everyone under the sun
right and they run in the same crowds
and circles even though batai is one
generation before
right they're bridged by you know their
Mutual friendships with figures like
Fuko their their knowledge of laan and
all that stuff and their Adoration of n
they both claim to be kind of right in
the house of n so this is this is a
strange Omission that Delo almost never
talks about batai some would accuse it
of the fact that Delo didn't like the
concept of death he thought it had
become overly abused you know in the
history of philosophy uh even since
Socrates saying that it's art of
learning to die well he thought death
was a cliche at that point maybe Bai was
too death obsessed for him um that was
that's one Theory but I think the the
actual reason is and it makes sense at
some level and this is maybe the only
place that I would as much as I have
immense respect for delus as a thinker
but this may be the only place that I
would side with him over batai is that
he thinks batai is still caught
in the the off for
transgression and that he loves the idea
of this forbidden border that you know
if you cross it it's just saturated with
all of this Rich metaphysics and
Damnation and Punishment and the fall
from ecstasy and all of that which to
him is is too too religious perhaps and
just also too dialectical and you know
so so if you look at the fact that Theus
loves Kafka now Kafka I would say is a
writer of evil I would definitely say
Kafka an i no I wouldn't say he's a
writer I'd say he's an evil writer if
you look at the way he manipulates you
know and his techniques and all of that
the way he strands the reader in
ambiguity in Worlds that don't make
sense I mean it's a plague to read the
castle you know it's it's a plague to
read the trial it's nothing but
restlessness and and questions it's a
book of questions and
obscurity but what delus loves about
figures like that he also loves Melville
who you know who writes MBI dick which
is a figure of evil you know and all
that uh in many ways that I mentioned
earlier so what's the reason is that
delus likes amoral characters not
immoral ones and for me that's also why
the lullabi is an interesting one that's
why when you mentioned Satan you know
one of the things that that I hold
against the monotheistic tradition for
all of its its beauty and horror from
the inquisitions to you know
Michelangelo sculptures you can run the
you know back and forth on a a pendulum
that swings from the most the most
wondrous to the most awful you know
actually it's interesting I would say
this the atmology if you look at the
word awesome and awful they both are
composed of awe it's just some some awe
is really good and full of awe is really
bad so so religion can kind of do both
historically but one of the things I
don't like that it does monotheism is
that it steals so much good material and
content from paganism and from the
things that came before it and it
doesn't it doesn't admit that it's done
that and then it simplifies and reduces
it in order to make it more Universal
like anything you do you know if you
want a if you want a movie that is a is
a blockbuster you have to work at kind
of the most basic emotions if you want a
pop song you have to simplify Melodies
so I think religion does that with Satan
as as interesting a figure as Satan is
and you can read Paradise Lost you know
and there's there's one wondrous
possibilities within there but Satan
comes from the Egyptian god Set and set
is much more intriguing to me in some
ways because set who is the he's the god
of the desert storms foreigners and the
color red already an amazing conceptual
combination there but set is not
considered by the Egyptians an evil God
in the monotheistic sense of being pure
evil he is a trickster God he's a
volatile God he's a Mercurial God he's a
moody God who half the time helps you
and half the time kills you and it just
depends on what night you meet Seth you
know and Caribbean Trad Traditions have
figures like that with Papa legma and
others and all that where they can help
you out he helps gamblers who are down
on their luck but then sometimes he
steals their money afterwards so it's a
kind of cutthroat God who a Whimsical
God a temperamental God which actually
is kind of the god of the Old Testament
that's what they inherit from paganism
you know a god who's envious and can be
wrathful and and all of that stuff but
the the last thing that I would just say
then so set is aoral not immoral he's
not good or evil per se he's an
amalgamation of potentials and it just
depends how you unlock them or how you
play into them and that's a really
interesting thing that you don't see in
monotheism it matters how you approach
set it matters how you speak to set
meaning the outcome is contingent upon
your
gamesmanship at some levels so it's not
just the enslaved follower of monotheism
who has these 10 commandments that they
must observe even though they don't
understand them necessarily or perform
certain rituals you know ablutions
prayers ceremonies and all of that pure
submission to the one instead this is
and I don't know if any of you have ever
had people in your lives who are
psychologically temperamental you know
or or manic even right oh it's always a
mindfield you step into the room and you
it's a very delicate tightrope to know
what to say how to orchestrate and
Orient how to get out of a situation
when you offend and you don't realize
what a trigger could be so it's just
endless provocations you can win the
game but the odds are stacked that
you're going to you're going to hit some
some turbulence along the way and those
are the gods that that I I find
intriguing and those are the gods who
got scapegoated as Evil later just very
complicated ones that demanded that you
refine a methodology of how to play and
by the way in East Asian just to say
this quickly in East Asia mysticism if
you look at DSM you look at Buddhism the
question of how you move within the
universe right is a really in a universe
that can and they were very aware of
this can equally destroy you as it does
you know redeem you you know what moves
you make matter there you know that's
why monks are so you know Buddhist monks
for instance are so consumed by motion
by Rhythm by the way they step by you
know what I mean all these different
sort of uh ways of doing things because
they know it matters it's not just some
Transcendent omniscient being who makes
the decision it's you've got to play
your hand too you can't cheat your turn
um so at any rate just just a a quick
answer not so quick
answer no I mean also just on the point
of actually yeah it's weird I've never
actually thought about the fact that
we've been doing Bai and d and g for so
long and yet yeah they've never actually
had a Confluence I I think it's
partially I wonder if it's because Ty
somewhat presupposes Hegel I think and
maybe there's too much of a a stain
there or too much of a lack base there
but even him this this evil force the
the absence of myth is itself the myth
that that motivates everything and I
wonder in that extent just so just go
back something you said before about how
animality and God can be United in the
figure of evil does this also work in
the sense of a transgression does evil
have to move through humans is is it
sort of an animality that moves through
humans in order to have a Divine
character because for B great great
question look at the way before B batai
was interested in tribal associations
but uh you know and he did kind of his
own anthropological work in really
fascinating ways here and there but if
you look at the first gods they are
hybrid combinations of human and
animal and I trust the instincts of
those first civilizations only because
they were in survival mode their extreme
vulnerability
before the elements they froze to death
they starved to death they suffered
famines they suffered you know Common
colds would wipe out entire tribes they
had to be on edge Vigilant like no one
else and they couldn't afford to do what
we can do in our air conditioned M
culture of today they couldn't lie to
themselves about where they were they
couldn't pretend they were in a Utopia
while the whole world is on fire you
know and going towards a dystopia they
had to face their their finitude their
mortality their desperation their
helplessness the fact that they were
freezing cold and scorching you know
heat the fact that predatory animals
were around every corner and so the fact
that they saw their gods as these
ruthless amalgamations that's the Sphinx
that's the Centaur that's the Minotaur
it's there even before those first
civilizations it's there in the cave
paintings and the hieroglyphs the gods
are these onethird alien one-third Beast
one-third human which means that they're
seen as the perfect again sort of
synchron synchronization of all the
powers of each category which I think is
again where we're headed right now you
know interestingly what in what you're
asking I mean when we talk about the
machine human interface it's not just
machine of what we think of machine that
machine also contains ghostliness it
contains all kinds of other uh forms of
being but I I did forget I I did a
dishonor to you my friend you asked
about storytelling real quick you know
and there's an interesting there's an
interesting figure just when you're
talking about evil and stories um and
you just think about the rich histories
of folklore you know from all parts of
the world from Eastern Europe to to
Latin America to to to East Asia to
Mongolian folklores about demons and you
know and and witches and all these sorts
of things and and how how evil just
lends itself to storytelling in the most
amazing ways that the good doesn't like
stories about good people tend to be
very very boring and archetypal and they
become kind of lessons moral lessons but
there's a figure since we're naming
naming wonderful Dead Philosophers and
and trying to honor them there's also a
figure who kind of played in the you
know in the in the in the playground
with figures like batai and that's
Walter Benjamin but he comes from a
different angle alog together Benjamin
kind of you know an obvious on the
surface Marxist but intrigued by
mysticism you know hid that from his
Marxist colleagues that he was deeply
intrigued by mysticism and actually I
don't know if you all know this how it
is that Benyamin batai and Jac laan all
know one another why you know not
they're not just not that they're
hanging out in France it's that they
used to attend secret sessions on
mysticism taught by Alexander coev the
Great
hegelian so in a time when mystical
thought was considered you know sart had
no patience for it and he kind of ran
and dominated the Throne of of French
intellectual circles surrealists under
Braton hated it for number a number of
reasons so there were a lot of figures
who were banishing it as sort of this
irrational Freud hated mysticism and
almost disowned Yung partially because
of his interest in some of those things
or misunderstandings of what that meant
so there were these secret Gatherings
where Benyamin laan and bat used to go
to Alexander K's house and listen to him
talk and lecture on mysticism and
discuss it together and that's why
Benjamin famously gave his last
manuscripts to batai to hide in the
floorboards of the of the National
Library in Paris where he worked but
it's Benjamin who figures something out
there that this the responsibility of
ancient storytellers and I've said this
in in other places sorry for anyone
who's hearing it repeated it's benin's
theory is that the Storyteller exists in
order to confront the child with
death it's to teach death because no
parent I look at myself again father of
a 2-year-old uh there is absolutely no
impulse in me that wants to teach my
daughter that I'm going to die on her
one day and then even worse and
unbearable for me that she will die one
day right so this is this is an awful
lesson and so you need a third neutral
party to come in and the way that the
Storyteller instructs and mediates this
encounter with with death is by telling
a story that has a beginning middle and
end and acquaints them with the fact
that things end that phenomena end that
we are in an impermanent world and that
not only are do things cease and perish
but that they're irreversible when they
do you can't go back you can go back and
read the story but the outcome is the
same your favorite character dies you
can't reclaim them or recover them
that's a way of instructing them in the
experience of of loss and mortality
that's going to hit them soon enough
right so that's where I think the
Storyteller has always been linked to to
to fear and to evil as well if death is
part of the game of evil I want to ask
you Jason what inspired you to organize
this book the way that you did what
inspired you to begin the book on evil
with a set of principles and then move
on to diagrams and then to talk about
libraries because I see that there might
be an impc evil even in doing that in
the sense that to to create a set of
principles is almost to create a Canon
which in some sense delimits activity
delimits insights if you will diagrams a
series of typologies libraries archives
here's the knowledge of importance and
of course there's an outside there are
things that are excluded from that and
I've been thinking a lot lately about
the ways in which our archives the
Western Canon our favorite philosophers
those who I'm not talking about here
today often become these these kind of
anchors or Stables whatever metaphor we
want to use that keep us sort of locked
in a kind of inactivity or suppress our
thinking and creativity and I I don't
know if that's implicit in the
organization itself but something like
that does seem to be taking place here
so I was hoping that maybe you could
speak to the organization and then if
there are any attendant insights on how
maybe philosophy itself or the archive
itself might be evil if you could talk
about that AB absolutely
so let's let's start with so as you as
you nicely and I appreciate all of you
reading through this this strange
Treatise and and all three parts of it
if we start with notations those
notations are not meant to be absolute
precepts they're meant to be almost like
in martial arts forms that can be
deployed now if you look closely a lot
of them seemingly contradict themselves
meaning I say something like evil can
practice in extreme speed can accelerate
reality then I'll say EV evil can
practice in extreme slowness it can
paralyze reality you know and you can
think of images that come come to that
you can think of of of sort of evil that
is again instantaneous almost but you
can also think of like a gargoyle which
is Frozen in Time sort of an that so
I'll say things that I use Paradox and
contradiction because I don't want to
they're not delimiting sort of a finite
map instead they're saying these are
like cards in a deck that can be played
given the circumstance they're highly
contingent upon circumstance which
typology of evil is the right one to
summon at any given moment depends on
whether you're in a dead end in an
Alleyway in a labyrinth in you know on a
cliff about to fall it depends sort of
you know and all that so that's that's
the first thing that that I would say
that's why there are just so many of
them too and they could proliferate it's
just you have to call it quits somewhere
eventually as for diagrams you know this
is this is the attempted humility on my
part of switching modes because of the
realization that my thoughts will change
if I change the the sort of the the the
the Matrix of how I'm of how I'm
engaging I always took it very seriously
that one thing I'm I'm writing now so
here's something that for instance I'm
writing now a short piece for another
book
on weather events in literature so
imagine entire entire civilizations or
entire tribes or entire secret societies
that Define themselves through some
climatological phenomenon that happened
an earthquake a flood uh s storms in the
desert right that's their that their
identity is predicated upon a
climatological weather weather
occurrence right hurricane Seasons you
know things like that so similarly I
know that okay it's it's if I'm if I
listen to the Elder N I should realize
that probably my thoughts will morph
slightly when it's raining
outside you know that that rain should
have an and it should have an effect if
not I'm a terrible philosopher
then I'm in a vacuum I'm in a bubble
pretending that I'm doing high stakes
work but allowing anything to challenge
or affect me whatsoever right remember
all this stuff we call it affect affect
affect now that comes from Theo actually
most of it which is a stunning
Revolution thought it just means being
affected just allowing yourself to be
affected by things that are occurring so
I allowed myself to be affected by
saying okay now I'm not going to write
in textual notations I'm going to write
in diagrams and I'm going to Envision
I'm going to reset to zero and play the
game again but this time in diagrammatic
fashion and diagrams unleash just a
different a different type of thinking
about the topic as well as then moving
into a much more speculative side of
things of inventing books that have
never been written before or to my
knowledge at least have not been written
before and I I really hope that some
people steal some good dissertation
topics from that or or book topics for
themselves in in the future because I
worked hard to come up with weird weird
literatures that I don't think exist
until this point and so that just that
was sort of me plunging into sort of the
the the third component and that just
allows you to write differently
different tonalities even the fact that
one some are written in shorter
sentences when you write in diagrams you
have one word you know essentially for
every it's like I think I have eight
eight Chambers or eight compartments I'm
only allowed one word and then I have to
let the reader fill in the blanks you
know of of why that word is associated
in that particular constellation so I
like that but I'll just I'll just say
one other thing to to the diagram you
know because I'm I've been talking about
this recently I'm really fascinated by a
concept I rediscovered recently so
something that I had read 20 years ago
lost track of it completely and then and
then it visited me again I didn't I
didn't find it by my own uh will there's
a great diagnosis by one of Freud's
Rivals actually Freud's ultimate rival
Emil kelen you a great German
psychiatrist I don't adore everything he
said just in the same that Freud doesn't
always doesn't he's a genius but I'm not
always on his side with everything uh
but kpin says something really cool he
says this Freudian symptomatological
method is so constrictive because and
it's it's a false method at some levels
to go after symptoms individual symptoms
and say well schizophrenics do this he
says actually if you notice almost any
symptom that you say identify or isolate
that can happen in one type of Madness
can also happen in every other type of
Madness they're much more fluid and
interchangeable you can have delusions
of grandeur in manic depression you can
have delusions of grandeur in
schizophrenia you can have delusions of
grandeur in Hysteria you can have all
all these kinds of things what he says
matters is the syndrome which is to say
the particular sequence pattern
configuration of symptoms right that
that creates sort of this elegant
mapping that allows you to identify
something and so I I like that idea
because then you could actually go and
redesign every one of those
diagrams and they would change by taking
a single term and placing them and that
doesn't offend me because I'm not
selling you know a moral philosophy on
evil instead I'm just I'm I'm again I'm
inventing a card game and I would love
others to come and say what if we played
with this strategy just like chess
evolves new moves all the time new forms
of attack new forms of defense this
should do the same as well as even new
rule sets I it doesn't bother me if
someone came and offered entirely
different rule sets to this it's just
setting a almost a Point of Departure
for that but the the other thing I just
wanted to mention then quickly to that
is kin this psychoanalyst he says
something very cool as well he has a the
idea that came back to me after 20 years
was called confabulatory
paraphrenia now I had heard about that
decades before where he said this gets
too often associated with schizophrenia
and it's not confabulated confabulatory
paraphrenia is a b basically people who
invent very lavish Vivid false memories
of their life and tell them constantly
to others like that I'm actually the
long long lost descendant of a royal
Dynasty or that I have a lineage with
werewolves or that I'm actually the one
who wrote George bai's books you know
and things like that and they have
sensorial memories of these things
they're absolutely convinced that
they've lived these lives and they have
the most elegant complex forms of
Storytelling and what he noticed was
schizophrenia tends to suffer from
what's called a deterioration of
identity over time so it becomes worse
and worse more aggressive uh more
troubled more tormented more painful the
more that it goes through the motions of
its delusions but this one confabulatory
paraphrenia became more ecstatic over
time and actually the identity just
became more multifarious more
multi-dimensional more detailed because
it was always improvising like a writer
just or or a theatrical modality always
improv which is why by the way uh anonin
arto should not be called schizophrenic
he should be in this designation
because AR just kept adding nuances
adding stories about his life to create
this gigantic Colossus figure called you
know arto but what's amazing there is
that is that Corell in the end calls
this euphoric
dementia which is a really cool line and
then it got me to thinking that well
then what's the secret of euphoria
because dementia we almost never
describe as euphoric we never picture it
or Envision it as a euphoric thing we
think of it as a as a as a terrible
condition so I started looking into it
and realizing something if you take
paranoia again which evil has been
associated with because paranoia is an
ultimate form of intelligence of looking
and seeing everything and thinking about
everything too much in
excess when does paranoia go bad there
there is euphoric paranoia and there's
really sort of tortured paranoia and
where what's the difference tortured
paranoia is where I think everybody is
out to get me and everything I see in
reality confirms my suspicion my story
right and that's the conspiracy
theorists online which is why they're
tormented and why they often end in
violence the way that we're seeing today
right but on the other side if it
remains partial if it's not everyone is
my enemy trying to kill me if it's
there's one person donot calls him the
enchanter in the story he has one one
enemy the enchanter and that he only
shows up in certain phenomena as cats or
in
mirrors you follow so it's only partial
slivers of reality that are corroded or
corrupted or that keeps you in a
euphoric game then you have moves to
make right you're not in this fatalistic
deterministic awful state of of
infestation sort of right the syndrome
remains an arena you know or or a game
where I can beat this enemy I can beat
the enchanter right I just have to avoid
mirrors or I just have to align with
forces that are against the enchanter
like stones for instance so this becomes
in this is where it remains euphoric
even paranoia can be euphoric as long as
you don't let it saturate the totality
of reality and thereby become
totalizing which is what we call Society
unfortunately well I mean honestly the
method of par oia precisely in that mode
is more or less what characterized like
our book and I think like the sort of
the book sort of the solo wrote as a
sequel exactly like this I mean it is
paranoia as a mode of thought to try and
find points of capture and escape and I
really appreciate the the the way which
evil is presented here as a set of
techniques because it also takes me back
to one of you know every occultist
favorites favorite factoid which is the
the link between grammar and grimoire
and it read there something of a
grammatical work here and especially in
the idea of publishing it giving general
rules for application and also sort of
make making it public you know there
there's something evil about publication
and hell if we know anything the
publishing industry is only getting more
evil so it it but I want don't give
don't give them the honor of such a of
such an exalted term they're just bad
they're just bad yeah you know you know
yeah let's let's be more stly DED about
this but I also want to ask a question
as well is how this idea of evil which
is sort of being laid bare in terms of
the rules of the game which evil becomes
publish it becomes techniques it becomes
something manipulable becomes a not
technique but also a
techniques how that might relate to your
other work recently on secret societies
where where here evil is being moved
from the esoteric to the exoteric here
you know where relate to the movement to
the the the esoteric the enclosure of
things
thanks for the for the the segue there
um no no doubt there's a there's a link
you know and actually they were written
a lot of well the the secret society's
book is is underway but a lot of things
were written simultaneously in this
regard because what I was what I was
trying to do there and it's it's a
similar game in some ways when and the
name of the secret society's book is the
unlost and the reason is because I was
looking after and I've done I've done
this for decades in my own life it's
just I never thought to actually write
about the process of doing it is to look
for and to unearth books of secret
societies that have been lost in time so
these are forbidden books these are
books that have been hidden misplaced
neglected you know they either because
they were too obscure in their meanings
or like you said too esoteric in the
topic so there's medieval notebooks on
blood purification you know completely
superstitious stuff but you can only
find it in one library in a small
village in Spain for instance right uh
there are journals of Caravan thieves
from from the Arab world that nobody
takes as legitimate knowledge who would
ever want to read you know to even read
it means that you're captivated by by
thieves you know and who wants to read
the Diaries of Thieves unless you're
planning something and so they're
typically in ill taste even though they
exist and are somewhat accessible or
there are books that are famed books
books of legend that were part of
libraries that have burned to the ground
in history you know and it's that's
that's a tragic undercurrent of the
history of philosophy and literature and
Theology and all of all all of knowledge
that we have these burned libraries like
the House of Wisdom in Baghdad or
Alexandria in Egypt and it's it's a hell
of a thing to think how how frail the
practi is these are entire lives devoted
to subject matters to inquests you know
tracing things only for some idiot
Emperor or something like that or some
thuggish you know militaristic Force to
decide you know to set fire to something
so it's a way of trying to also just
just remember that that we're always
beneath the beneath the knife of history
in that regard but what's similar in a
certain regard is that the method for a
book on secret societies and Lost Books
is like a book on evil you're chasing
rumors a lot of the time you know
everything's kind of hearsay half lies I
love the fact that when I go to places
like parts of North Africa to look for
some of these Lost Books I used to do
that a lot more in past years you know
everything is exaggerated distorted
they're fabricated Clues you can't
really trust the book sellers are
testing you the book sellers are are
passing on things that have been echoed
five times you know through street
corners and all of that and they don't
either they're intentionally misleading
you or they don't know they're
misleading you and so a really
intriguing challenge right right away
when you're in this ocean of deceptive
signs and impostor sort of impostor
suspicions is that you either choose the
route of knowledge or Aesthetics meaning
when you have no absolute Criterion of
knowing if something is true or not
about a secret society that once existed
there or might still exist there how do
you discern between this Avalanche of
things being told to you which one to
follow if you go the route of knowledge
you go an epistemological route then you
become the ultimate detective you almost
do like forensic kind of breakdown laser
sort of techniques of trying to
differentiate which is more credible
which is more authentic based on the
reputation of the person who's telling
you based on the context based on what
how close they were as an eyewitness or
something like that actually a lot of
things which have now become part of
just the law today you can apply those
and that hopefully will get you closer
to the inner Circles of the mystery that
you're looking to go to but I actually
like the second route and weirdly enough
paradoxically it often led me closer to
what you might call the truth uh which
is just chasing your favorite story so
you're told three different things by
three different people just go with the
one that sounds the coolest to you and I
learned this method from by the way this
is this is even an an you know I'm not
that far from a history department where
I'm sitting right now they would come
and burn me at the stake for saying this
but I know their dirty secret which is
that that's how Herodotus starts the dis
of History he says something like there
are like eight stories circulating about
how Cyrus the Great became the King of
Persia I'm going to tell you my favorite
one that's his methodology is just this
Whimsical mood choice of I like this one
the best so I learned this actually not
from Herodotus though I learned it from
Sufi Mystics because Sufi Mystics when
they go back and some figure some Mystic
was Sanctified it's almost always after
their death right that they become this
kind of saint
everybody starts generating accounts of
Miracles right and it's really cool how
contagiously people enjoy being like
well I once saw him do this and I once
saw her do that you know all that it's
it's and so the question of how do sufis
then how do Islamic Mystics historically
what do they include and what do they
throw out they include the best stuff so
for instance halaj who is this amazing
early Mystic who was crucified for
claiming that he was God and he
supposedly danced in ecstasy in his
chains as he was being led to the Cross
to be burned on the cross and while he
was burning he screamed out in in
ecstasy I am God I am God and it left
this haunting resonance in people's
minds in the Middle East throughout
history there's a story about him that
he was talking very calmly and serenely
with a crowd of people in a room at
night and it was there was this candle
light flickering in a lantern and all of
a sudden they noticed as he was speaking
that his shadow began stretching to like
overwhelming monstrous proportions on
the wall behind
him sufis include that reminiscence they
include that account in everything
written about HAL just because it's
awesome you know it's just it's just a
great
phenomenological account and it's Unique
you know it's something they hadn't
heard before so that's why they throw it
in there whether it's more or less true
that's almost irrelevant so in some ways
that's that's what you have to do
especially when you're dealing with
secrets societies we have to remember
that the really good ones the ones that
I consider the elite ones they turn
themselves into walking riddles meaning
they purposefully circulated
misinformation about themselves
misunderstandings about their Origins
their beliefs their rituals so they
wanted to be concealed in some ways or
misread in other ways and so even what's
out there on the surface in the in the
light of day you you can't trust that
the architects of that information
weren't people trying to throw you off
course Jason
speaking of stretching
shadows I'm sure you have been
approached about the film nasu the most
recent remake and I I've actually been
reading a few different things as of
late I'm reading this collection of
essays by the famous archetypal
psychologist James Hilman on Melancholy
and Mania and it made me think of you
and your work on Mania and looking at
the film nasu I mean Melancholy is and
not only a an operative theme but it is
a a a very Stark thematic Choice made by
Edgars to convey the story of the the
kind of Yearning and Transfiguration
that the character of Ellen is
undergoing and I'm curious if you've
seen the film and if you have a take on
it and we'll just say spoiler alert at
this point if you're listening I'm going
to I'm going to disappoint everyone here
that I that I haven't seen it against
every every desire and Instinct my my
lovely child who's my universe my my
whole universe she she keeps me very
closely bound to the realm of cartoons
most most of the time and so and so I
haven't had a chance to steal a KN for
myself but it's going to be a luxury
item in the next couple of weeks where I
do my escape artist move get out of the
house late at night and under the cloak
of of night be able to watch this I have
seen some of the imagery though I did
see the silhouette behind a curtain uh
which was a a really powerful sort of
cinematography and what intrigued me was
the look of the actress while while
being sort of the the shadow of the claw
I think was on her face in that scene
that's all I that's the only thing I
know of it and I just recently talked
about the fact that you know a a friend
of mine Eugene ther who you guys may
know of you know he's a he's a friend of
mine who I don't see for years of years
at a time but he's he's wonderful
thinker in so many regards but he wrote
a piece um many years ago about this
turn towards what he called I think he
called it Transcendent horror where he
said you know in the 80s when I was a
kid growing up you had the Freddy
Krueger Jason from Friday the 13th you
had evil embodied in a particular fiend
or Monster and your job was simply to
outrun it or kill it by the end of the
film right so it was a pure exteriority
something totally unlike you and foreign
to you that was chasing you that was
trying to harm you and you could either
yeah Dodge it or or or annihilate it and
then you look at films like the witch
you look at the Lighthouse you look at
Midsummer and they all end with this
look of rapture at the end of the
surrender of the human to the evil
universe so it's not a person anymore
it's not a a a circumscribed you know
Monster figure necessarily it's that the
universe is evil the whole universe is
evil and that they realize this finally
and they become one with the evil and
that's why there's this look of kind of
of of sort of happy resignation on all
their faces at the end of the films I
didn't see that in the NOS veratu
instead I saw a more ancient principle
which was just complete frozenness like
disbelief the incomprehensible which I
like uh at first glance what bothers me
and I love I love that Eugene ther
mentioned this move towards Transcendent
horror as a new philosophical
orientation of your of Our Generation
towards horror which maybe maybe more
interesting than than the old uh
creature sort of typology but I do worry
that it's actually complicit with and I
don't want to sound like a Critic here
I'm complicit that that whole smile at
the end is actually part of the
narcissistic capitalist era of
everything is about me and everything is
for me and I'm the center of the
universe again and I can customize my
you know evil to my own individual you
know
consumption and for me it's more
interesting when evil is pure
exteriority you know when it remains
purely outside as something that is that
is exceptionally alien and strange I I
think that's that's more powerful and so
I I'm a little bit concerned with that
move so whether NOS Fatu then whether
you can you know become the creature or
not or whether the creature is a is a
standout and it does not represent all
of being you know in in the old ones
like the Bell Lugosi vampire ones the
castle stands out on the horizon as a
perversion or an anomaly against the sky
against the village against the forest
you know what I mean it's it's it seems
to be almost like an alien hovercraft it
shouldn't be there it's what's not
supposed to have happened right and so
and the creature by by extension is the
same you know even in even in Dr
Frankenstein it's an unintended
consequence right and I love the fact by
the way just to bring back to to to
earlier discussion a lot of people
always forget that do that Frankenstein
Mary Shell's Masterpiece is a book about
technology as well
it's a book about the invention of
electricity and her fear that this
supposedly utopian invention was going
to lead to catastrophic
monstrosity and and destruction which is
the same debate we're having now again
with artificial intelligence it's the
electricity of our time you know in a
way but but no I haven't seen the film I
promise you all if you have me back at a
later round I'll I'll watch it I I do
though want to jump on your your comment
about being drawn into to children's
animation because our discussion started
with the lullabi and one in sequence one
of this book on evil you talk about
immemorial
collapse and yet you know uh the
aperture and the function of sort
of being drawn in if if the lullabi is
is evil I'm I'm thinking or if the
lullabi is a technique of evil I'm
wondering what do you make of the
proliferation of strange cartoons across
the internet that are meant to to to
render children docile right these I
mean I'm assuming you've seen these
increasingly bizarre
cartoons and I'm wondering if you can
maybe connect these two things it's a
it's a great question I'll give a
negative and a and a positive because
you know I never trust
I I never trust that something you know
I kind of had this dualism it could turn
bad it could turn great it could be an
opening it could be a a closure that
that looks like an opening
so for instance our generation
is seemingly the most vulgar in terms of
if you look at just I mean swearing and
cursing and profanity on TV in movies
but even in the everyday you'll see
young kids swear around old people in
ways that let's say older older cultural
moments wouldn't have allowed would have
prohibited right now at some levels that
seems liberating maybe that we're g
getting out of aist
hierarchies okay I'll I'll the the
anarchistic side of me will will grant
that but at the other level I fear
something that arto who I mentioned
earlier feared arto was filthy sometimes
in his writing right really could curse
with the best but he was an elite
professional cursor and they say that if
he heard someone in a cafe in Paris
swear in front of him he would get up
and leave he would storm out because he
would be offended by the amateurism but
what he was also disturbed by was the
mediocre of the most extreme language so
like the effort the effort is supposed
to conjure damnation itself it's
supposed to bring the heavens like
collapsing overhead on the person you
say it to and I hear kids these days
just drop it like a placeholder like
it's like or you know it doesn't qualify
anything it doesn't actually even
intensify or Electrify language the way
that it's supposed to so what's the
outcome of that psychologically or
existentially people who when they go to
watch NOS veratu write on Twitter OMG
that was the most awesomely amazing
crazy movie I've ever seen five
exclamation points all capital letters
three emojis that means they're hitting
this steroidal juice sort of because
language isn't doing what language is
supposed to be doing anymore it doesn't
have the voltage or the charge so
they've got to be hyperbolic and
redundant and use use every trick in the
book just see you nothing should be
amazingly awesomely whatever awesome
already encompasses amazing I I have to
interject and I think there are going to
be a lot of listeners who are going to
just be really upset or really going to
laugh at what I'm about to say but
there's an entire brand of like
children's YouTube content I'm about to
say skidy toilet you don't have to know
what it is I don't really I don't really
know what it is but it's these
extraordinarily graphic and intense and
uncanny and violent images that ha that
have to say no meaning would be to give
it too much credit actually what we're
seeing is the proliferation I think what
you're describing is something like an
empty intense
intensity that is just absolutely empty
and I'm wondering if you know just like
how hilard Von bingan the Mystic of like
the the Mystic of of of the shivas wrote
that you know aridity Emptiness is
precisely that space where evil can
start to it's aridity that through which
evil can start to sort of manifest I'm
wondering if if the the increasing
intensity yet emptiness of cartoons in
our in our age opens up sort of new
techniques of evil it I hope so but but
I would say it would have to be through
active nihilism not passive nihilism so
active nihilism is that I can get my my
little two-year-old daughter to play any
game in the house hide and seek you know
tag I can get her to play any any type
of game tug of war which is an ancient
ancient Babylonian game and and all that
we play all sorts of games and she's
always up for it but I've seen teenage
members of my family who you cannot
motivate to want to do anything you
could tell them that there are Miracles
happening in a hallway down the down the
and they're on their phone in that
neurotic scroll mode right which is full
of supposed shock value that's what it
is it's novelty it's like oh what's this
next thing oh what's this next thing but
it's such a low intensity charge as you
said and it's there just to create not
awe or pleasure but
addiction essentially you know anytime
you see an addictive propensity don't
trust it then you know and and this is
you know who teaches me that great
junkie writers throughout history you
know like like William Burrows will tell
you that buroughs will say the most
boring person on earth is a junkie for
all the exoticism that we give to as as
one himself who writes the famous book
you know called that you know for all
the EX iism and Adventure we think
that's involved and I have looked at
literature of addicts and I'm interested
in decadent writers the absinth taverns
I've written a whole piece on opium dens
and things like that but more often than
not he said a junkie can usually only
talk about one thing
junk they only want to think about one
thing or or discuss one thing or discuss
stories one thing which is the last time
they were on the substance you know and
so it becomes actually very
one-dimensional and confining so even
with shock in so think about that like
the you know the the the the the jolt of
of a high of a drug high is kind of like
a shock value but when it becomes so
repetitive and you're chasing the dragon
and it's just diminishing returns and
now that thing in the veins is not
working you know and every time around
it's getting less and less and you even
here's a the one of the only times you
will ever hear me give an homage to the
great Socrates but Socrates said one of
the fundamental confusions of human
beings is not being able to
differentiate pleasure from release from
pain so every time my phone dings with a
new text message and I think it's oh
it's a curiosity oh who is that that's
not pleasure that's released from Pain
that's an anxiety mechanism right that's
com that's compulsive and so I worry
about this new methodology of really
transgressive really shocking comedy's
even gone that way have you noticed that
you have standup comedians who are just
foul and filthy beyond belief who are
not just willing but who dive headlong
into the most taboo subjects who make
jokes about AIDS who make jokes about
rape who make jokes about you know all
kinds of different violence murder and
all of that and they're mainstream by
the way these are extremely mainstream
many of them women right you know and
all that as well and I watch it and I
see this is an interesting twist in the
history of humor and and comedy but the
problem is that the reason why they're
allowed to get away with it is that
there's this little wink wink Su sort of
Supremacy complex of the righteous who
are saying the reason I can make this
racist sexist violent joke is because
you know I don't actually think that
way and the crowd is and so they
exonerate themselves in this morality
play like the fact that we laugh shows
that we're Above This vulgarized mode of
thinking of others that we're not the
racist so you get both a charge of
self-righteous sort of sickly pleasure
along with actually getting to laugh at
a racist or sexist joke but pretend
you're not laughing at it th this
actually really does open up I think
something even if we stumbled upon it
accidentally something rather profound
about about the the unfunny humor of
like
contemporary comedy and the comedy scene
especially in like Austin with like Joe
Rogan and all of those those people is
is we're told to laugh at the humor it's
not even particularly funny right
there's an emptiness to it and yet the
Laughing signifies that disconnect and
yet we're already supposed to be so like
I think that that in a certain sense it
goes back to that that that lowlevel
intensity issue here but I'll let I'll
finally let the question when you say
then is there a space for evil evil
would have to restore not just disperse
intensity but restore the possibility
for intensity which is to say to create
the stage remember that in wow you you
guys got me on this German German French
thing today so let's do it heiger in his
in his piece called what are the poets
for says something really Sly he says
that the it's about not about God it's
about the house of God being empty
there's no altar for God to inhabit
there's no dwelling really the dwelling
has to come first and so for him poets
lead you across this abyss and try to
rebuild the house of God it's really
theological in certain ways and
Messianic and that's what's what's not
my favorite element of it but I think
this is this is the interesting issue is
that there used to be unknown spaces
there used to be undergrounds fugitive
spaces pirate Utopias hideaways you know
that was the space of conspiracy before
now we really don't have much Terra
Incognito in an age of surveillance in
an age of of
hyperposites I could get lost in now
they're all building developments in
those same forests and all of that just
it's not only the the actual physical
space that's deteriorated it's the
inclination to find that physical space
remember every we're talking about kids
every fairy tale is basically a story of
a
runaway right they're all abandoning
reality but there has to be an
alternative space whether it's the
rabbit hole or it's the Wardrobe in
Narnia or it's the the labyrinth in pan
Labyrinth or the forest in a million
fairy tales and all that there have to
be portals there have to be archways or
gateways that allow this traversal from
this awful reality principle and I think
it's the most wonderful and accurate
indictment of the horror of adult human
civilization that every kid would rather
be in a forest with predatory witches
and wolves than hang out with
us talking about society and politics
and all that the excruciating boredom
but the hypocrisy is what they hate not
our violence because all the creatures
in their Forest are violent it's the
hypocrisy of our violence which they
detest right that were these bad Liars
walking around pretending to be Noble
and kind and that's that's actually
Freud's first Insight too is every cat
who walks in my office is lying to me
they're telling me some movie in which
they're the star that's why the last
question he ever asks is tell me about
yourself what a waste of his time he's
just going to get a film reel of well Dr
Freud I think I'm a very kind person and
I've always tried to be there for my
family and you're the bastard who was
just gossiping trying to ruin someone's
reputation three minutes ago outside in
the waiting room he knows that so in a
in a similar the question is do we have
the capacity to build zones you know if
you go back to tarkovsky's you know
great movie stalker you know and you
think about what it means to have this
it's like kafka's castle castle again
can you actually construct this this
willingness to abandon everything like
the child does in the fairy tale and
Prophets do this in the Bible too by the
way Abraham leaves his family his tribe
his possessions to go out into the
desert some go into the bellies of
whales some go up on mountains and caves
Muhammad does that in the in as a
prophetic figure in the Islamic
tradition goes to a cave all day long to
listen to the voice of of infinity you
know sacred verses these are people who
will throw away and discard reality
for some other some other sphere right
and the question of whether or not then
something that has imprisoned us in a
kind of pseudo interiority will ever
allow us to Chase
some extraneous
sphere well that brings me to uh my
final question which has to do with
politics the the kind of political
commitments that that we have on the on
the podcast amidst actually this this
narcissistic concern maybe about the
kinds of discussions that we have here
too one of the dominant claims that that
repeats within the book on evil is that
idleness is evil in fact there's a
sentence evil is often tied to
philosophies of idleness and Evanescence
the devil's workshop laying down in clay
withering here on the podcast we
valorize philosophies of idleness so I
thought that was an interesting point to
talk about especially in distinction to
the kind of mania that is present in
today's world the Mania for labor the
Mania for the phone you know the the
constant influx of of digital
stimulation and what makes idleness in
today's world a kind of evil versus the
evils of mania let me say this is I know
that there I share and harbor the same
revolutionary inclinations and
proclivities as as as everyone else the
book on evil is a book against genocidal
war machines and Empires because evil if
you look it historically is always an
underdog it's always a subversive
movement it's never the dominant which
is why I really dislike and I you know
with all du all due respect respect and
credit to to the brilliant Hannah arent
when she calls Nazism evil she gives it
way too much exotic credit it is a
disgusting bureaucratic genocidal war
machine that would have purged the
entire Earth if given enough time and
chances but it's deeply neurotic and
evil is always from the Vantage of again
the loser or the exiled one if you look
at Satan if you look at Cain they're The
Afflicted they're the banished they're
The Unwanted right it's never the
totalitarian dominant regime that's not
evil I hate to say it and I've said it
all elsewhere that's the
good that's what we call the good
because these are all utopian ideologies
whether it was stalinism or fascism or
capitalism that have hundreds of
millions of dead bodies to account for
slavery Holocaust Googs right just
Killing Fields on on every corner of the
earth these are all leaders who claim to
be working for the good I want to give
them the respect of their terminology
then that's what the good looks like to
me absolute Terror right uh absolute
oppression so for me evil is always just
again an escape artist maneuver to try
and unbind oneself from that from that
subservience from that slavehood for me
then it is a fundamentally revolutionary
technique right to be be diabolical is
to be Elusive and I'll just say say this
sometimes I know we've been taught since
the great great Elder marks that
Revolution is about struggle and about
fighting and he's a dialectician so he
wants you in the center of the city
causing trouble fighting headon but I
would just remind you that there are two
other forms of resistance that are
equally crucial one is doing
nothing so that's idleness as you talked
about right and that's Mastered by great
decadent figures like Rambo who is Young
and gay and poor by the way he's checks
a lot of boxes of minorities and of and
of marginalized figures in his time and
his form of resistance is to not work
not become a productive member of modern
society right to stay at the fringes so
that's that's one form of resistance
that Mystics also do a lot they just
check out of of of the the mainstream in
that regard it's what the beats did by
becoming hitchhikers dropping out of
college and all of that stuff but then
another thing is to leave you know and
this is what I did even with the United
States I got to a point with the US I'm
back here now but I was gone for six or
seven years from the US and the reason
is because it got to a certain threshold
of obscenity for me and of just
complicity just feeling like you had
blood on your hands just living there
every day that the most radical thing I
could think to do was what James Baldwin
did which is just
leave not go fight not go storm capitals
or pretend I can make a difference or or
change the fate of of the plan no just
turn my back on and say I want nothing
to do with this nonsense I'm not part of
this profane little little game you're
playing and go elsewhere for for as long
as you can as long as you can survive
and that doesn't mean you're clean or
you know in un unadulterated territory
everywhere on the Earth is stained by
corruption and oppression and and
dishonor and I hate to say it's most
often people claiming to be good and
ethical and Noble who are behind all of
these Insidious operations you know you
can say what you want about my my dead
my dead Master n for all for all
whatever faults he may have had or may
have not had he didn't hurt
anybody and he never claimed to be a
good man he just did his thing you know
but he didn't hurt people if you look at
any accounts of him he was not cruel he
was not vicious he was didn't have a
sadistic bone in his body he embodied
the generosity of the spirit I try to be
the same as best I can I try to be
generous and kind and affirmative to
others and the way I do that is by never
circumscribing myself in an ideology of
the
good awesome that's that's fantastic
Jason please tell us what's next for you
I know you have another course coming up
you have the two books coming out let us
know where we can access these things
hopefully then what's coming up for me
is another great conversation with all
of you some months down the line I'll
have more material on the new book on
secret societies which has some great
text books of poison books of plagues
books of you know books of sleep oh
that's one of the great things we didn't
get to talk about dream temples in
ancient Egypt or the Sleep caves of Rome
so I'll throw that out there as just a
thread for for us to to chase after the
next time
oh
oh
