uh I'm going to describe a bioelectric
interface and I'm going to talk about
how this interface allows us to uh
communicate and thus reach new
capabilities by taking advantage of the
collective intelligence of cells and
tissues and so I view uh living material
as a kind of agential material meaning
that it has agendas it has uh problem
solving capacities that already exist
that we do not have to engineer and thus
we can take advantage of them so all of
the um the primary data the D the
software the papers everything is is all
here and then my own kind of thoughts
about what it means are here if
anybody's interested so here are the
main points that I will try to transmit
today first of all that bodies operate
fundamentally on a multiscale competency
architecture meaning that at multiple
scales there are problemsolving subunits
that we can take advantage of and
communicate with uh I'm going to claim
that really definitive regenerative
medicine is going to require learning to
work together with the collective
intelligence of groups of cells not
micromanaging the molecular Hardware but
communicating novel anatomical goals I'm
going to try to show how specifically
how endogenous electrical networks in
all tissues are a very tractable new
interface for using simple triggers to
induce very complex Downstream desirable
outcomes I'm going to show you some
tools for reading and writing these kind
of uh pattern memories uh and I'll show
you some applications in in uh birth
defects regener repair and and a little
bit in cancer but the fundamental
message is that to really induce the
ability of healing and restoring
structure and function we have to
understand the material we're working
with and fundamentally it is an agential
material so uh let's just talk about
overall the the idea of engineering so
so there are lots of different types of
materials of course we have the most um
experience with with passive materials
but now active matter and even
computational materials are coming out
and the thing is uh that you have to you
have to uh engineer very differently so
so when you engineer with Legos the only
thing you can count on the material to
do is to keep its shape that's it which
means that it is on you to assemble
everything exactly how you want it you
are in control of every piece of it well
the good news is that there are few
surprises uh because you are in control
the bad news is that you are responsible
for absolutely everything um when you're
dealing with an agential material and
this is a material that has built-in
agendas problem solving competencies
learning ability and so on something
very different happens imagine instead
of trying to build a tower out of Legos
you're trying to build a tower out of
dogs well this kind of strategy is not
going to work because if you try to
micromanage it and stack them one on top
of the other they'll simply run off but
you can do something more interesting
which is you can train the dogs in which
case they make this Tower but it has an
interesting property when you push it
over they will get back up and reform
the tower autonomously so uh you gain
something interesting you gain the
self-repair capability but at the price
of uh having a very different way of
engineering with this material than you
engineer with that material um this
comes up a lot in in biom medicine uh
and in general in the in the philosophy
of biology where people argue all the
time are are living organisms machines
are they something else well in in
medicine uh we have both perspectives
because uh if you have an orthopedic
surgeon they do this kind of thing and
you really want an orthopedic surgeon
that believes that your body is a
machine because they have hammers and
screws and and and and chisels and
things and they will take advantage of
the machine-like properties of the
organism but when they're done with all
this they send you home to heal and
everything that happens after that all
of the healing the adjustments uh none
of those things do we have control over
we're actually expecting the organism to
do the rest and and that's that's when
uh uh other and including including
perhaps um trauma related Psychotherapy
and various other things that are an
important part of healing so uh both of
these both of these components have
their place you know you you you don't
want a psychotherapist that thinks your
body is a machine but you definitely
want uh a um somebody who's going to
work on at this level to uh to
understand the machine metaphor and um
you know there there are there are
people like Fabrizio Benedetti who work
on Placebo effects where the Two Worlds
of of of cognitive semantics and
molecular biology Collide you know he
says words and drugs have the same
mechanism of action and and and it's
true and so so we really do need to
understand kind of both both
perspectives so um what I what I work on
is fundamentally diverse intelligence so
different embodiments of different kinds
of intelligence in the physical world
and one of the things that we try to do
is uh Place systems along this kind of
spectrum it's specifically a spectrum of
persuadability that is uh what kind this
is a very engineering approach and in
fact my my framework is called tame T
technological approach to Minds
everywhere and it's very much an
engineering kind of take because um I I
I I think that all of these intelligence
and cognition claims are really protocol
claims what you're really saying is what
tools can I use to interact with the
system so here you're going to use the
tools of physical rewiring you're not
going to convince it of anything you're
not going to reward or punish it here
with these kinds of systems now we're
talking about the tools of control
theory and cybernetics you can rewrite
goals and the these are systems that are
goal directed and then we have some
systems that uh encapsulate a lot of
underlying mechanisms that you don't
even need to know really to uh train the
system right they learn and so training
with rewards and punishments Behavior
shaping and then of course even more
advanced you can you can communicate
with arguments and cogent reasons and so
on so so where something fits is all
about what tools you're going to use but
notice that uh that's an empirical
question it's not a philosophical
question so lots of times people have
background uh commitments well I think
cells are down here and I think only
human brains are here and whatever but
the reality is this is very much an
empirical kind of uh experimental
science so so if you want to answer the
question where do cellular collectives
fit in and a lot of people treat them as
simple machines and and and you know and
maybe maybe down here the reality is we
should actually be using all of these
tools to see what actually works and and
in our experience you get a lot of
surprises when you do that you can't
just assume from the beginning now the
reality is that all of us start Life as
a s as a as a kind of a chemical machine
a little blob of uh of chemistry and
physics and unfertilized oite and then
through the amazing process of embryonic
morphogenesis we become something like
this or even something like this so the
journey from physics to mind is really
slow and gradual both evolutionarily and
developmentally and um we what we need
to develop is uh models of scaling in
other words how do the competencies of
these kind of chemical systems result
and and transform into the kind of
competencies of these goal-seeking
systems what happens along the way how
far back do these skills go and so on
and all of that um is described here
because we are fundamentally made of an
agential material this is a single cell
so uh there is no brain there's no
nervous system uh but this thing is very
competent in its own local uh needs in
terms of metabolics and and uh you know
here it is hunting it's in its
environment so so this is the material
that we're we're working with um the
thing with engineering with these
agential materials is that in
traditional uh traditional Sy bio or
robotics or any of that all of this is
on you to uh Implement you have to make
circuits to do all of these kinds of
things in fact you really uh you know
synthetic biologists often are very
frustrated with their medium because the
material does not just do what you want
it to do it does all kinds of other
things and that makes it very very
difficult um it's not a it's not a blank
slate at all uh so traditionally you
hope the material is very uh very
passive and doesn't interfere with what
you're trying to do and you do bottom up
engineering of specific circuits um but
what what we are exploring is a new way
of engineering with agential materials
where we use uh human and AI discovered
prompting to exploit the competencies
that are already in the material and all
of this is described here what what are
some of those properties well the first
thing is that I showed you that cell but
actually you don't even have to be a
cell to uh to to have learning for
example so so we've shown that just uh a
gene regulatory networks by themselves
you don't need a nucleus or cell or you
know scal you don't need any of that
just just alone a small set of molecules
which turn which up and down regulate
each other is sufficient for six
different kinds of learning including
pavlovian conditioning and that means
that um what you should be able to do
and this is what we're doing right now
we're building these automated devices
to try to train cells for specific
responses to drugs um for example in a
kind of pavlovian assay where you can do
drug conditioning you can condition One
Drug on another drug that didn't
actually it didn't used to do anything
anything so kind of molecular Placebo
and that has lots of applications in for
example allowing the use of of of of
drugs that you couldn't use by
themselves let's say they're too strong
too many side effects whatever but you
can condition their uh their effects on
some other Much More Much More inert
drug and things like that so so by
taking advantage of the competencies of
the living material at the subcellular
cellular and tissue level we can uh we
can make some uh some interesting
advances um the material is actually
incredibly plastic so here's a tadpull
uh here are the nostrils the mouth the
brain the gut so there's the tail and
what you'll notice here is that there
are no eyes what we did is we prevented
the primary eyes from forming but we
gave them an eye on their tail uh and
this eye makes us it makes an optic
nerve and the optic nerve comes out it
synapses sometimes on the spinal cord
sometimes on the gut sometimes nowhere
but what's amazing is that if you
actually test these animals for vision
and we built this device to uh test them
on visual learning cues you find out
that they can see in fact they can see
quite well and so this is this is this
is very puzzling and unexpected you know
this this is a very different uh sensory
sensory motor architecture the eye is
not connected to the brain uh why
doesn't it take new rounds of evolution
you know new generations of mutation and
selection for this animal to adapt to
this novel architecture why does this
why does this work out of the box and
partly it's because the material the
living material is uh has has all kinds
of interesting problem solving
competencies that um that we can talk
about another another competency that it
has is moving information across tissue
so these are plaria these are flat worms
and if you cut them into pieces every
piece uh regenerates a perfect little
worm okay so they're highly regenerative
but one thing that's amazing is that if
you train them and they have this little
centralized brain here uh you you train
them to find food at a particular
location on these bumpy discs it's
called Place conditioning you then cut
off their head and you know amputate
amputate the entire head the set the
tail will sit there doing nothing for
about 8 days it grows back a new brain
and then you find out that this animal
remembers the original information so
not only is that train the the the
information resulting from training not
only is it somehow distributed
throughout the body but it's actually
imprinted onto the new brain as the
brain develops in order to drive
Behavior so this ability of moving
information across radical
reconstruction is another example of the
plasticity of the material that we're
dealing with you start to get the idea
this is not this is not nothing like the
kind of materials that we deal with when
we engineer robotics or or anything else
um one final example I want to show you
is the uh caterpillar to butterfly
transition so these caterpillars
basically live in a two-dimensional
World they crawl around uh and they eat
leaves and they have a brain that's
suitable for that but this so so this is
a kind of soft-bodied robot so to speak
this is a hard-bodied creature
completely different controller needed
for this and that means that it needs a
new brain and in fact during this
process it dissolves the old brain
breaks up most of the connections most
of the cells die and builds up a brand
new brain now it turns out that if you
train the caterpillars the butterflies
remember the original information now
it's not enough to ask how is this
information stored while the brain is
being taken apart I mean that's an
important question but actually an even
more puzzling thing is is this the
specific memories of the caterpillar are
of no use to the butterfly whatsoever
the butterfly doesn't like leaves it
eats uh it eats um nectar so when the
caterpillar learned to find leaves at a
particular color disc uh to to move
around and and and to move in a certain
way that gets gets the leaves by when
prompted by a certain stimulus that kind
of thing is irrelevant to the butterfly
the butterfly doesn't want leaves it
doesn't move the same way so it can't
store the actual information what it has
to do is remap this information onto a
novel architecture the things that the
caterpillar learned are not just stored
they're actually re remapped and
reinterpreted in a novel context so
instead of leaves uh nectar and and and
so on and this has many implications for
human augmentation and stem cells
implanted into human brains and so on
how does information move through the
body how is it uh reinterpreted in novel
uh circumstances right so so you're
starting to get the idea the the
material is really really kind of
remarkable so uh the reason all of this
works is because at every level of
organization from molecular networks on
up we have uh problem solving
competencies so at every scale SC these
things are solving problems in different
spaces uh and many of these spaces are
very hard for us to visualize so we're
good at visualizing uh intelligence in
three-dimensional space uh we can see
animals moving around you know
medium-sized objects moving at medium
speeds I mean we can recognize that as
intelligence but actually living things
work in a lot of other spaces for
example the space of G they they
Traverse the space of gene expression
the space of physiological States and
the space of possible anatomical
outcomes and so all of these systems
traversing those
spaces uh it is it is not easy for us to
visualize these are often High
dimensional and quite abstract spaces
it's not easy for us to recognize uh
problem solving behavior in those in
those spaces so I want to take one uh
example I want to spend some time on
um really diving into one model system
that we've developed to study this
unconventional collective intelligence
okay how how do cells work together to
solve specific problems and let's look
at this how do they navigate
morphospace so here's the here's the
question uh we begin as a set of
embryonic blastam eventually it gives
rise to this amazing uh thing this is a
cross-section through a human
torso
so um how how how how did the cells know
to build this I mean you might say well
the genome but we can read genomes now
we know that when you read a genome you
don't see any of this what you see is
protein sequences and it's the the
genome Direct irly specifies the
hardware the molecular Hardware that
every cell gets to have but all of this
is the result of the physiology that
runs on that on that hardware and the
this shape is not directly in the genome
any more than the structure of a of a
termite Nest or this the the exact
structure of a spiderweb is in the
Genome of these of these organisms it is
the con it is the result of a
construction following uh specific
policies and the policies are not simply
put you know put each Lego where it goes
so how do the cells know what to make
and when to stop um if something is
missing or damaged how do we repair it
and as Engineers we wonder past that we
wonder um what else is possible you know
these exact same cells what else could
they build uh if we knew how to make
them do it so um the way I see the
endgame of this field is something I
call the anatomical compiler the idea is
that someday you will be able to sit in
front of a system and you will be able
to draw the plant animal organ biobot
whatever uh whatever structure that you
want and what this thing would do is
compile that anatomical description into
a set of stimuli that would be given to
specific cells to get them to build
whatever it is that you want okay so
complete control over growth and form uh
if we knew what we were doing that that
is what we would have and all of this
would go away we would have no no more
issues with birth defects traumatic
injury cancer aging degenerative disease
if we knew how to convince cells to
build specific structures this would all
go
away now um molecular biology and
genetics have been going very well over
the last decades why don't we have this
why are we very far away from this I
think it's because what's important here
is that this is not a 3D printer the
goal is not to micromanage the cells or
the molecules or anything like that this
is fundamentally a translation device
what it's doing is converting your spec
as the bioengineer into the goals of the
cellular Collective so that they are
motivated to build exactly this so so
what we need is to take advantage of
their uh capabilities to build different
kinds of structures to remap information
to move information through tissues to
uh reach anatomical goals despite
various uh interventions um and then and
then maybe we'll be able to um to have
some of this so the like one thing that
really stands in our way is this idea
that um that the genetics is some kind
of a privileged level of uh of control
so let's just look at a simple example
so here's an axel um baby axel have
little four legs tadpoles do not have
four legs and what we do in our lab is
we make something called a frog otle so
it's an early embryo that's a chimera
between axotal and frog okay and so now
I ask a very simple question you have
the entire axotal genome it's been
sequenced you have the entire frog
genome we know we know what that looks
like uh is a frogot going to have legs
or not okay and so so the reality is
that um there is no current uh way to
even begin to answer that question from
the genetics uh that would tell you
what's going to happen in this case okay
so what the situation is currently is
that we are very good at manipulating uh
this level of information but what we
actually care about is this we want to
understand why why do specific
structures form why do they fail to form
why uh do they do they overgrow and so
on and so I think that we are today
where in in biology and biom Medicine
where computer science was in the 40s
and 50s okay back then in order to
program this is what you had to do you
had to interface with the hardware
directly you had to rewire the machine
to get it to do something different
uh this is where we are now all the
exciting advances crisper genomic
editing protein engineering pathway
rewiring all of these things are at the
level of the hardware and we're getting
very good at manipulating the biological
Hardware but what we've barely begun to
scratch the surface of is the software
of Life the actual intelligence and I
mean that quite literally of the
material that we're dealing with we are
we are um engineering with with our
hands tied behind our back because we
are neglecting the special properties of
the material now what do I mean by
intelligent
I don't mean anything like human level
metacognition where you know you're
intelligent and so on I simply mean what
William James meant which is the uh
ability to reach the same goal by
different means okay it's a goal- driven
system it's expends energy to reach
certain States in some kind of problem
space and it has different degrees of uh
competency or Ingenuity in solving
problems to get there so so let's talk
about this what kind of collective
intelligence do cellular swarms actually
have well the first thing you notice
about development is that it's a very
very reliable and so what I'm going to
uh uh I'm going to uh develop is this
idea that groups of cells are literally
Implement a collective intelligence just
like we do out of our neurons in our
brain so we are all Collective
intelligences but um but but living
cells and tissues are a collective
intelligence because they solve problems
in anatomical space now development is
very reliable but that is not why I call
this intelligence it's not because it's
reliable it is not because it's it gives
rise to complexity those are very easy
reliability and emergent complexity are
cheap and easy and that's not to to to
to see in a variety of Sy systems and
that's not what I mean by intelligence
what I mean is William james' definition
which is uh has to do with problem
solving for example if you cut an early
embryo into pieces you don't get half
bodies you get monozygotic twins
triplets and so on each of these
starting states can navigate anatomical
space and get to its goal which is the
normal human target morphology
uh despite various perturbations it is
not a hardwired process it gets it gets
really crazy um with certain examples
like this is a uh a cross-section
through a kidney uh uh Lumen of a of a
kidney tubule Lumen and what you'll see
is you know normally there's eight to 10
cells in this uh in this n um but you
can make polyploid NES that have
multiple times the chromosome numbers
you know 4 n 6n 8 n NES and so on and
when you do this you discover that first
of all the cells get very big uh because
they adjust to the amount of DNA but the
nude stays the same size and that's
because the cells automatically adjust
the number of cells to their new size in
fact you can make them you can make the
cells enormous where one cell will wrap
around itself and still give you the
same anatomical structure but notice
something very interesting this is a
different molecular mechanism this is
cellto cell communication in tubular
Genesis this is cytoskeletal bending so
what we have here is the ability to
reach the same goal in anatomical space
while using different molecular
underlying tools to get there I mean
that that is the definition of of
intelligence use using various um uh uh
available uh tools to to get your goals
met now think about what this means as a
as a as a nud coming into the world what
can you count on well you can't count on
knowing how many copies of your genes
you're going to have you can't count on
uh having the right size and and number
of your cells you not only can't you
really count on your environment you
can't even count on your own Parts you
have this is what I mean by problem
solving you have to you have to get to
where you're going in anatomical space
assemble a correct nud no matter what's
going on with your with your parts and
these the material has incredible
competency to do it now some animals
keep this in their whole throughout
their lifespan so like this uh this this
salamander this this or or these axotal
you can you can amputate anywhere along
the limb uh they will grow exactly
what's needed and then they stop that's
the most
remarkable thing about regeneration is
that it knows when to stop so it's not
just a hardwired set of uh processes to
build the limb what it's really doing is
a kind of homeostasis anatomical
homeostasis it's minimizing the error
between this state and this state by
filling in and when the error goes to
acceptable uh below acceptable levels
then it stops and they regenerate their
eyes and their jaws and their um their
spinal cords and portions of the brain
and heart and so on so uh it's it's this
very generic property of being able to
stay in a certain region of anatomical
space and and get there when you need to
by different means of course mammals
have this to some extent so humans
regenerate their liver human children
regenerate fingertips and deer
regenerate uh large amounts of bone
vasculature innervation every year but
they're certainly not as good as uh as
as as salamanders so so how does all
this work uh when you have something
like this how does the tissue know what
the correct pattern is how does it know
when to stop how does it know when to
build um we've we've already talked
about the fact that um DNA by itself
doesn't doesn't tell you that that
answer so um we've started uh asking uh
this this question years ago um to try
and and trying to get inspiration from
Neuroscience so Neuroscience uh we know
a little bit about something uh
something about how uh goal-seeking
systems represent and achieve their
goals and it has to do with this
interesting electrical architecture the
hardware looks like this it's a bunch of
cells connected to each other with these
electrical synapses known as cap
Junctions and they have ion channels on
their surface they create a voltage
gradient and that voltage gradient may
or may not propagate to their neighbors
so it's an electrical Network um if you
track the electrical network over time
so this is a living zebra fish brain you
see these kinds of Dynamics so uh this
electrophysiology according to
Neuroscience is the medium of the
collective intelligence of these cells
what makes this a fish instead of a pile
of neurons and what makes what gives it
goals that no individual uh neur on can
can fathom is is a kind of cognitive
glue that cognitive glue is
bioelectricity it's the fact that these
things are connected into an
electrochemical Network that processes
information that enables this to be more
than the sum of its parts and what
neuroscientists try to do is they try to
decode it right so they have this neural
decoding project where they try to read
the electrophysiology and say well what
is the cognitive content of this
Collective of cells what is it thinking
about what does it remember it turns out
that this kind of Architecture is a
extremely ancient evolutionarily it was
invented around the time of bacterial
biofilms so every cell in your body has
ion channels most of them are
electrically connected to their
neighbors this is not about neurons it's
not about brains it is an absolutely
ancient system for processing storing
and integrating information across space
and time and so we asked uh could it be
possible that the same uh this this kind
of network not only became uh sort of
evolutionarily U adapted to process
information about behavior and and solve
problems in threedimensional space for
animals that run around and do things
but could it be uh the more ancient
function of this is to store
morphological information and could the
bioelectrics underly the collective
intelligence of cells that have to solve
anatomical problems long before they
encounter um behavioral problems so we
developed some tools uh and the idea was
to apply the same neural decoding
strategy to non-neural cells to ask is
is Neuroscience really about neurons or
is it really about how cognition uh
emerges uh through um electrochemical uh
networks or or in fact other networks
and how that gives us the ability to
communicate goals to novel systems so
here are the tools that we developed um
first of all the use of uh various
voltage reporter dyes and proteins to
track the bioelectrical conversations
that all these cells are having with
each other so think of this as the
equivalent of trying to do a brain scan
and uh and and reping all the electrical
uh uh states of all the neurons and then
we do lots of computer simulations to
try and reconstruct the network and
understand its properties how do these
electrical gradients spread how do they
form how to control them and so on I'll
show you uh uh just a couple of examples
this is a uh a frog putting its face
together so time-lapse of an early
embryonic uh zenopus uh making its face
here this is one frame out of that video
and what you see here is that
you can catch the pre pattern the
scaffold that tells all the organs where
to be so here's where the animal's right
eye is going to be the mouth the
placodes um this is the pattern that
controls the downstream gene expression
and location of all the different organs
we can read it out from here the fact
that this is what the future face is
going to look like by reading these
electrical pre patterns um so that's so
that's a an endogenous pattern and in
fact required for normal morphogenesis
this is a pathological pattern and so
we've what we've done here here is
excuse me is uh inject a human enogen
into these embryos eventually it'll make
a tumor and the tumor will start to
metastasize but um in the meantime the
first thing that happens is these cells
electrically disconnect from their
neighbors they depolarize and they
disconnect and on a voltage scan you can
see where this is going to be and in
fact we're developing this as a cancer
diagnostic because you can actually see
where uh the cells are going to
disconnect what happens when they
disconnect is that they roll back to
their ancient unicellular lifesty as far
as they're concerned the rest of the
body is just environment they will go
where they want they will reproduce as
much as they want they become amibas the
thing that makes an organism or an organ
out of individual cells is the
bioelectrical uh glue the the the
ability to form a Network that has large
scale goals such as building specific
organs and maintaining them not the tiny
little little um goals of of individual
cells okay so so this is all this is all
about the kind of the monitoring and the
reading of the of the uh of the electric
code what about the functional
experiments because we need to know
whether these things are actually doing
anything are they EP phenomena or are
they actually instructive so in order to
manipulate the electric content of these
Collective uh collectives we don't use
any magnets waves Fields frequencies
electrodes nothing like that we do what
neuroscientists do which is to hack the
normal interface that the cells are
using to control each other that means
um altering the Ion channel properties
opening and closing and mutating them so
pharmacology uh optogenetics things like
that and the same approach to these scap
Junctions so we can control the topology
of the network which cell communicates
with which cell and the electrical state
which cells have what voltage patterns
within them and so now I'm going to show
you just very briefly uh we could we
could spend hours looking at all the
examples but I'm just going to show you
a couple of quick examples of what
happens when you do this what do these
voltage patterns actually do well the
first thing that you can do is uh you
can try to reproduce that elect face
pattern somewhere else so I showed you
there was a little eye spot a little
voltage spot that says build an eye here
what happens if we put that spot
somewhere else so we can take ION
channel RNA encoding a particular for
example potassium Channel inject it into
cells that are going to give rise to
this gut and we're going to give them
this weird voltage pattern that says
build an eye and guess what the cells do
they build an eye and those eyes have
the same lens right optic nerve all the
same components now notice a couple of
interesting things from this first of
all the bi electric pattern is
instructive if you put the pattern
somewhere where it will force the
formation of a a whole organ number two
it is modular we did not tell these
cells how to build an eye we have no
idea how to build an eye there are so
many cell types and so many different
genes we have no clue what we provided
was a highlevel uh prompt or subroutine
call that says build an eye here that's
it the system takes care of the rest
very much like when you uh when you
train a dog or a horse you do not try to
micromanage the synaptic structures or
the uh firing of the muscles the nerves
and the muscles in the legs you are
providing s stimuli high level stimuli
and letting the system readjust in a way
that that is is appropriate to what
you're trying to get to so the same
thing here highly modular uh also if you
look at the developmental biology
textbook they will tell you that um only
the tissue up here the ectopic the um uh
ectoderm out here the anterior
neurectoderm is competent to make I
that's because they've been prompting it
with the So-Cal called master hene pack
six but it turns out that it's not the
it's not the tissue competency that was
limited it was our competency in knowing
the right prompt if you prompt it with
the with the bi electric signal actually
you can get eyes pretty much anywhere in
the body so this reminds us how
important it is to be to be humble and
uh to think about the the fact that we
don't know all the competencies of our
material right the limitations the
developmental constraints all of these
things uh they might be constraints on
our own U imagination and and knowledge
we don't know that they actual
constraints here so so so this is this
is important to keep in mind and by the
way the material self scales which means
that if we inject only a few cells here
so the blue cells are the ones we
injected this this whole lens is made of
other cells that the blue cells
recruited in other words we tell these
cells make an eye they know there's not
enough of them to make an eye and they
recruit all these other cells to get the
job done we did not have to teach them
to do that we didn't have to worry about
it so the material has certain um
autonomous um competencies that we want
to take advantage of in engineering um
we've also uh applied this to leg
regeneration so uh frogs unlike
salamanders do not regenerate their legs
and so normally you amputate and nothing
happens we developed a bi electric
cocktail that uh sends a signal that
says build a leg not a scar immediately
they turn on this msx1 um Gene for this
blasa gene they start building a leg
with by 45 days you've already got some
some toes and some toena and a toenail
uh in our most recent experiments
um 24hour stimulation so the signal we
we're sending the signal for 24 hours
this this this ION channel drug cocktail
is there in the in the wearable
bioreactor for um 24 hours you get a
year and a half of leg growth from that
a year and a half so again the idea is
not to micromanage it we're not 3D
printing it no scaffolds no talking to
stem cells we are telling the collective
on day one go down the leg building
route not the scarring route and then we
take our hands off the wheel and then
eventually you get a pretty um pretty
respectable thing and so here I have to
do a disclosure because David Kaplan uh
and I uh uh we are scientific
co-founders of this company called
morphos cutical uh which is now trying
to move that from frog to uh to to
mammals and David makes these um
wearable bioreactors um and then uh we
try to uh figure out the um the payload
the Ion channel modulators that will
trigger leg regeneration and so all of
this uh is done with the help of a
quantitative predictive models so we
need to be able to start by knowing
which channels are expressed and then a
a biorealistic electrophysiology model
of how the cells react to each other and
then large scale organ and tissue uh
regionalizations all the way through to
an actual algorithm computed by this
electrical Network to make decisions how
many heads how many fingers where you
know symmetry type and all of that and
this is uh this is what we uh what we
try to do uh I'll show you one example
of the use of this uh of this kind of uh
approach where um we found that uh so so
here's a normal uh for this is a normal
brain of a um of a of a Tull so uh you
know it's got left and right hemispheres
here's the forbrain here's the midbrain
here's the highb brain uh you can make a
mutation for example Notch is an
important neurogenesis Gene you make a
mutation the forebrain is missing the M
midbrain and hindbrain are a big bubble
uh profoundly um disabled animals they
don't have any Behavior the brain is a
complete mess what we found is that that
bi electrical pattern I showed you the
one that controls the formation of the
face well there's another one that for
controls the formation of the brain and
if you force the right pattern even even
though you have this mutation you end up
with perfectly normal animals these guys
not only have a normal brain but they
have normal gene expression and they
have normal IQs their IQs are
indistinguishable from controls even
though they're bearing this really
terrible um Notch mutation and that was
done by using the computational model
which suggested one particular ION
channel called h cn2 that would get the
brain pattern back to the right level
even well the right pattern I should say
as the right spatial pattern even though
the notch is mutated so and then we can
we can actually we can actually uh uh
mimic this this effect by using um uh
hcn2 Channel openers to trigger existing
hcn2 channels or we can introduce novel
hcn2 channels directly so what this
shows is that we can use the
computational model to ask uh a simple
question um if if we have an incorrect
state for example a tumor state or a
malformation or a scar or something else
uh if we know what the correct B
Electric state is and that's a big if
because this kind of physics has not
been done yet so that's something that
we're doing now is to um characterize
what all the correct patterns are then
you can ask the computational model to
say what channels could I open and close
to go from the incorrect state to the
correct state so this is part of this um
cracking this bioelectric code to
understand what are the uh the the
prompts the stimuli in this language
that are going to get this motivate the
system to build all these complex things
we don't know how to build so you can
you can play with a very early version
of this but uh the the biggest rate
limiting step here is obtaining all the
physic data you cannot infer it from
genomics proteomics or anything like
that because these channels open and
close in place so just because you know
it the expression level of a channel
does not tell you the voltage of the
cell so we have to do measurements in a
live state so so that's that's the idea
is that this this kind of system to help
you pick um
electruck uh message that you want to
send so now um so so this is kind of the
biomedical side let's let's back off of
this a little bit and uh talk about the
the broader aspects of of engineering
what if we what if we try to go um
beyond the normal pattern so so what
I've told you is that we can restore
normal patterns face heart gut whatever
we can we can restore the normal
patterns but um first of all where do
these patterns come from and uh and what
can the system do besides those patterns
well the traditional answer is again
well they come from Evolution so uh over
Millennia what's happened is that the
genome that gives rise to uh oak trees
uh it has learned to make this so in
other words the acorn contains the
genetic material and what the genetic
material knows how to do is make this
and if and and that view the focusing on
the hard Ware and the fact that this is
what normally happens is really limiting
this this really um development is is
almost too reliable in that it lulls us
into a false sense of its its
limitations what is the option space
actually around this and Darcy Thompson
back in 1917 already understood the uh
amazing um concept of of of an
anatomical morphospace of of
possibilities so uh what else what else
can the system do well bioengineers are
ideally suited to find out what they can
do for example
one thing you can build out of these
cells is something like this now
interestingly this was not done by a
human bioengineer it was done by a wasp
so what happens is these wasps uh prompt
they signal the cells to build something
that the cells actually are quite
capable of building but who would have
known this if you hadn't seen this would
anybody ever look at these I mean how
you know incredibly reliably 100% of the
time this Acorn builds nice flat green
uh structure of the appropriate shape
who who would have known that can
actually do this if prompted correctly
so that space of possibilities is
something that's here for us Engineers
to um to understand and remember this is
not made of of of insect cells this is
this is made of the plant's own cells um
what's what's also interesting is that
more advanced Engineers induce better
elaborate constructions so bacteria will
make Galls that look like this they're
basically a big lump fungus does a
little better you know these kind of
well-defined lumps and the nematodes
make this kind of thing mites do a
little better but insects can do
something they can they can make the SE
make the leaf do something like this so
again it's this idea that um uh the
intelligence of the uh of the system and
the intelligence of the engineer who who
seeks to prompt it are tightly linked
you do not see what your material is
made of if you either are incapable of
it or are you know sort of closed off to
the to the possibility um there's a real
there's a real uh uh correlation here
between between what the what the what
the hacker can do and what the what the
material proves to be um capable of so
so let's look at let's look at a couple
of animal um examples um what if we take
some um just pause that what if we this
is a frog embryo uh in the cross-section
we take some of these uh uh epithelial
cells off the top and we dissociate them
and we put them in a Petra dish now a
few things could happen they could die
they could spread out and get away from
each other they could form a
two-dimensional model layer many things
could happen what they do instead is
something very interesting um overnight
they Clump together and they form uh
this this little thing I'll show you in
a minute what it does let's just look at
the individual cells here so these are
the individual cells look look at this
little thing okay so this is just a
group of each one of these is one cell
so so they move
together um so this this little this
little you know sort of the horse
looking thing we call we call them um
Zeno bits and uh these are these are the
individual cells trying to figure out um
what their what they're going to make
now that they've been liberated from
their normal environment their normal
normal environment has all kinds of
other cells telling them what to do
specifically to be a boring
two-dimensional uh outer covering um on
the embryo surface the light flash by
the way is a calcium that you're seeing
here this is this is calcium signaling
that there's been an event here these
two cells have signaled to each other
somehow so there's there's incredible
diversity in the these kind of shapes
that they make and the way they move but
together once they get together this is
what they look like so these are our
xenobots zenopus lavis is the name of
those frog species and and it's a bot
because we think this is a biorobotics
platform so it moves on its own the way
it moves is it has little cyia these
little hairs that spin they're normally
used to propagate the uh the mucus down
the side of the animal's body but here
they're being uh repurposed to to to uh
row against the medium so they can go in
circles they can Patrol back and forth
like this they have Collective behaviors
that they do um here's a zenbot
traversing a a maze of of Still Water so
here it's going to come down here it's
going to take this corner without
bumping into the opposite wall so it
takes the corner and then here for some
reason it turns around and goes back
where it comes from so autonomous
spontaneous behaviors again there's no
nervous system here um what you can do
is put uh calcium uh reporters in here
and so you see the cells are very active
there are lots of computations going on
again no no neurons this is just just
epithelial cells but what you can do uh
and this is this is a pre-print and we
have a couple things more the pipeline
you can start to apply various uh
Neuroscience metrics that people apply
to calcium signaling in brains to ask
what does the causal architecture here
look like what does the information
processing look like and how similar is
it to brains so stay tuned we have some
we have some exciting um exciting data
on that but you can apply it directly to
these things that are absolutely not
neural uh they they self-heal so if you
cut them almost in half so so look at
this we we cut this thing half look at
that that that hinge there imagine the
force that it takes through that little
hinge to like you know do this sort of
bicep curl up here and and and fold back
so they heal back to their normal zenbot
shape the most the most amazing thing so
far that we' found is something called
kinematic self-replication so we've made
it impossible for these animals to uh
replicate in the normal froggy fashion
but it turns out that if you give them a
bunch of loose skin cells so here's a
bunch of loose epithelial cells what
they will do is they will run around and
um condense these cells into little
balls like this and the little balls
because they're working themselves with
an agential material these are not
passive particles um much like us and
much like Evolution we worked with
agential materials to make xenobots and
they do the same and therefore these
little balls mature into the next
generation of zenbot and guess what they
do they run around and make the Next
Generation and the Next Generation so
this this kinematic replication is
something that we don't we we don't have
never seen in any other creature on
earth um and that rais es an interesting
question what does this G what has this
genome actually learned through its time
on Earth well it's certainly learned to
do this this is what we see 99.9% of the
time they make uh this particular
developmental sequence and they make
these tles but much like with that Oak
Leaf if you think that's all it can make
then then you're you're you're missing
quite a lot because the default Hardware
is great but it's also capable of lots
of other things and so these cells up
here when you liberate them from the
instructive influence of these other
cells you find out what they what they
really are capable of doing which is to
form a zenbot uh then have a
developmental sequence this is about an
83 day old bot um who knows what it's
becoming we have no idea and then and
then they make these they have these
behaviors so uh the thing is there's
there's never been a zenbot before
there's never been selection to be a
good zenbot there's never been selection
for kinematic self application where do
these things come from right these
competencies of our material previously
in the first half of the talk we were
talking about uh specific patterns that
um correspond to healthy normal organs
and so on and those patterns we you
could think are set by Evolution and and
so on and so we're just trying to remind
the tissue of of what it needs to do but
actually now you're starting to see that
well there are many other um um
potential outcomes on on the table and
how do we understand this so there's
really two ways to to think about this
one way which is what a lot of people
say is that this is emergent what they
say is that well yes if you have um uh
uh large numbers of subunits following
Simple Rules you're going to have
certain emergent behaviors and that's
true as far as it goes but what we do
what I think we don't want is to be
surprised every time that happens and to
say oh look this is a random you know a
random uh kind of a bag of emergent
things that sometimes occurs what I
think we ought to do is use the
hypothesis that what we're actually
exploring is a structured space so not
just just random stuff that emerges in
various systems but actually the way
that mathematicians think that at least
as many mathematicians think that
they're exploring a they're discovering
they're not inventing they're
discovering a platonic space of
mathematical truths uh my my feeling now
is that when we engineer what we're
doing is creating Vehicles so xenobots
and so on are vehicles for exploring uh
the latent space of possibilities each
one of these things is helping us to see
so there's a little there's a little
point in that space that corresponds to
the normal embryo but outside of that
point are all the other things that that
Hardware is capable of and what
evolution is doing is producing uh of
pointers into that space and we can we
can manipulate those with our synthetic
bioengineering to see what else is out
here uh I I would rather think that this
is a a space that that has a metric it
has a structure we can systematically
explore it not U sort of randomly
encounter emergence the surprises and
and and think that that it's you know
it's just just random so so um what I
think is going to happen for next
generation of biom medicine is that we
are going to use uh Ai and other tools
to explore that space and in particular
um not to try to micromanage the system
but to explore the communication space
the space of signals the space of uh
Behavior shaping cues that we can give
to these highly competent multiscale
systems to get them to do what we want
and in fact um all kinds of other wild
things that that we've never ex seen
before
and so um the thing is that that
reprogramming complex outcomes top down
meaning figuring out what are the what
are the the signals that are going to
motivate the cells to do a particular
thing not not micromanage them but uh
but but uh reset their their set points
that they're pursuing um you need smart
interventions there needs to be a kind
of impedance match between the tools
that you're using and what you're hoping
to see so uh the tools themselves you
know drugs drugs are very simple um
they're kind of agency tools they just
do the same thing that hcn2 Channel that
I told you about that fixes the brain is
a little better it's context sensitive
so it will open and close in different
cells depending on what's going on so
it's slightly smarter than typical drugs
but we can do way better than that we
can use um uh what I call agential
interventions and what might an agential
intervention look like so this is one
example um uh if I ask you what you
thought this was you might think this is
something I got out of a pond somewhere
um it if if I can tell you that that if
you were to sequence this Gene the
genomic sequence would be Homo sapiens
100% human what this is is a something
we call an anthr robot anthr robots are
derived from a patient tracheal
epithelia we choose tracheal epithelia
because it's ciliated so you get these
little hairs um here they are and
therefore the thing's going to be able
to swim around and you're going to be
able to see what it's what it's doing we
have a specific protocol that forms
these and these are adult uh patient
cells uh that um
do not we're not using any yamanaka
factors we're not uh there's no weird
the nanomaterials there's no scaffolds
nothing all we're doing is letting these
cells reboot their multicellularity in a
new context uh what do they do well they
form this little self motile structure
that does not correspond to any uh
developmental stage of a human it has uh
thousands of uh alter gene expression
changes so it's its transcriptome is
completely different than the um tissue
that it comes from just because of its
new life style there's nothing
physically um uh different about it here
here this is kind of a cool capability
so this is all these are all human
neurons up here we made a big scratch
wound through it right so so here comes
here comes the anthr robot they can they
can move on their own through these
through these kinds of wounds um when
they accumulate you get something called
a superbot cluster like this and if you
actually lift it up four days later you
see that what it was doing under there
was was knitting the two sides together
okay so so these these anobot got in
there and they and they uh for some
reason they knitted this together um so
so two interesting things one is who who
would have thought that your tracheal
epithelial cells that sit there quietly
in your Airway uh for for really long
periods of time are actually capable of
of in in a new environment given the
opportunity uh are able to have a whole
new life as a self-motile novel
construct with a novel transcriptome
that has these these capabilities of
healing neuronal wounds and the second
thing is this neuronal wound thing is uh
that's that's the first thing we tried
this is this this wasn't uh you know
experiment 82 out of a thousand things
we tried this was the first thing so my
guess is that they probably do a lot of
interesting things we just don't know
about them and these are the these weird
assays you know you have to really um
kind of go outside the box to say okay
we're going to we're going to take adult
patient cells we're not going to try to
revert them or anything like that we're
going to uh see if they want to make a
new kind of organism and um and what is
that capable of and and so what else you
know really like the sky is the limit
here in terms of assays what what can we
test on these so so I call these an
agential intervention because these
things are incredibly complex we have
very little hope in the in the near
future of making anything directly as
any kind of a a a biobot or you know
that kind of uh uh an an implantable
device or anything that has the
complexity of these of these cells
they're they're self assembling they
come from the same body they're patient
specific so if you use them inside the
body you don't need immune suppression
or anything like that but they already
have all the pride ties of of
inflammation Health disease States uh
interactions with with bacteria you know
from the airway and everything um an
incredible number of sensors and
affectors and amplification it is all
there and we can use them to do these
kinds of amazing things but before we do
we need to understand what they're
actually capable of on their own so to
finish up here this is this is kind of
how I see uh the the future of medicine
there are two major categories this is
what the vast majority of work has been
done on so the bottom up kinds of
Hardware Focus things like surgery and
genomic editing and and explicit genetic
circuits and and so on uh but but but
this is a this is an emerging area both
for bioengineering and Medicine where I
haven't even really talked about this
about Behavior shaping training cells
and tissues for specific outcomes uh
we've talked about this the discovery of
morphos cutical and specifically
electruck um use the electrical
interface to reset the uh the set points
that the cells are working towards and
all kinds of gental implants of which I
think anth robobots are just um are just
the first kind of uh the first the first
example so I think I think and you can
you can see all of this developed um
here that basically what's going to
happen is that the future of of of uh
both biomedicine and bioengineering is
going to look a lot less like chemistry
and a lot more like uh a kind of Psy
sematic Psychiatry we're going to be uh
have uh quantitative uh rigorous
computer models of
the um the memories the preferences the
the the past beliefs and the
competencies of cells and tissues in
their spaces in physi physiological
space and transcriptional space in
anatomical space and by manipulating
Behavior not molecular Pathways but but
manipulating um gold driven behavior in
these other spaces I think that uh
avails us of an incredibly interesting
uh tool kit for biomedical engineering
and regenerative medicine focused around
the new um the emerging field of diverse
intelligence so if anybody wants to uh
dig dig deeper these are these are some
of the um some of the papers that uh
discuss kind of conceptually the the the
the thinking that that goes into this
this area and uh I want to thank um all
the amazing people who did all the work
so Doug Blackiston is the biologist who
did all the zenbot work and gazam gush
did the um the anthr robot stuff um and
then uh the I development Sher a and v p
and lots of lots of other people Patrick
developed uh all the latest bioelectric
voltage Imaging originally done by Danny
Adams um computational modeling with
Alexis pyac um and uh uh the kind of
planarian regeneration work Fallon
Durant and Patrick Ericson is doing the
the cell learning stuff so I'll thank
those those folks um all of our amazing
collaborators uh support um from various
foundations so our funders and then
again uh uh disclosures um for um
competing interest interest because
these these three companies support some
of our work so um I'll stop there thank
you so much
