for anyone watching this video
statistically speaking you fit into one
of two camps you're either in the 60%
who are too young to have experienced
what I'm about to describe otherwise
you're part of the 40% and have your own
variation of this story even if you
watch to play out from a distance but
regardless of which Camp you sit in we
have to start this story with optimism
optimism is how we got to the
predicament we find ourselves in today
and the best way for me to describe that
optimism is to start with my own
experience I grew up in limr a small
City in the southwest of Ireland and
lived there until I was in my mid-20s by
the end of my time in limr I'd become
pretty disillusioned and Restless I was
living a purely musical life spending
most of my time managing the band that I
was in if I wasn't performing I was
writing or recording or going around the
country ing CDs into radio stations yeah
CDs we had a distribution deal that put
them in chops around the country not yet
realizing that Napster and its accessors
were in the late stages of strangling
that model to death but I did much more
promotion than just that I spent a lot
of time building and maintaining our
website using Flash and action script
not yet realizing that platform
dominance had made that endeavor almost
completely pointless and also that my
flash and action script skills were soon
to be redundant too even back then I
knew that social media was important and
so dedicated a lot of time to attending
to our Myspace page which was the place
to promote your band at the time it was
buggy inundated with ads and pop-ups and
most annoyingly it was a volcano of spam
scammers were free to pesture you with
impunity deleting random friend requests
from people you didn't know was a daily
chore I was also heavily involved in the
general music scene in limmerick I
helped put on shows recorded other bands
and had a nice Sound Engineering gig too
for a time I liked my little niche I
liked my circle of friends and I liked
working as a musician but I just had no
money and I couldn't figure out how to
bootstrap our band to get to the next
stage of professionalism with the odds
feeling like they were so stacked
against us we eventually went the way of
most bands and agreed to split up the
obvious next step for me was to move to
London where I could make use of my
design degree and get into software
money had always been the problem and my
goal was to solve that problem to
bankroll my next steps as a musician
when I made the decision to leave
limmerick I was gone within a month and
I remember that final month really well
I soaked up as much atmosphere as
possible saw as many shows as I could
and visit everyone I knew I knew that
this was it I wanted to remember this
time clearly I didn't want faces to
begin to fade from memory and of course
I didn't want to be forgotten so during
my first year in London I'd go back to
visit lii all the time to play solo
shows and even do Sound Engineering
occasionally but over time people began
to stop thinking of me as someone they
could call if they needed something my
friends formed new bands sound Engineers
replaced me and before I knew it I was a
stranger in my own Hometown which was
made even worse by the fact that I was
an even bigger stranger in my new
adopted City it was a weird and
sometimes oppressively lonely time I
wasn't yet a very experienced designer
so sat right at the bottom of any
pecking order in any company I worked in
no one knew me I auditioned to join a
few bands but couldn't find anyone I
gelled with so for 6 months the only 6
months in my life where I did this I
decided to put music on hold and try
some other things and meet some people
and that's when I took a brief detour
and became interested in the world of
amate Dramatics joining a nearby theater
group I'd always wondered whether my
Affinity for performing on the stage
would trans for to acting but
unfortunately I'd never find out because
once the theater director discovered I
could do Sound Engineering my fate as
technical staff was sealed I do sound
effects audio cues little moments of
piano playing slight whistles for when
someone's trousers fell down you name it
I worked on a few Productions
participated in competitions made one
really good lifelong friend and attended
a whole bunch of rap parties and along
the way kind of developed a slightly
flirty relationship with an actress
there who was also Irish I wasn't
totally sure she was interested but but
it seemed like it was going that way at
one particular party when we were saying
our goodbyes she asked me for my email
address which I gave her and the next
morning I woke up to find an invitation
to this thing called Facebook now when I
got my first look at Facebook I wasn't
all that impressed to my eyes as a
designer working on sophisticated web
products it looked a bit crap what is it
another Myspace but with nothing on it
what I didn't realize was I had just
become inadvertently a very early
adopter in the UK but of course because
I was only connected to one person on a
there wasn't much to do I posted a
message on her wall hey I'm here yay and
left it at that then a week or two later
I got a curious email notification to
inform me that I had just been poked she
had poked me so I logged on to Facebook
again and saw indeed that I had been
poked and seemingly my only available
option was to poke her back I'm not sure
if this is like is this the right thing
to do feels a bit weird okay I poked her
unfortunately this was the most active
period in our Jank Dian and neither of
us messaged to the other again so once
more Facebook faded out of memory and I
moved on the
end and then one day a few months later
I got a new notification a guy I'd
studied within Primary School who I'd
actually forgotten existed wanted to be
my friend I barely recognized him the
chubby boy I knew had become an adult
man with a beard and everything that's
crazy hey man oh my God how have you
been what are you doing these days hey
Martin it's great to see you you I'm an
electrical engineer I live in Berlin now
wow it's been 15 years since I saw you
I'm working as a designer in London
brilliant I always remember those Mad
comics you used to make about our
teachers what an interesting and totally
random thing to happen and then about a
week or two later it happened again this
time it was a guy I had been very close
with when I studied in a brutal old boy
secondary school we used to ditch PE
class together and talk about how we'd
eventually get out of Ireland and become
artists I started talking to him all the
time and found out that he was living in
London too and then the notifications
started coming in multiples each week
people I'd studied within art college
people whose band I'd recorded a guy we
toured with in the Czech Republic my old
guitar teacher Etc it was such an
amazing experience hey it's so great to
see you again how have you been is your
band still going can you send me your
music what country are you in what job
are you doing what ever happened to Tom
what ever happened to Jill oh Tom and
Jill are here send them a friend request
and what followed this was what I can
only describe as 2 weeks of Total
Insanity 15 or 20 people per day wanting
to be my friend everyone I'd ever met
who remembered my name within the space
of one month I went from feeling totally
a drift and isolated to suddenly being
able to chat with all my friends on a
daily basis yes there had long been
things like chat rooms and early social
media sites like 6 degrees.com make out
club Friendster friends reunited Myspace
or Orchid but none of these Services had
come close to what Facebook had achieved
they had the right combination of
privacy settings so our conversations
weren't exposed for everyone to see they
had engineered an experience that made
us feel safe using our real names you
got almost no spam and most importantly
the entire service was geared towards
fostering communication when you logged
in your feed would be updated with a
chronological list of what your friends
have been talking about while you were
away you just scroll back to see what
you had missed back then I'd come across
all kinds of fascinating conversations
in particular since many of my friends
had totally different professions to me
it was really instructive to read
discussions they'd have with other
Professionals in the same field
programmers civil servants artists
academics historians you name it I
remember during one election in the UK I
really enjoyed Frontline dispatches from
friends who were involved as either
volunteers or advisers it could
sometimes be so much more instructive
than your traditional newspaper
reporting of course there would be
disputes but they take place between
people who knew each other and you were
much more likely to moderate your
responses simply because conversations
were taking place in front of people you
liked and respected there were a few
people I knew who felt the need to
constantly post their thoughts and
conversations where I'd rather they
didn't it could be annoying but it
wasn't anything Earth shattering more
than anything else my memory of this
period of Facebook is that it was kind
of chaotic in free form people used it
in very different ways for example there
was a period where people would post
long think pieces or blogs that would
kick off long discussion threads I
remember once posting an intentionally
terrible screenplay of a full episode of
lost I was always really disappointed by
the writing of that show and thought
writing my own version would be an
amusing way to criticize it I spent
about a week writing it my intended
audience my network of connections on
Facebook when I started writing music
again I'd post demos to get reactions
from other musicians it was great I had
a lot of fun on Facebook back then and
would often spend countless hours on it
talking with my closest friends
especially late at night on weekends
when I could grab a bottle of wine
listen to some music and forget whatever
crappy job I was working at the time it
was my connection to my hometown My
Three Brothers my closest friends and
was increasingly becoming my connection
to my new life in London too over the
next two or three years as I became a
more experienced designer I managed to
transition away from Bad agencies and
began working in software in games
companies eventually Landing in a
company that made games exclusively on
the Facebook platform it was now both my
social life and my working life and if
that wasn't enough to make it clear how
important this site had become to me the
first few conversations I ever had with
a girl who would eventually become my
wife took place on Facebook for me it
was a transformative technology there's
just no other way to describe it the
funny thing is during the earliest years
on the platform I never really paid
close attention to what was happening
behind the scenes and it would be years
before I'd start following the Facebook
story more closely so when I decided to
make this video I went back to find out
as much about the early days as I could
and this is when I came to fully
appreciate For the First Time The sheer
vastness of media coverage that exists
about Facebook which when you take it
all together tells a fascinating story
right up to the present day the story of
Facebook from beginning to now is the
story of numerous crucial moments of the
development of the internet rubicons
that can't be uncrossed it's the story
of the transformation of our Behavior
and the story of how legal rules built
for the era of TV and print are
struggling to keep up and it all starts
with an explosion of
positivity in early 2004 Mark Zuckerberg
launched the Facebook a site exclusively
for students of Harvard University when
it proved to be a hit there other
universities emailed the team to ask if
the service could also be expanded to
include them a lot of the expansion work
was done by the co-founder Dustin
moskovitz as described by Mark in a
lecture he gave at Harvard a little
later so my roommate Dustin was like Hey
I I want to help out I want to do the
expansion and like and you know that's
pretty cool dude but you don't really
know any PHP or anything like that so
that weekend he went home bought the
book Pearl for dummies came back and was
like all right I'm ready to go I was
like dude site's written in PHP not
Pearl so he picked up PHP um over a few
days and um and he went to work Dustin's
contribution was nicely captured in a
CBS segment about young entrepreneurs
Dustin just launched 100 Schools a
couple of days ago so he's passed out
dude what's up dude you're on TV the
Facebook's initial purpose was to offer
a convenient way for people at the same
University to look each other up you can
take a person and look them up and you
can get a picture of how they'd like to
portray thems and in addition to say the
courses that they're taking sports teams
clubs that they're a part of but I think
that there's a lot of times where people
will just go out meet someone say okay I
don't know that much about this person
and they'll go back to their room and do
what people call Facebook them which is
go on the Facebook and look them up just
to kind of see the snapshot of what they
have in order to make its College users
feel safe privacy was of the highest
importance and then we also give people
complete control over like what parts of
their profile get showed we don't force
anyone to show anything and we like give
people granular control over some of the
more sensitive stuff so like right next
to the cell phone field there's like
another field it's like who do you want
to show this to I mean like we care
about it if people feel like their
information isn't private then that
screws Us in the long term too but we're
obviously like really sensitive to
people's privacy by the way just as as
an aside it's really interesting to see
how poorly attended this lecture was
that wouldn't last long in August 2004
the venture capitalist and co-founder of
PayPal Peter teal invested $500,000 in
the Facebook which bought him a 10.2%
stake in the company and a place on its
board an investment that was vital for
the early expansion of the product many
former employees and advisers would
later report that teal wielded
significant influence over Zuckerberg's
thinking especially during the early
days for example teal is often credited
for convincing Mark of the importance of
having absolute control over the company
however in order to achieve this there
was a problem to overcome you see while
at College Mark had liberally handed out
large Stakes to a few of his co-founders
including famously Eduardo Savin who
held a 30% stake in the company which
he' bought for a fairly trivial
investment to get around this Mark
Incorporated a new company that
effectively purchased the Facebook which
allowed him to redistribute the shares
reducing Eduardo's stake to less than
10% by doing this Mark cons consid
solidated his position as the majority
shareholder with additional mechanisms
put in place to ensure that his
decisions could not be overridden a
situation that persists right up to
today then another feature appeared
there's this feature called poking where
you just go to someone's profile and you
could poke the person and like what does
that do nothing it sends them a message
it's like you've been poked you know
like who cares you know I mean it's like
I thought about it when I was drunk oh
so that's what that was about anyway
since the platform was now rapidly
growing in registrations a collection of
new investors began began bidding for a
stake in the company including the
Washington Post however the winning
investment eventually came from Jim
Brier of Axel Partners who offered $12.7
million for a 10.7% stake in the company
by June the team moved operations to
Palo Alto one of the principal cities of
Silicon Valley around this same time
Facebook expanded to serve high schools
too an important thing to note at this
point is Facebook's strict policy that
registrants use their real identity this
was enforced by only accepting email
addresses issued by colleges or
universities as we'll see later this
policy of non- anonymity is one of the
core aspects of their success one
immediate benefit which I described
earlier was that when you have to use
your real identity it acts as a
disincentive to behave badly another
immediate benefit of this approach was
that they didn't need to dedicate too
many resources on content moderation
Myspace has almost a third of their
staff is monitoring the pictures that
get uploaded for pornography we hardly
ever have any pornography uploaded I
think that a lot of the reason is that
people use their real names on Facebook
when it came to hiring they took a
pragmatic dual approach on the one hand
they began poaching High Caliber
developers from other companies by
offering higher salaries primarily
targeting those who worked in Google one
of the many tactics that would make the
two competitors mortal enemies however
they also Diversified their teams by
focusing on inexperienced Raw Talent too
you know I started the company when I
was 19 right so I can't institutionally
believe that experience is that
important you know we invest in in
people who we think are just really
talented even if they haven't done that
thing before technically one of
Facebook's major advantages was how fast
it could process information other
social networks like Myspace and frster
were suffering from mounting performance
problems as more users joined
increasingly struggling to cope with the
amount of information being shared and
consumed Facebook's Innovation was a
system for storing data called the
social graph which was in part
responsible for their ability to scale
rapidly it's worth describing the social
graph in a basic sense you as a user are
a single node in a network other people
are also individual nodes too if you
send them a friend request and they
accept a connection is formed that
describes the relationship between both
of you and it's the connection
description that's crucial here say you
make a post of some kind this post
becomes a new object in the network its
connection to you is that you're the
publisher if your friend comments on
this post a new connection is drawn that
describes their relationship to it as a
commenter so as you and your friends
engage with and comment on each other's
content more and more nodes and
connections are drawn that explain the
relationships back and forth this means
that everything around you all the
actions you've taken on anything you've
seen and all the actions taken by anyone
else that relates to you is stored as a
massive constellation of crisscrossing
connection points this allowed the data
to be decentralized so that information
most relevant to you could be loaded
quickly which made Facebook far faster
than its competitors who relied on more
traditional databases which needed to
scan through numerous massive tables of
data for each user matching them against
other massive tables for each type of
social interaction a process that became
more and more inefficient as the
platform scaled up the scaling issue
social networks tend to have is that
users consume orders of magnitude more
data than they create which means the
database storing all this information is
under constant bombardment by millions
of computers trying to fetch information
which makes it run slower and slower the
larger the overall population gets to
make this run efficiently Facebook
initially used the open-source solution
mcash which like the name suggests
caches versions of the database on
multiple different servers distributed
all over the world this way computers
fetch information from memcached servers
rather than directly from the database
if the information is missing from the
cache the memcached server fetches it
from the database and stores the result
as the years progressed Facebook would
build more sophisticated systems on top
of this so that it could keep up with
the rapid growth in users this
investment in scalability would prove to
be one of the decisive advantages that
Facebook had over frster and Myspace
moreover armed with real identities and
a rich database of connections it was
possible for Facebook to make accurate
friend recommendations that greatly sped
up the process of adoption just as all
of this was beginning to really lift off
in late 2005 the influential author Tim
O'Reilly published a now famous article
titled what is Web 2.0 in this article
he predicted that the future power
holders of the web would be the
platforms who harnessed what he called
the collective intelligence of the
internet in other words those who
controlled the most data the races on to
own certain classes of core data
location identity calendaring of public
events product ident identifiers and
namespaces the winner will be the
company that first reaches critical mass
via user aggregation and turns that
aggregated data into a system service he
may not have known at that exact moment
that he was describing Facebook 2 years
in the future in 2005 Facebook released
the ability to upload photos and also
the ability to tag people in them if
someone tagged you in a photo it would
automatically be linked to your profile
making them immediately accessible to
anyone you were friends with which
helped to make the site feel more alive
and engaging they also introduced events
around around this time too this feature
allowed users to organize social
Gatherings or other kinds of public
events in the early days it was used by
almost everyone I knew gigs meetups
House Parties you name it it was a major
aspect of how Facebook felt like the
center of your social life even now
thinking back to how everyone used to
use events makes me feel a little
nostalgic around this time they changed
the name of the site from the Facebook
to just Facebook and bought the
facebook.com domain for
$200,000 2006 was an enormous year in
September they opened up registrations
to the whole world now anyone over the
age of 13 who had a valid email address
could join but this new version of
Facebook that the public saw was very
different because it included a
revolutionary design change something
it's not hyperbolic to say would go on
to change the internet and The Wider
world the newsfeed prior to the newsfeed
Facebook was a static site where if you
wanted to find out what your friends or
family were up to you visited their wall
which lived on their profile page from
there you'd post messages to them and
wait for a response if you didn't do
that you missed out to find information
you basically went to one person's
profile and then another and then
another it was hugely inefficient we
knew we could do better to solve this
the newsfeed aggregated posts and
activities from all of your friends
profiles and collected them together in
one continuous chronological feed we
wanted to deliver 10 million unique
newspapers every single day it was
undoubtedly a major success despite an
initial uproar from many of its users
who didn't expect such a significant
change they were used to one-on-one
discussions not one to everyone
discussions and there were some other
unexpected consequences too say for
example you just went through a breakup
and changed your relationship status to
single now due to the news feed that
life event would suddenly be broadcast
to all your family and friends as well
as many of your partner's family and
friends too bringing what would be for
many an enormous amount of unwanted
attention to a particularly painful
episode in your life we woke up to
hundreds of outraged people groups had
formed in the middle of the night groups
like I hate Facebook and RI is the
devil amidst all that chaos and all that
noise we noticed something unusual even
though everyone said they hated it
engagement had doubled there were more
page views than there ever were before
aggregation feeds might not have been a
new idea and there were already somewhat
comparable examples on other social
media sites such as Flickr however
Facebook's application of this concept
to the way we interact with our friends
was massive especially when they began
applying sorting algorithms later to
determine what content should appear in
our feeds in July 2006 Mark was faced
with a crucial decision when the search
giant Yahoo offered to buy Facebook for
$1 billion an offer which after some
soul searching he eventually turned down
but that was really stressful cuz a lot
of people really thought that we should
sell the company so for a lot of the
folks who joined early on being able to
sell a company for a billion dollars
after a couple years was that was like a
home run right and and it is a home run
right the part that was painful wasn't
wasn't turning down the offer it was the
fact that after that um huge amounts of
the company quit because they didn't
believe in in what we were what we were
doing 2007 is when Facebook began to
demonstrate to The Wider world how much
of a big deal it was going to be this is
the year where we can look back and see
that Mark Zuckerberg was from a business
perspective becoming a highly Savvy
long-term strategist case in point in
April they launched the Facebook
platform this allowed third-party
developers to create applications and
games that ran on Facebook which turned
out to be an incredibly valuable two-way
relationship anyone who's ever worked in
a startup can tell you that the hardest
part of trying to grow a digital
business is getting people to even
notice you exist in particular getting
them to register no one likes signing up
to things and in order to convince them
you need to spend money on marketing so
if you were an indie developer you
either attracted investors to help you
with things like marketing or you were
almost certainly screwed but now
Facebook created a way that software
developers could access users data from
the social graph allowing you to sell
your wares to the largest set of
connected users in the world for game
makers this was enormous if people play
their game on Facebook their friends
would get notified about it in their
news feeds free advertising as I
mentioned I worked in the gaming company
who thrived on this platform our access
to the social graph was absolutely
crucial for our survival Facebook was no
longer just a site it was a platform
with endless different kinds of
applications and games that would keep
people coming back and staying longer by
2012 Zinga the biggest name in Social
gaming on the platform at the time made
up 11% of Facebook's Revenue I'll never
forget this period in London when there
was investor money sloshing around
everywhere looking for the next big
social gaming company I remember
interviewing at one of the Darlings
playfish who just been bought by EA they
were so in need of people with excellent
flash skills they made me an offer on
the spot and then I used that contract
to negotiate a better offer with the
company that I eventually joined the
second major change in November of 2007
was Facebook ads the significance of
this move is one I doubt I need to
expand upon all that much it was a
system that now also granted advertisers
access to the rich data contained in the
social graph so they could Target their
adverts with a level of precision never
seen before age gender region interests
previous purchases you name it four
months later they hired Cheryl Sandberg
to take the role of Chief Operating
Officer Sandberg had previously been
instrumental in growing Google's
advertising business and her movement to
Facebook was a big coup Facebook ads
combined with sandberg's experience is
one of the major factors that led to
Facebook becoming a tech giant according
to the New York Times reporters Shira
Frankl and Cecilia K Cheryl was the
perfect foil for Zuckerberg she oversaw
all the Departments that didn't interest
him policy and communication legal human
resources and revenue creation drawing
on years of public speaking training and
on political Consultants to curate her
public Persona she was the palatable
face of Facebook to investors and the
public it was also in 2007 that
Microsoft invested in Facebook buying
240 million in preferred stock thereby
valuing Facebook as a $5 billion company
at the time this investment was
criticized for being to Cavalier now
it's clear that Microsoft could see what
had been predicted by Tim O'Reilly they
understood the ridiculous power that
comes with having the world's largest
database of real user identities who
through their usage of the platform were
constantly feeding the system with more
and more data about their interests and
behaviors later in 2007 Facebook
introduced Pages a feature that allowed
entities other than personal Prof FS
such as artists Brands and public
figures to create a presence on the
platform we'll be coming back to this
one later in 2008 they launched Facebook
connect which allowed users to sign into
thirdparty sites using their Facebook
login details this integration enabled
other services to utilize information
shared by Facebook and vice versa for
example Spotify used this integration
very effectively allowing users to share
their playlists with friends on Facebook
which in turn drove more traffic back to
Spotify in return Facebook obtained
additional data and was able to provide
an even richer experience for its users
overall this technology effectively made
any third party sites that supported it
an extension of Facebook also in 2008
they introduced a new messaging feature
that provided a way for its users to
speak privately then in 2009 they
introduced what would become the
defining symbol of the platform the like
button the like button almost
immediately became a new indicator of
Social Capital letting you know how much
people appreciated the stuff you posted
shortly after likes would also be used
by Facebook as a vital metric that would
determine what appeared in people's
newsfeeds by June 2009 they announced
publicly that Facebook was now being
used by 250 million people an incredible
Milestone finally in 2010 rounding out
the core experience we generally know
today they introduced groups a feature
that allowed users to invite like-minded
people to groups which could be
collaboratively managed by its members
this enabled people to engage in group
chats which could be shielded from view
if needed by making them private and
that's it an incredible growth story
over a six-year period where each step
widened the possibilities that paved the
way for an even larger Next Step this is
how they managed to become vital not
just to my private and working life but
also those of countless others around
the world so I hope you enjoyed my story
about Facebook how it got started and
where it ended up and I expect for some
of you young whipper snappers out there
a bit of an education no so if you let
me torture this fake out for just a few
more second there are some great books I
want to recommend which help me a lot
when putting this video together the
first and in my opinion the best is
broken code by Jeff harowitz of the Wall
Street Journal released at the end of
2023 kind of a strange name actually
broken code sounds like vaguely negative
anyway then there is an ugly truth by
Cecilia K and Shir Frankle which
collects together numerous accounts from
former employees another is an account
by Roger mcnam who knew Zuckerberg
during the early days it's okay not
essential reading but it has its moments
that one's called
zucked gosh I should actually probably
read these hold on let me just grab my
my phone Kindle My my
fundle
what ah right
um uh yeah right okay uh right you know
what let me just put that
down this does actually bring back some
memories uh just for the sake of being
thorough just a quick addendum to this
video okay there was actually something
that bothered me a little bit in the
early days like no big deal I can be
finicky about these things
right okay so Facebook was an experience
that changed an awful lot during the
first few years and although many of the
changes were positive there were others
that gave me pause for example I
remember scrolling through the news feed
one day and coming across a very simple
but also to me rather unusual statement
Andy Jones likes Budweiser that's that's
it an image of the Budweiser brand with
a like associated with my friend Andy
the funny thing was that since I knew
Andy really well I was pretty certain he
wasn't much of a Budweiser fan I mean
you'll struggle to find anyone in the UK
or Ireland who is the other funny thing
was that since Andy was a work colleague
he just happened to be sitting across
from me at the time so I called him over
Andy what you make of this and I'll
never forget the look of confusion and
Mild frustration on his face when he
read the message I don't remember his
exact explanation for what post he'd
seen that he' liked but what I do
remember was his conclusion and now
they're using me to sell you Budweiser
and he legitimately felt embarrassed by
this Association as would I this was a
feature called social ads initially
launched in 2007 the idea was simple
Brands could post interactive updates
that appeared in the side panel or
Newsfeed and if you made a comment or
liked the message that engagement would
then be broadcast to your friends feeds
this was a popular method of advertising
because research data showed that people
were much more likely to engage with
adverts if they took the form of a
recommendation from your friends as you
can imagine this was not a popular move
in large part because the change had not
been rolled out with any transparency
since people were not asked to give
their consent to be used as adverts many
became a little less trusting and bear
in mind that this was happening during a
time where people were beginning to wake
up to a new reality where their personal
information was being used for the
purpose of targeted advertising across
the internet to further aod trust there
were numerous privacy blunders which
people were becoming more and more used
to even as early as 2007 one really bad
early example was uncovered by the
Privacy activist and blogger Chris seoan
in a nutshell he discovered that even if
your privacy settings were quite tight
so that your personal information could
only be seen by friends it was still
possible to learn deeply personal things
about you using their advanced search
feature say for example you searched for
your neighbor John Smith and limited the
search to the town that you live in boom
there is John Smith then you refine your
search this time including the filter
religion Buddhist oh John Smith's name
no longer pops up I wonder why okay
let's instead change the religion to
Christian ah John's name appeared again
I guess he must be Christian after a
little bit of additional research on
this exploit seoyan eventually realized
that you could bruteforce a lot of
personal information about large numbers
of people including things like the kind
of groups they were signed up to as well
as personal identifiers or Hobbies they
listed on their profile using this
information seoyan demonstrated that one
could say quickly isolate a group of
people in a university who fit this
criteria Christian men interested in
other men Muslim women interested in
other women students who work in local
strip clubs students under the age of 18
who self-identified as being interested
in alcohol Etc it's not hard to see how
this information could be put to very
bad use when seoan published this
particular Revelation it got picked up
by a few different news Publications
eventually leading to Facebook
tightening up their privacy settings you
can still see a comment from one of the
Facebook reps announcing the fix on the
comment section under Sean's original
blog post another even earlier privacy
related outcry was caused by the news
feed itself remember that example I gave
earlier of changing your status to
single and everyone been able to see it
many people thought that this was highly
creepy and there was a very large outcry
so why did they do it well let's return
to that clip I showed earlier by Ruchi
sunvi the then product manager of the
newsfeed even though everyone said they
hated it engagement had doubled we may
as well stamp that phrase into our
memory banks right now even though
everyone said they hated it engagement
had doubled now apologies for pointing
out the obvious here but engagement and
fulfillment are not the same thing if
someone clicks on more stuff that
doesn't necessarily mean they're happier
there are many teams in this video and
this one will run all the way through
nevertheless the outcry was so bad that
Zuckerberg published what was fast
becoming a common feature of the site
the semi- apology blog post calm down
breathe we hear you people are concerned
that non-friends can see too much about
them we're listening to all your
suggestions about how to improve the
product it's brand new and still
evolving and we agree stalking isn't
cool but being able to know what's going
on in your friends lives is okay so if
we return back to 2007 Believe It or Not
we've still not got to the biggest
privacy Scandal of that year beacon
beacon was an advertising program that
thirdparty vendors could sign up to
which allowed your purchases on their
sites to be repurposed into an advert
targeted right back at your friends on
Facebook so what are the consequences of
this when a Facebook user bought his
wife a diamond ring online the surprise
was ruined because Beacon notified all
his friends and his wife about it on
Facebook oh de deer cats out of the bag
this caused absolute uproar because
users were not informed about the change
at any point nor asked for their consent
Beacon was opt out this prompted a
severe online response from users and
privacy Advocates as well as a lot of
critical news coverage regardless
Zuckerberg resisted making changes to
the feature justifying it as a cool
positive way to share your tastes with
others is there any concern you're
turning Facebook into something much
more commercial I actually think that
this makes it less commercial I mean
what would you rather see a banner ad
from Bloomingdales or that one of your
friends bought a scarf well I guess this
shows how difficult it is for a company
like yours to make money through
advertising and protect people's real
privacy and their sense of privacy you
know it it's it might take some work for
us to get this exactly right this is
something that we think is going to be a
really good thing there have to be ads
either way because we have to make money
I mean the we have 400 employees and you
know I mean we have to support all that
and make a profit no one bought this
soon after Zuckerberg then posted
another apology blog entry on Facebook
titled thoughts about Beacon we've made
a lot of mistakes building this feature
but we've made even more with how we've
handled them we simply did a bad job
with this release and I apologize for it
again many were not impressed by this
apology especially because there was no
suggestion Beacon was going to be
discontinued it was merely a bad job
then even worse a researcher named
Stephan Berto public published a blog
post revealing that Beacon tracked users
activity and sent it to Facebook even
when they weren't signed into Facebook a
serious privacy breach even for 2007
eventually in an attempt to put the
whole Fiasco to bed Zuckerberg then
agreed to make Beacon opt in but by then
there was already a class action lawsuit
filed against them which they eventually
settled for $9.5 million in 2009 and
then to coincide with this payout
Facebook finally agreed to discontinue
Beacon entirely in February 2009
Facebook made changes to their terms of
service these changes appeared to say
that Facebook would hold on to users
data even after they deleted their
accounts and that this information could
be used for advertising purposes this
change was reported on by now defunct
blog called the consumerist and sparked
enormous backlash on media attention the
pressure eventually led to Facebook
reverting back to their previous terms
of service but regardless its effect was
to broadcast what looked like a
presumption of permanent ownership over
users personal data in a similar vein
another increasingly unpopular feature
from a privacy point of view was find
friends a service that allowed people to
use their address book of email contacts
to quickly locate their friends which
was much more convenient than searching
for them manually however what users
didn't realize was that the addresses
they were uploading could be stored and
used to build what's referred to as a
shadow profile for those not yet on the
platform where still this data could
potentially be shared with advertisers
too this meant that at the time Facebook
could obtain and benefit from your
personal data even if you actively chose
not to be on Facebook and there we have
it Facebook's early privacy
issues and until a few months later
another black eye for Facebook the
social networking giant has reportedly
revealed the sexual orientation of some
users to advertisers okay the problem
here was that if you were viewing a page
or group related to a specific sexual
orientation and clicked on an ad while
there advertisers could potentially
deduce where you would come from by
looking at the refer URL even if your
profile was set to private but that's
not all and just last week we learned
some of the most popular apps on
Facebook were leaking users information
to advertisers this one was a bigger
deal the Crux of the story was this if
one of your friends was playing a
popular game like Mafia wars or
Farmville even if you never opted to
play the game yourself the games could
still scrape your personal information
and give it away to Fourth party
advertisers it was a problem reported to
have affected tens of millions of users
so why was this possible well in 2010
Facebook released a tool called the open
graph which granted outside developers
access to data available from the social
graph and in order to make sure that the
open graph was adopted it included quite
the personal information giveaway
usernames locations emails birthdays
political Persuasions relationship
status and employment history as well as
the activities posts and likes of one's
friends the open graph puts people at
the center of the web one former
Facebook employee Sandy parakilas warned
at the time that the open graph could be
misused for Mass data harvesting by Bad
actors but claims that her objections
were ignored just store this one away
for later open graph we have not heard
the last of this it's like deja vu we're
always talking about Facebook and
privacy now aside from Beacon and the
open graph you might have noticed that a
few of the errors I've just described
were unforced errors in fact unforced
errors basically came to typify the
platform during this time but why do
they keep happening well partly it's due
to the development ethos that
underpinned Zuckerberg's now Infamous
catchphrase move fast and break things
also known as done is better than
perfect the idea is this when trying to
grow in a highly competitive landscape
it's better to get a feature released as
quickly as you can so that you can
collect data on how it's being used from
there you can use that data to inform
how you refine the feature and make it
better or if it's underperforming kill
it completely and move on in this way
when you fail you fail fast rather than
wasting tons of time and resources
polishing things that are destined to be
dead on arrival however not all features
are created equal the consequence of a
page failing to load is embarrassing for
sure but fairly trivial compared to the
consequences of mishandling your us
users private data however this
distinction does not appear to have been
treated with enough importance by
Facebook and there are innumerable
accounts from former employees
indicating that the company was a total
mess when it came to stability according
to Jeff harowitz bonuses and promotions
were doled out to employees based on how
many features they shipped reviews
incentivized employees to complete
products within 6 months even if it
meant the finished product was only
minimally viable and poorly documented
engineers and data scientists described
living with Perpetual uncertainty about
where user data was being collected and
stored according to Brian Boland a
former vice president in Facebook's
advertising and Partnerships division
building things is way more fun than
making things secure and safe until
there's a regulatory or press fire you
don't deal with it now of course
Facebook stated at the time that privacy
was of the utmost importance to them but
to Rattle off an old cliche it's what
you do not what you say that indicates
where your real priorities lie and with
that in mind let's begin building a
profile of Facebook's actual philosophy
we've already included the phrase even
though everyone hated it engagement had
doubled now let's add done is better
than perfect these are both aspects of
the same general drive to grow as
quickly as possible be in mind that at
the time Facebook was by no means a
guaranteed long-term success and
Zuckerberg was fully aware of this yes
it hit 250 million users but as we'll
see later there was an enormous amount
of growing left to do frenster and
Myspace had already demonstrated what
happened to complacent social media
firms and it was entirely possible that
a new upstart could come along and knock
Facebook out of the game this fear was
even expressed in an internal Manifesto
handed out to employees called the red
book if we don't create the thing that
kills Facebook somebody else will to go
back to Tim O'Reilly's observation in
his famous what is Web 2.0 article the
RAC is on to own certain classes of core
data location identity calendaring of
public events Etc the key word here is
race this was a race and Zuckerberg
understood this better than most he was
in this game to win and the only way to
win was to become so big and so dominant
worldwide you couldn't really be touched
as his co-founder Chris Hughes put it
from our earliest days Mark used the
word domination to describe our
Ambitions and this leads us neatly to
the biggest privacy Scandal during
Facebook's Forma of years a scandal
largely in response to the rise of a new
upstart Twitter founded in 2006 Twitter
began to explode in 2007 going from
20,000 to 60,000 tweets per day its
model was completely different to
Facebook because everything you posted
was public this made it an attractive
platform for celebrities journalists and
organizations who could reach a wide
audience without requiring a prior
connection tweets could go viral to the
world in ways that Facebook posts
couldn't and it was also more suited to
breaking news and real-time coverage of
Live Events too at this moment in time
Twitter was a major competitor that
Facebook needed to clear off the board
so in 2008 Zuckerberg tried to acquire
it however talks quickly broke down due
to disagreements about the valuation of
the company and Twitter decided to carve
out their own path and as Twitter
continued to Skyrocket Zucker Brook
began to realize that the very thing
that had put Facebook on the map being
able to converse with your circle of
friends out of view of the general
public was becoming a limiter to growth
if Facebook users would instead post
their thoughts publicly they'd not only
be able to blow Twitter out of the water
they'd also become even more attractive
to advertisers and third party
developers too when people share more
the world becomes more open and
connected and in a more open world many
of the biggest problems we Face together
will become easier to solve so in
December 2009 they introduced the
Privacy transition tool a pop-up that
appeared in front of all Facebook users
which contained a large and complex set
of privacy controls ostensibly created
to help users tweak their privacy
settings more precisely and if they
wanted to skip all this detail they were
encouraged to press a button that simply
accepted the recommended settings and
then they could get on with their day
but what was not obvious about this was
that Facebook had changed whatever
defaults people had previously set up
information that was supposed to be only
viewable by friends had automatically
been changed to a new setting viewable
by everyone I remembered this moment
really well some pop-up appeared about
some new widget they created where I
could fiddle with privacy settings
that's nice didn't really care too much
because I was already reasonably pleased
with how it worked and it wasn't until
months later that I realized my profile
was now basically public and I'll never
forget how irritated I was when I
finally investigated these new settings
in detail and saw the new defaults I
would never have chosen those settings
had I been presented with them clearly
and it was definitely one of those key
moments for me where I began to regard
Facebook as a suspicious and
untrustworthy company I'd argue that
this specific Scandal was the one that
began seriously altering the general
Public's impression of Facebook it was
no longer a cool site that made a bunch
of dumb mistakes which could be forgiven
it was now a site that we all felt could
be relied upon to intentionally deceive
you for their own benefit the move
seemed too transparently self-serving
for there to be any other explanation we
are here today to urge Facebook's
Creator and CEO Mark Zuckerberg to
revisit this new policy as soon as
possible we believe Facebook should
reverse its policy to begin exploring
guidelines so users know upfront what's
happened do you feel like it's a
backlash or do you feel like you're
violating people's privacy you know
there were real learning points and
turning points along the way in terms of
building things if I could if I knew
what I knew now then then I hope I
wouldn't have made those mistakes but I
can't go back and change the past I can
only do what we think is the right thing
going forward in 2011 the FTC would
ultimately issue an eight-part complaint
against Facebook culminating in an order
to cease these kinds of practices the
resulting settlement forced Facebook to
take a number of different steps to
improve their protection of users
personal data including submitting to
external audits at the time it appeared
that these steps might finally bring
Facebook to heal but since all this was
generating so much bad press Facebook
decided to go in the offensive by hiring
the public relations firm Bon Marell who
came up with a pretty silly scheme
deflect attention away from Facebook by
trying to make other Tech giants look
bad to do this they contacted Tech
bloggers and tried to convince them to
write negative stories about Google
specifically by feeding them a weak
story about one of Google's features
which they said was misusing users
private data and to sweeten the deal
they suggested that if the bloggers did
write these stories they'd help to get
them published in prestigious Outlets
like the Washington Post or Politico one
of the bloggers they emailed was Chris
aoyan the guy who broke the story about
Facebook's search exploit Chris
immediately sensing that something
suspicious was going on emailed back
who's paying for this not paying me but
paying you to which they responded
thanks for the prompt reply I'm afraid I
can't disclose my client yet but all the
information included in this email is
public publicly available any interest
in pursuing this irritated seoyan
published the email exchange and soon
after USA Today finally linked it back
to Facebook causing them a significant
amount of embarrassment since the scheme
was a pretty hamfisted one they really
thought it was okay to tell a journalist
don't worry I'll write your story for
you no one will know what do that make
you feel like when you get this call
saying hey I'm going to I'm going to let
you be a fake journalist for a day so I
was a little bit shocked that that
Facebook's PR firm acting on behalf of
Facebook thought that I would go along
you know with their pitch and and attack
one of their competitors not for a
legitimate privacy problem but for
something that was you know really not
bothering anyone this is not the last
time Facebook will try to do something
like this anyway this pretty much
concludes what I think of as phase one
of Facebook's privacy misadventure which
very much sets the stage for Phase 2 but
for now let's move on so if we stop for
a second and look at our profile so far
we've addressed Facebook's goal of
achieving massive growth as fast as
possible and I've mentioned their
working practice Mantra that causes
constant sloppiness these are major
factors in their decision-making for
sure but there's another core Factor
I've not yet included which it's time to
address corporate virtue I've worked in
a lot of companies over the years and
I've witnessed on quite a few occasions
how proposals for new directions can be
framed as acts of virtue something
altruistic not self- serving these
proposals are often accompanied by a
whipping up of employees to get on board
and sometimes when these proposals get
enough traction and Achieve enough Mass
self-d delusion they can give birth to
truly terrible decisions that that
baffle observers on the outside the need
to be seen to be virtuous is especially
true for social media companies who
because they serve people can't justify
their existence on Purely
self-interested grounds they can't say
for example our goal is to grow so fast
that we acquire the world's Data before
anyone else does no they need to
convince those within and without that
there's a higher moral principle
underpinning their actions Facebook's
statement of virtue their mission so to
speak was at this time to make the world
more open and connected a value
consistently posited as the ultimate
good because when people are connected
they're opened up to the world of
information which ultimately empowers
them it's not an insane thing to say in
the abstract being connected to networks
of friends has clearly been beneficial
for hundreds of millions of people but
when the idea of connection is
positioned as the ultimate good we begin
to see problems later in this video
we'll see utterly catastrophic problems
but for now we're still only talking
about privacy we're still in the playpen
folks so you might be thinking okay but
where's this internal Mass self-
delusion well helpfully an internal me
called The Ugly written by Andrew
Bosworth one of the founding members of
Facebook lays that bear it was an
attempt to pump up employees who are
beginning to feel the weight of external
criticism in the memo he reminds them of
their core Mission connecting people and
then goes on to boldly state that this
mission is so important it justifies
many of the Privacy scandals we just
looked at maybe it costs a Life by
exposing someone to bullies maybe
someone dies in a terrorist attack
coordinated on our tools and still we
connect people The Ugly Truth is that we
believe in connecting people so so
deeply that anything that allows us to
connect people more often is de facto
good and that's why all the work we do
in growth is Justified all the
questionable contact and porting
practices all the subtle language that
helps people stay searchable by friends
all of the work we do to bring more
communication in anyway this statement
of corporate virtue Connecting People is
the ultimate good has to be added to our
profile this one is the rocket fuel
because it sanctions the first two
statements and while we're on the topic
of corporate virtue things were about to
get bit more complicated when in 2012
Facebook became a public company their
initial public offering being one of the
most anticipated in history our mission
isn't to be a public company our mission
is to make the world more open and
connected from this point onwards when
Mark made decisions there'd now be
shareholders expecting those decisions
to deliver returns anyway the statements
of virtue just kept on coming remember
that internal Manifesto I mentioned a
minute ago the one they handed out to
employees called the Red Book well it
contained a pretty prophetic statement
changing how people communicate will
always change the world apart from being
a bit silly and self-aggrandizing this
statement also contained an obvious
logical flaw you know change isn't
always good and man was Facebook about
to
change starting around 2011 I began to
notice something quite concerning my
closer friends increasingly seemed to be
routinely ignoring any of the things
things I posted especially when they
were think pieces ideas about larger
topics I was interested in that I wanted
to get feedback on and on the flip side
I was becoming more more disappointed by
how others seem to be changing what they
shared too posts were rarely
conversational anymore and were
increasingly becoming onliners TR jokes
and Toothless observations memes
trivialities or just links to YouTube
videos with no commentary at the time I
interpreted this as a general lack of
interest in actual conversation and an
increasing tendency to be lazy this came
to a head in 2013 when I took a career
break moving to Glasgow to study a
masters in composition so once again I
found myself in a new city where I
didn't know anyone and once again I
tried to take some refuge in Facebook
but this time it was totally different
almost no one saw anything I posted and
I began to develop a mild hang-up about
it sometimes I get no response from
anyone it wasn't until I asked one of my
friends straight up are you not seeing
the stuff I'm posting anymore his
response what stuff incidentally while
making this video I looked back over
some of my posts after this period which
didn't take long because there are only
a handful of them and noticed an
interesting one from 2018 a link to a
YouTube video I just released a comic
review of the notation app seus on
YouTube this was my first experience of
a properly viral hit seen by hundreds of
thousands of people within the first
week of its release on Facebook it's
total as of today is 13 likes and five
comments which was high for me all of
the comments bar one are from immediate
family members none of the hundred or so
composers or music teachers I'm
connected to on Facebook saw it there
all of them saw it on YouTube I don't
know when it happened but Facebook made
a decision at some point that Martin
Keri is as boring as hell sent him right
to the back of the queue every time but
here's the thing I wasn't the only
person experiencing this my assumptions
that my friends were getting sick of me
were largely wrong at least I hope so
and my perception that people were
becoming lazier causing them to post
Dumber stuff was also Off the Mark too
so what was going on well the main
reason was that the news feed kept
changing at a rapid Pace initially it
was Guided by a simple algorithm called
Edge ranking which decided what content
you should see its purpose was to
prioritize posts by the friends it
deemed were most likely to be important
to you judged in large part by how much
you engaged with them over time though
Edge rank was gradually replaced with
more sophisticated machine learning
driven algorithms which started to
optimize towards maximizing engagement
and the amount of time you spent on the
platform the justification being more
time equals more good the introduction
of the like button supercharged this
situation people began to start thinking
of their posts in terms of how
successful they were on Faceook Facebook
now had a powerful metric to help them
determine what posts should be boosted
now since my posts were only intended
for a few people and therefore didn't
get much engagement compared to more
widely appealing memes and onliners this
changed my entire feeling about what
Facebook was for it made me feel like I
was now kind of in competition for
attention the most successful thing I
ever posted on Facebook was a really
simple observation about some workspace
jargon I noticed people were beginning
to use those who saw this post started
chiming in with examples of workspace
jargon they found agonizing and the post
blew up up for days people commented on
it and it was a nice feeling for as long
as it lasted but what's the lesson here
think like an editorial team think of
things to say that will'll draw people
in that will get clicks what's the point
I just want to talk to my friends it's
too much work but there were plenty of
people who did get drawn into this
competition and many of them started
learning from the algorithm discovering
new techniques that tended to get more
engagement my absolute least favorite of
these and I know this is not an original
observation is what I'm going to call
the living the High Life post you and
your friends on a yacht drinking
champagne glamour shots in exotic
locations posts where you allude to how
successful you are now early on I was a
little bit guilty of this last one I
definitely bragged a little bit about
things I thought were impressive until I
read a blog post titled seven ways to be
insufferable on Facebook by Tim Urban
creator of wait but why his main
observation was that there are
fundamentally two different kinds of
Facebook post those you post for other
people and those you post for you let me
give a few examples heading to Hawaii
with the love of my life for a month of
relax ation yoga and shopping need to be
careful though 10K can disappear like
that what's the purpose of this post
well to craft an image of yourself so
that others are jealous of you just got
my degree distinction baby this second
example looked at through Tim Urban's
critical lens was a bit of an eye opener
for me because I recognized that I was
slightly guilty of doing this although I
hadn't specifically posted my degree
results which were excellent I
definitely posted other achievement
Milestones over the years now in one
respect so what I think a legitimate
life achievement should be celebrated
because they don't happen every day and
it's understandable that you'd want to
share them with loved ones and friends
even if you are kind of boasting a
little bit but this blog was now forcing
me to confront an awkward problem I
legitimately had not considered until
then unintentional harm what if one of
my friends was having a hard time and
especially bad breakup flunking out of
University losing their job a serious B
of depression Etc and at their worst
moment they suddenly see my post about
how well things are supposedly going for
me which acts as a punch in the stomach
for them and the worst part is I
wouldn't know I'd done it the moment I
started pulling that thread I realized
social media had a lot more serious
consequences than ID first imagined
we'll get back to this topic later there
were plenty of other major social
changes happening too some of which were
natural Evolutions that can't be blamed
on Facebook for example that moment when
you get a friend request from your mom I
remember jumping on a chat with my three
brothers to discuss how we were going to
handle this ending with us all jointly
realizing that like we're hardly going
to reject a friend request from our mom
it turns out that most of the people
people we you were also coming to the
same conclusion and Bam the older
generation are all suddenly here all
suddenly commenting on our posts and
browsing with mild concern through the
photos we've been tagged in photos of
our nights out gigs we played in Crazy
goth clubs with naked people dancing
around another thing that affected
Facebook usage were the horror stories
we kept reading about where people got
fired from their jobs because they
didn't realize the things they thought
were private were actually public
including posts where they complained
about how much they hated their boss a
famous incident of social media foot
shooting occurred when a college
students who appeared in the movie Borat
sued the filmmakers in the movie they've
been seeing guzzling booze and making
racist remarks which they argued was an
unfair protrayal that caused them
significant harm including damage to
their chances of seeking employment as
part of the filmmaker's defense they
submitted images posted publicly on the
plaintiff's Facebook page which showed
them engaging in similar kinds of boozy
Behavior the lawsuit was ultimately
unsuccessful for various reasons but it
taught the world a valuable lesson
curate your profiles carefully it could
be argued that all people had to do was
edit their pracy settings to be more
strict but Facebook's privacy settings
were miserably designed and hidden away
where you often wouldn't go looking bad
design aside though after the Privacy
transition tool debacle in 2009 we
hadn't much faith that private stuff
would remain private so we were all just
much more cautious about what we shared
especially given that our extended
families and work colleagues were all
now in here with us as for the Facebook
team well the changes kept on coming in
2012 to the surprise of absolutely no
one Facebook introduced ads directly
into the news feed these were called
sponsored stories initially they didn't
perform very well and annoyed
advertisers who weren't seeing the
returns they expected with some becoming
completely disillusioned stating that
they were fundamentally some of the
worst performing ad units on the web in
order to fix this situation Facebook
stepped up their investment in the
burgeoning field of machine learning one
team led by a former Microsoft AI
specialist hen quano Candela started
producing some very powerful results by
taking sophisticated user
classifications for example men in their
early 30s who like bonjovi ice cream and
rubby and combining them with Brute
Force machine learning techniques that
started by simply aiming everything at
everyone and continuously optimizing the
results over time to maximize
conversions and as the money started
rolling in the team continuously tested
hundreds of machine learning variants to
see which would make the most money and
these tweaks mattered a successful tweak
could mean additional hundreds of
millions of dollars in Revenue then
because these successes were so
significant they created a tool called
FB learner flow which allowed
unspecialized coders around the company
to launch machine learning experiments
on other parts of Facebook including the
newsfeed but FB learner flow was a black
box with many Engineers having no clue
what the underlying machine learning
technology was actually doing one former
employee referred to this as giving
rocket launchers to 25-year-old
Engineers this would go on to create a
situation where nobody really knew why
or how things were appearing in people's
feeds because the rules that governed
them were total abstractions only
understood by the machine learning
algorithms themselves setting the stage
for some major crises down the line
getting back to 2012 in May another
change came that had a dramatic effect
on news outlets as well as innumerable
other businesses who'd created a
Facebook Presence by creating a page to
promote their services the change was
the introduction of promoted posts which
allowed anyone running a page to pay in
order to boost their views bear in mind
that Facebook had originally built pages
to produce a win-win situation Facebook
benefits from diversity of content which
keeps people there for longer news
outlets and other businesses benefit
because if they do a good job they can
grow Their audience at a rate that was
wasn't possible before once that benefit
was established many news outfits small
medium and large started dedicating
their efforts and resources into growing
a Facebook presence becoming more and
more reliant on Facebook as a source of
traffic and revenue they became
committed but promoted posts turned out
to be a massive rug pull only 2 months
after it was launched the reach of
organic posts meaning posts you don't
pay for started rapidly declining
leading to numerous accusations that
Facebook had intentionally engineered
this decline to force page owners to pay
in order to maintain their reach
the reality was a bit more complicated
than this though for example with more
and more news outlets entering into the
space the competition to appear on users
feeds was getting ever more Fierce and
those running Pages couldn't reasonably
have expected stable growth forever
under those conditions however the
timing speed and scale of the decline of
non-paid posts was quite suspicious a
tech crunch article from around this
period reported a 40% decline of average
non-paid posts across the board over the
duration of only 4 months as well as an
unconvincing response from Facebook
representa about why this was happening
the massive reduction in organic traffic
sent Untold numbers of Indie news
outlets scrambling to recalibrate their
budgets or simply going out of business
and on the consumer side we saw less
from the pages we'd intentionally signed
up to and more promoted posts we didn't
care about as well as a slew of annoying
ads that were often bafflingly
irrelevant incidentally in 2011 Facebook
did something similar with respect to
gaming by instituting a 30% tax on all
revenue earned on the platform the
social gaming company I worked for at
the time couldn't recover from this tax
and eventually folded but it wasn't just
indie games and news outlets celebrities
musicians and public figures who built
up a respectable audience were also
having an increasingly hard time
actually reaching them organically
moreover Facebook had its own strange
rules that dictated what people saw and
what went viral which changed constantly
according to criteria no one understood
this situation persists even today and
this leads us to the trash ever
increasing numbers of clickbait Articles
and spam much of which was now being
force fed us via our news feeds a
problem made worse as Facebook altered
its mechanics to maximize the effects of
virality removing the limits for how
many friends you could make in one day
removing the limits for how many places
you could cross promote the same article
moves that were gifts to spammers who
could piggy back off posts that had
already gone viral in the past by simply
copying and reposting them to as many
people in as many different spaces as
they wanted this meant not only that we
saw more and more trash but that we kept
seeing the same trash over and over
again learn weird tricks that will help
you lose weight this weird trick helps
cure diabetes in 30 days you'll find out
how these tasty pastries contain a real
ingredient that reverses diabetes I do
not know how long this video will be
online your total investment today is
now
$19.99 listen don't even decide right
now as social media became more and more
prevalent a new term began to be used in
research and media coverage brain
hacking the practice of introducing
mechanics that encourage frequent use
which maximiz izes the potential for
capturing people's attention these
included automatic emails that notified
you constantly when any type of thing
happened someone liking your post for
example infinite scroll which keeps
loading more content so you never get
the feeling you've reached any kind of
checkpoint where you can catch your
breath videos that play automatically in
your feed which maximizes the chance of
catching your attention and my least
favorite annoying red notification
medallions all over the place that never
go away even if you check your
notifications and clear them they still
go R again almost immediately to tell
you something
anything just so you click on them and
lose a few more minutes out of your day
Facebook didn't invent half of these
techniques of course but they employed
basically all of them in combination
they made the experience more exhausting
and unbelievably less fulfilling so all
of this taken together the notifications
the trash the adverts the insecurity
about privacy the engagement patterns
and algorithm changes that rewarded
either trivial or downright toxic posts
it left me and many others like me to
suddenly find that there wasn't very
much for us on Facebook anymore it had
distanced me from my friends who didn't
see anything I posted and vice versa my
newsfeed was full of random crap I
couldn't express myself honestly because
I couldn't quite trust that Facebook
wouldn't trick me into making it public
and even when I did want to post
something the new engagement rules that
assigned to score to my efforts were
pushing me towards inan oneliner ISM
that moment when I began my masters in
Glasgow with the crazy Darkness at 300
p.m. not having made any friends yet
doing the long-distance relationship
thing with my now wife who was still
working in London at the time that's
when I decided that Facebook was no
longer a good place to be I preferred to
just deal with the dark Ness and the
loneliness on my own without Facebook
wearing me down further with its
Relentless mission to serve me nothing
but depressing irrelevant garbage and so
I became one of the zombie users of
Facebook logging in just to check to see
if I had any messages and then leaving
real quick and I wasn't the only one in
2013 according to an article in the
information the sharing of original
personal posts had declined by 21% and a
year later by a further 16% it was now
much more of a Content consumption site
which prioritized lowquality videos and
also news and just one last thing about
change while I was putting this video
together I decided to look back over my
old timeline starting right at the
beginning and what I found was really
weird and a little bit sad too
conversations that no longer make any
sense because the people I had them with
have since left the platform so it's
often just my responses it reads like
I'm having a mental breakdown talking to
myself and this led me to a chilling
realization for me all I have to look
forward to is more of this Facebook is
eventually going to become a mortuary a
reminder of all my friends and family
who've either left or died where the
evidence of our inter actions are then
scrubbed away like a Soviet style
rewriting of History oh look another ad
deceased likes Budweiser that's not
something I want to experience and
rather than leaving it up in Zombie form
I've now decided to cross the point of
no return and delete my account entirely
that said it was really 2013 where my
story with Facebook ended if this is
where it all ended the story would be
one of a wasted opportunity and a major
disappointment but Facebook would roll
on without me and instead the story
would go from disappointment to outright
tragedy
so let's begin this part of the story
with a quick look at how Facebook was
broadly perceived by the public in the
early 2010s you see even though more and
more people were becoming frustrated
with Facebook many still viewed it
through a positive lens especially
during the Arab Spring Uprising where
activists in Tunisia and Egypt used it
to organize protest events and provide
the public with information that
contradicted the narratives provided by
official state media the success of the
uprisings as well as the part that
social media had to play in them was
widely reported around the world one of
the key organizers of the Egyptian
protests yel gim praised Facebook for
making the uprising possible you're
giving Facebook a lot of credit for
this yeah for sure I want to meet mark
zuker one day and thank him actually the
idea that Facebook could help people
overcome censorship and produce positive
change made an impression on a large
number of people although Facebook had
become something that was viewed with
skepticism by civic-minded observers the
Arab Spring was an encouraging sign that
convinced some highly talented leaders
to overcome their skepticism and join
the company applying their skills to
issues around security privacy
protection of minors counterterrorism
and More in 2010 Zuckerberg was named
times Person of the Year in 2012 Obama's
re-election campaign once again
successfully demonstrated the pioneering
use of social media especially Facebook
to reach voters Zuckerberg and Obama
were seen together often around this
time most notably during a town hall
meeting at Facebook's headquarters in
Palo Alto for sure Obama's unique Global
popularity aided the perception that
Facebook was a tool for good in the
Democratic process part of what makes
for a healthy democracy is when you've
got citizens who are informed who are
engaged and what Facebook allows us to
do is make sure this isn't just a
one-way conversation Facebook's
headquarters were buzzing with experts
and researchers looking to understand
whatever they could about how the
platform affected society and the
everchanging nature of online Behavior
much of this was done specifically to
spot and avoid risks and a lot of
research was published internally for
other employees to read and act upon
unexpected issues occurred all the time
big and small and it was the job of
various different teams to identify
problems and suggest Solutions before
they got out of hand the only problem
was that within the corporate structure
which was very much tied to improvements
in core metrics many of these
civic-minded employees felt that they
were second-class citizens compared to
the teams tasked with achieving rapid
growth it's much easier to demonstrate
that you brought in more users than it
is to demonstrate that you prevented
something bad from happening to
illustrate let's return to the issue of
trash content a problem that was
continuously growing throughout the
early 2010s if you clicked on a junk
science article you'd be recommended not
just more from the same authors but
related pages that also pedal junk
science Facebook was so heavy-handed
with these kinds of recommendations that
many began to game the system by setting
up multiple pages that all pedal the the
same type of content which had a
multiplier effect unbeknownst to
Facebook that sent overall views for
trash Peddlers into the stratosphere
this was exacerbated by the blatant
plagiarism I mentioned earlier if you'd
know Scruples you could simply find a
page with a large following and start
copying and pasting its most viral
content on your page as well as viral
content from Twitter Youtube or Reddit
viral content always has high potential
to go viral again and again so with
Facebook failing to adequately enforce
rules against plagiarism while
simultaneously supercharging anything
that went viral you had the perfect
environment for trash easy High rewards
no punishment one of the best examples
of this were the infamous troll Farms
run in large part by teenagers in
Macedonia through trial and error these
teenagers had managed to figure out how
to game Facebook's engagement metrics
and were making ad money Handover fist
by simply reposting whatever viral trash
they could lay their hands on they
demasked an enormous number of pages
with high followings contributing to a
situation where the top 10 pages for
popular subjects were often LED by TR
Farm creators rather than legitimate
ones TR Farms overwhelmingly dominated
the top 20 most popular Christian Pages
including the most popular page of all
be happy enjoy life they also dominated
the top 20 Pages aimed at
African-Americans including the top page
my baby daddy Ang according to a report
by the data scientist Jeff Allen our
platform has given the largest voice in
the Christian American Community to
handful of Bad actors who based on their
media production practices have never
been to church our platform has given
the largest voice in the
African-American Community to a handful
of Bad actors who based on their media
production practices have never had an
interaction with an African-American
adding more fuel to the fire Facebook
made additional tweaks to their
algorithm giving more weight to comments
and emojis like the angry face this
meant that if you saw content that made
you really angry and you decided to
comment on it getting into a little
argument along the way you were more
likely to see content from that same
Source again and since Facebook didn't
pay enough attention to what was
actually taking place on their platform
you users's anger appeared to them to be
simply an improvement in engagement an
abstraction on an engineer's analytics
dashboard where still this produced a
situation where tribal polarizing
content which tended to get more likes
ended up drowning out moderate
thoughtful content while gim the Arab
Spring organizer we saw earlier himself
became very worried about these problems
in later years if you increase the tone
of your posts and become more
exclusionary against uh your opponents
you're going to get more distribution so
if I call my opponents uh names my tribe
is happy and celebrating this was the
situation at Facebook when primaries
were taking place in the runup to the
2016 US election more and more content
about either Trump Bernie Sanders or
Hillary Clinton started to go viral and
since trash content tended to make
people argue more highly partisan
content disinformation or rage bait
tended to get more engagement which in
turn made it more likely to go viral and
therefore more likely to be recycled by
nihilistic Macedonian teenagers half a
world away one story had Hillary Clinton
dying mid campaign and being replaced
with a doppelganger another saw the pope
endorsing Trump for president to make
matters even worse there was another
more Sinister way that Macedonian
teenagers could make money from their
Pages they could sell them along with
their massive followings to third
parties third parties whose identities
and motivations were a mystery we'll
come back to this in a moment other
beneficiaries of Facebook's
recommendation setup were Radical
organizations who learned that they
could draw big audiences by first luring
them in with milder more acceptable news
Pages knowing that they'd then be
recommended far more extreme Pages which
they also owned an efficient Mass funnel
for Speedy radicalization this technique
was exploited successfully by all kinds
of extremist organizations including
pre-co antivaxer groups and Isis highly
populist politicians like Narendra Modi
in India and duerte in the Philippines
had also found this new variant of
Facebook to be an excellent platform for
amplifying hateful rhetoric in the
leadup to their elections it later
became clear that misinformation
campaigns have been run successfully in
elections in turkey and Indonesia too
recommendations aside though Facebook's
targeted advertising capabilities also
became more prevalent in political
campaigns in 2013 a company called
aggregate IQ was set up to help
political campaigns understand and
Target specific voter segments more
effectively through voter Behavior
Analysis demographic studies and
predictive modeling by integrating this
data with Facebook's advertising systems
they claimed to be able to aim political
messages at highly specific target
audience much more effectively than had
been previously possible from 2015 to
2016 during the brexit referendum in
Britain aggregate IQ began working with
four different vote leave campaigns with
the official campaign dedicating 40% of
its budget to them the leave campaign's
most successful ads spread incorrect
assertions about the cost of EU
membership as well as misleading
statements about immigration and
National sovereignty when Britain
ultimately voted to leave the EU
aggregate IQ took as much credit as they
could on their website they proudly
posted a quote from the leave campaign's
Chief strategist Dominic Cummings
without a doubt the vote Leaf campaign
owes a great deal of its success to the
work of aggregate IQ we couldn't have
done it without them anyway we finally
come to that point in the video I know
you've all been waiting for where we
discussed the 2016 US election which
produced arguably the most famous of
Facebook's black eyes things are
momentarily going to get a bit
complicated here because there were
actually four different controversial
factors of play which are all related
but also distinctly different in many
ways this is the moment when all of
Facebook's chickens came home to roost
the first factor is that Facebook had
been developing advertising services to
sell to political campaigns which
included dedicated assistance from
Facebook employees an obvious move given
the amount of money invested in
advertising during election years these
Services were offered to both the
Clinton and Trump campaigns but whereas
the Clinton campaign largely turned down
the offer the Trump campaign took full
advantage of it the second Factor was
Facebook's evolving attitude towards
news you see in the Years leading up to
the election Zuckerberg had been
increasing increasingly insisting that
they were a completely neutral platform
this was largely in response to
accusations from conservative
politicians and news outlets that
Facebook had a left-leaning bias
Zuckerberg's chumminess with Obama as
well as sandberg's involvement with the
Clinton campaign only helped to fuel
these accusations with Trump ramping up
anger about media bias throughout 2015
and 2016 this pressure became more
pronounced but then in May 2016 a
scandal appeared out of nowhere in the
form of a Gizmodo article titled former
Facebook workers we routinely suppressed
conservative news in the article an
anonymous Facebook employee described
his frustrations working on a Content
curation team who he said regularly
removed news about conservative
politicians from Facebook's trending
topics section given that the 2016
election was only 6 months away this
story generated a massive outcry of
conservative anger towards Facebook in
response the trending topics team were
let go and Zuckerberg cracked down on
all kinds of content curation then much
to the disappointment of many Facebook
employees influential conservatives
including Glenn Beck and Tucker Carlson
were invited to meet Zuckerberg at
Facebook's campus so he could assure
them of their neutrality after this the
whole company was put on notice from now
on automated trending content was King
this leads us to the third factor which
I've already mentioned the algorithm
changes fueling the spread of polarizing
content which in combination with now
completely unmoderated news meant that
Americans were far more likely to see
content that was trashy unsubstantiated
crash or simply just untrue Hillary
Clinton had a secret child out of
wedlock Hillary Clinton coordinated a
domestic terror attack on the US Etc and
of course this content would then be
copied and pasted by troll Farms
including our Pals the Macedonian
teenagers which gave the most polarizing
content second third fourth and fifth
lives it wasn't all just alt-right fake
news either some fake news aimed to
bolster Hillary's chances all in all in
the 3 months leading up to the election
fake news articles favoring Trump were
shared 30 million times on Facebook
whereas those favoring Clinton were
shared 8 million times the number of
people who saw these shared posts were
in the multiple hundreds of millions
later it was reported that over half of
American adults who saw fake news said
they believed the stories at the time
groups also played a big part in
spreading misinformation too A friend of
mine cat who was studying misinformation
in the leadup to the election joined
multiple different Trump groups to keep
an eye on them soon after Facebook
started recommending those same groups
to her family and friends pointing out
helpfully that she was in them and then
there's the fourth Factor Russia let's
just give a little backstory here in
2011 protests against Vladimir Putin
were breaking out all over the Russian
Federation inspired in large part by
Alexi noval who used social media to
organize protest events this prompted
Putin to launch a counter offensive to
disrupt the protesters ability to
organize online and interfere with their
Communications in general an investment
into a new type of information Warfare
where sewing confusion was the main goal
in addition to this he publicly accused
accused the then Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton for having run an
influence operation aimed at fueling the
protests in Russia you know Russian
voters deserve a full investigation of
all credible reports of electoral fraud
and manipulation later on it was
reported that a US spy overheard a
Russian military intelligence officer
stating that they were going to get
Clinton back for what she had done now
when we think of the 2016 election and
Russia we think of hackers and that's
certainly not Off the Mark traditional
hacking did play a significant role in
early 2015 Facebook's threat
intelligence team discovered that
Russian hackers were trying to gain
access to the accounts of figures
involved in the upcoming US election
then a few months later us cyber
security firms published a report
claiming that hackers with ties to
Russia had successfully hacked the email
accounts of various senior figures in
the Democratic Convention soon after a
threat detection Analyst at Facebook
named Ned Moren used the information in
these reports to uncover a Facebook page
called DC leaks which he suspected was
linked to the email hack and so he began
to keep a close eye on DC leaks by
monitoring their activities including
reading their private instant messages
from this he discovered that the hackers
were contacting us journalists on
Facebook and leaking emails directly to
them in order to embarrass the Clinton
campaign at this point Trump would then
issue one of the more astonishing
statements of the campaign because it
shows how little respect they have for
our country when they would hack into a
major party but it would be interesting
to see I I will tell you this Russia if
you're listening I hope you're able to
find the
30,000 emails that are missing I think
you will probably be rewarded mightily
by our press once Moren had confirmed
his findings he then sent reports about
the problem up the chain of command
intended to eventually arrive at the
desk of one of the then leaders of the
company Elliot trage the VP of Global
Communications and public policy shr is
an interesting individual most accounts
I've read paint him as a domineering
company man if I press a like button on
a brand that could pop up as a sponsored
story I might not know about it I
certainly wouldn't necessarily agree to
it well but when you when you press a
like button on a on a brand you're
saying I like this I like saying I
advertise
this I would you're asking a profound
question what's advertising on the
Facebook system I'm affirmatively
communicating that I'm associ
myself with whatever I'm liking sh will
pop up a few more times in this video
however for now it will suffice to say
that the Russian hacking report intended
for him did not appear to reach either
Zuckerberg or Sandberg it has been
suggested numerous times that
Zuckerberg's strong resistance to
curating political content acted as a
disincentive for top leaders to bring
this kind of information to him now just
in case you didn't know I should
probably mention that Trump went on to
win that particular election but even
before that happened stories were were
already emerging about Facebook due to
the amount of lies and polarizing
content people were experiencing on the
platform soon after the election
Zuckerberg was asked about the fake news
problem his answer made headlines around
the world you've been getting a lot of
push back from people who feel that you
distorted the way that people perceived
the information during the course of the
campaign because you didn't filter out
enough fake stories that might have been
published simply to gain traction and
sell advertising you know I've seen some
of the stories that you're talking about
around this election I think uh the the
idea that fake news on Facebook influenc
the the election in any way I think is a
pretty crazy idea soon after this when
Zuckerberg finally found out about the
Russian hacking taking place on Facebook
he was reported to have said oh how did
we miss this it's not exactly clear how
he didn't know about it and there's
never been a transparent explanation as
to where exactly in the chain the
communication broke down moreover it was
reported that Facebook dragged their
feet on the idea of disclosing their
findings to the public because they knew
how damning the story would be now when
it comes to Russian hackers trying to G
access to high-profile accounts or
trying to disseminate hacked information
this is the good oldfashioned stuff the
kind of hacking that Facebook were used
to and which once identified could be
prevented however hacking was only the
tip of the iceberg Ned morren and his
boss Alex Stamos who've been trying to
sound the alarm about Russian meddling
for months both believed there was much
more going on than just hacking later
they would tell journalists that their
fears were largely dismissed by shr who
they believed was taking direction from
Sandberg herself everyone seemed to want
the story to go away but it wouldn't die
finally an article published by Time
magazine in 2017 blew the story wide
open confirming what Stamos had been
warning about for months that a
russian-backed campaign of
disinformation had been employed on
Twitter and Facebook in order to
influence the outcome of the election
this pressured both us intelligence
agencies and Facebook to work together
to uncover the extent of the
interference prompting Zuckerberg and
sber to give the thumbs up to Moren and
Stamos to finally uncover what had
actually taken place on their platform
and after a few weeks of searching they
got their answer the main culs were a
group known as the internet research
agency which was run out of St
Petersburg they weren't using some
hypers sophisticated form of hacking no
they were using the exact same tactics
as the Macedonian teenagers troll
farming building up numerous pages with
names like secured borders all sharing
the same content in order to game
Facebook's engagement algorithms
spreading highly polarizing content on
key voter issues which drove people
insane and made them argue which
Facebook then misrecognized as virtuous
engagement and boosted even further in
order to siphon as many voters away from
Clinton as possible the pages favored
not just Trump but also Bernie Sanders a
rather clever tactic to spread
bitterness among more left-leaning
voters where still Russian troll farmers
were using Facebook's own advertising
system to buy cheap page like ads which
as the name suggests encourages people
to like your page and once they do this
they'll start seeing more of your
content in their feeds an incredibly
cheap way of scaling up so your
disinformation articles and memes are
much more likely to go viral organically
and to cap it all off when anything the
Russian troll Farmers posted went viral
you could be sure that other troll
Farmers would plagiarize it for ad
Revenue including our dear old friends
the Macedonian teenagers when this
report was delivered to Facebook's
leadership as well as us intelligence
agencies they were appalled it turned
out the internet research agency owned
120 different pages and it posted
880,000 pieces of content reaching in
total 126 million Americans the exact
degree to which the Russian
disinformation campaign contributed to
Trump's election is unknown but when
this report was released to the public
it set off an Unholy Firestorm of bad PR
for the company it also prompted a
reasonably new question in the minds of
many people a question that has dogged
the company ever since is Facebook a net
bad for the world hearings on social
media manipulation began in Autumn 2017
which was a by representatives from
Twitter YouTube and Facebook separately
Cheryl Sandberg visited Washington to
discuss steps Facebook could take to
prevent such incidents in the future
then prepare yourselves for Des shja Vu
here Elliot trage directed a PR company
called definers public affairs to help
navigate all the bad press who in turn
began publishing news articles to try
and spread the blame in particular
towards Google again they also looked
for ways to discredit George Soros when
he became critical of Facebook too just
keep that in your head a moment longer
as for Ned Moren and his boss Alex
Stamos they were dispirited throughout
this entire ordeal they tried to raise
the alarm but had largely been ignored
however they did have at least one
moment of light they discovered that a
coordinated Russian attack was taking
place to disrupt France's upcoming
election but this time they were able to
tip off the French authorities in
advance this meant that when the hackers
suddenly released 20,000 emails from the
Emanuel macron campaign just 2 days
before the election security officials
were able to immediately inform the
public where the hacks had come from
which led to news outlets advising
voters not to believe what they read
this was an example of where Facebook
could do good as long as Executives like
shr Zuckerberg and Sandberg allowed them
to but then in 2018 just when we thought
this issue was beginning to wind down
unbelievably almost inconceivably it
actually managed to get worse that's
right there's actually a fifth Factor
let's wind back for a second to
understand how it happened remember
earlier I described numerous scandals
related to the open graph and how a
granted third-party Developers far too
much access to users personal data well
in 2014 an academic named Alexander
kogan accessed the open graph to plug
into an app he had developed called this
is your Digital Life the app was
presented as a personality quiz and a
collected personal data from users who
installed it almost 300,000 Facebook
users participated in this quiz from
which kogan was able to extract not just
their data but also that of their
friends ballooning the overall data set
to almost 90 million people kogen shared
this data set with a company called
called Cambridge analytica whose trade
was to create what they called
psychographic profiles of Voters in
order to Target them with personalized
political messages then we add a unique
extra layer of data about personality
decision-making and motivation this
creates an unparalleled rich and
detailed view of Voters and the issues
they care about we call this behavioral
microt targeting our techniques are
working across the globe from local
elections to the US 2016 presidential
race Cambridge analytica then Vice
President Steve Bannon eventually left
his position to become the chief
executive of Trump's 2016 election
campaign he then hired Cambridge
analytica to come work for the campaign
and produce targeted advertising when
the New York Times and observer in
London broke the story that Facebook had
allowed users private data to be stolen
and that this data was then utilized by
the Trump campaign for political
advertising the world's media went into
a frenzy and it wasn't long before
politicians were insisting that
Zuckerberg himself testify before
Congress about this in the UK the
Scandal had an interesting counterpart
when it was reported that Cambridge
analytica had extremely close ties to
aggregate IQ Who as a mentioned earlier
have been utilized by the leave
campaigns for their targeted advertising
according to the former Cambridge
analytica employees Britany Kaiser and
Christopher Wy the connection between
the two companies was so close that
Cambridge analytica considered aggregate
IQ to be one of their departments and
that they shared the same tactics and
Technology this kicked off a separate
firestorm in the UK about the use of
stolen data to influence the brexit
referendum for Cheryl sunberg this was
especially devastating because as the
person ultimately in charge of public
relations it was the second time she'd
failed to head off a major scandal in
the space of a year and you know we know
we need to earn back trust however this
seems slightly unfair Cheryl's more
notable failure was how she and Elliot
trage failed to notice the Russian
hacking and disinformation campaign
despite Facebook employees trying to
tell them about it the Cambridge
analytica Scandal however was a direct
cause of the open graph which was very
much Mark's baby Elliot trage would then
go on to do something even more stupid
when Cheryl went to testify during
Congressional hearings the public
relations firm he had hired def finers
started digging up dirt on the Senators
questioning sunberg spreading the
information they'd obtained to reporters
in an attempt to portray the hearings as
politically motivated and not based on
genuine public concern when this story
broke it further destroyed Facebook's
credibility spelling the end for Eliot
trage who had by now demonstrated such
consistently bad judgment that he felt
obliged to offer his resignation this
also damaged sandberg's reputation which
she would never fully recover from the
Cambridge analytica Scandal produced
unprecedented public ey towards Facebook
the delete Facebook hashtag began
trending on Twitter with high-profile
celebrities like share announcing that
they deleted their accounts with many
others following suit amidst all of this
Facebook stock also plummeted by 10% and
this takes us to the big moment where
Zuckerberg finally testified before
Congress for the first time in order to
prepare for this Zuckerberg held mock
hearings with a team team of litigators
who trained him on his responses and
prepared him to deal with tactics such
as grandstanding aggression and left
field questions intended to throw him
off his talking points they also took
other precautions for example since Mark
had a history of sweating during
interviews his staff insisted that the
ACB turned down low during hearings when
the day finally arrived Mark's testimony
was calm and assured however most
privacy Advocates felt that the
questions addressed to him were weak
where still some lawmakers displayed a
notable lack of technical literacy so
how many data categories do you store
does Facebook store on the categories
that you
collect Senator can you clarify what you
mean by dat C there there's some past
reports that have been out there that
indicate that it that Facebook collects
about 96 data categories so how many do
does Facebook store out of that do you
store any Senator I'm not actually sure
what that is referring to could somebody
call you up and say I want to see John
Kennedy's file absolutely not could you
if not not could you not would you do it
could you do it uh in in theory do you
have the right to put my data a name on
my data and share it with somebody I do
not believe we have the right to do that
if I'm email if I'm eming emailing
within WhatsApp does that ever inform
your
advertisers no we don't see any of the
content in WhatsApp it's fully encrypted
right but is there some algorithm that
spits out some information to your ad
platform and then let's say I'm emailing
about Black Panther within WhatsApp do I
get a WhatsApp do I get a black panther
uh Banner ad you said back then that
Facebook would always be free is that
still your objective yes well if so how
do you sustain a business model in which
users don't pay for your
service Senator we run
ads I
consequently this shifted the media's
focus away from Facebook's wrongdoing
and instead on how clueless the Senators
appeared to be Congress wanted to teach
him a thing or
two but it turns out they didn't know a
thing or one as a result of Zuckerberg's
performance Facebook's stock recovered
significantly increasing his net worth
by around $3 billion in just 24 hours
however the pr damage Still Remains to
this day with the name Cambridge
analytica serving as a byword for
Facebook's Cavalier attitude to users
Data before we move on I want to mention
one funny twist in this last Scandal
which is that Cambridge analytica's
supposed Secret Sauce their
psychographic profiling was a totally
useless service and was heavily
criticized by many experts in polling
data and psychology due to the lack of
evidence and transparency provided even
Alexander kogan the researcher who had
shared the data with Cambridge analytica
in the first place knew the approach
didn't work according to him their
profiling data was only right 1% of the
time wor still by the time the 2016
election rolled around the stolen data
they acquired was already 2 years old
and nowhere near as detailed as the
real-time Treasure Trove Facebook
themselves had access to and given that
Facebook already offered highly
calibrated targeted advertising to
politicians the irony here is that
Trump's campaign would have been far
better off ditching Cambridge analytica
entirely and simply doubling down on the
much more powerful targeted advertising
they were already using Facebook to
produce had they done that they would
have wasted a lot less money Facebook
would have been spared this Scandal to
end all scandals and users personal data
would have been even more effectively
utilized to sway the
election from this point in the video
onwards the topics discussed are at
times going to get much more dark and
although I promise to avoid explicit or
gruesome detail I still think it's wise
to issue a trigger warning here in
August 2013 Facebook announced a new
service called internet.org which would
bring free internet access to
underserved communities around the world
particularly in developing countries
they would do this by partnering with
mobile operators and other technology
companies across Latin America Asia and
Africa providing a stripped back version
of the internet that could be served at
low bandwidths at the time it was
reported that this was the project
Zuckerberg was most excited about when
people are connected we can accomplish
some pretty amazing things we can get
access to new jobs and opportunities and
ideas but technology it has to serve the
whole of society connectivity can't just
be a privilege for some of the Rich and
Powerful it needs to be something that
everyone shares so how did it work in
practice well when you access
internet.org you were provided with a
few free services most importantly a
simplified version of Facebook and
Facebook Messenger as well as Wikipedia
BBC News and the forecasting service acq
weather it also included a few local
Services too depending on the region
however internet.org was not a fully
free internet service if you wanted to
access any site outside of these Court
offerings you'd hit a pay wall to give
an example of how all this combined
together let's take Indonesia at the
time the free search engine they
provided in Indonesia was ask.com but if
you tried to access any of the listings
on ask.com you'd be prompted to pay for
data criticism of this idea appeared
almost immediately mainly focusing on
how internet.org broke with the
principle of net neutrality which holds
that service providers and governments
should treat all internet traffic
equally thus ensuring a Level Playing
Field to give some specifics internet
service providers should not Grant
higher speeds to certain Services which
could stifle Fair competition by
favoring established players over
startups secondly the entire internet
should always be accessible making some
of it paid again tips the scales in
favor of the powerful whose Services can
be offered for free making it harder for
smaller entities to compete lastly
internet service providers should never
limit freedom of expression especially
where someone decides to communicate
such barriers to access could be
manipulated by those wielding power to
discriminate against voices they don't
agree with all in all many pointed out
that internet.org was not free access to
the internet it was free access to
Facebook net a Walled Garden where
Facebook gets to decide what people can
have access to for this reason 65 NOS
from around the world published an open
letter criticizing internet.org as a
poor attempt to bring the developing
World online apart from the concerns
I've already mentioned it included
strong opposition to the idea of a
two-tiered internet that favored
wealthier citizens it also outlined some
security concerns indicating the
technology opened the door for users
activity to be monitored by their
governments as well as Grave concern
that many of its users would not
understand privacy consent due to a lack
of education on the topic as well as
high levels of illiteracy among the
poorer populations some call the effort
digital colonialism due to the
overwhelming priority given to Western
Services overlook ones now few believed
this project was motivated purely by
philanthropy the benefit to Facebook of
being installed as the core
communications platform for potentially
billions of additional people was
obvious it was the growth tactic to beat
all growth tactics just to remind you
one more time of that Web 2.0 quote the
race is on to own certain classes of
core data location identity calendaring
of public events Etc internet.org was
set up so that if anyone wanted to sell
a service or blog about something or
message a friend their only real option
would be to do it on Facebook thus
Facebook creates an ecosystem and
therefore a dependency on their service
which would persist even if a properly
open internet came into existence now
some watching might feel Facebook's
initiative is not being treated fairly
here and that these are acceptable
trade-offs given the potential benefit
to those who would otherwise have no
internet at all that's a reasonable
position and I'll address it in just a
few minutes but for now let's look at
some of the Practical problems faced by
internet.org when it was launched the
most obvious was that many of the
services were only available in English
another more subtle issue was that to
newly online users Facebook was largely
considered to be the internet which
according to Mong palatino who studied
the Philippines version misleads the
public and makes them think that these
sites and services are the essential
tools this would turn out to be a big
problem a little later Facebook
rebranded internet.org to free Basics
which they said better communicated the
service being provided their number one
target India in order to establish free
basics in India Mark engaged in a PR
campaign visiting local Villages and
cities and meeting with various
politicians including the Prime Minister
Narendra Modi here in India 243 million
people are connected to the internet and
more than 100 million are on Facebook
already but you know there's still more
than a billion people in India who don't
who can't connect and don't have access
to the same opportunities as everyone
else however enthusiasts began to sour
on the idea when they finally saw what
free Basics really looked like there
were no other social media apps other
than Facebook being rather than Google
search and access to only 36 sites for
free all of which were chosen by
Facebook this prompted Fierce resistance
from privacy and net neutrality
Advocates around the country what
Zuckerberg means by internet for all is
essentially Facebook for all along with
a few nonprofit Services thrown in to
give it the appearance of philanthropy
soon after net neutrality became a
national issue with Fierce protests
coming from around the country
ultimately despite significant lobbying
from Facebook the Telecom regulatory
authority of India cided with the net
neutrality Advocates rejecting free
Basics outright at the time this was
seen as a massive blow for Facebook but
just to make that blow a little bit
worse one of Facebook's board members
Mark andreon decided to get really angry
about it on Twitter anti-colonialism has
been economically catastrophic for the
Indian people for decades Why Stop Now
very good I'm sure Zuckerberg and
Samberg adored that particular
contribution especially how it Likens
Facebook to colonialism nice one as you
can imagine this was reported everywhere
he later apologized for it but who cares
in 2017 a damning report from global
voice summarized free Basics as not
being particularly useful they observed
that of all the versions they tested
none met the linguistic needs of their
users and that it was sorely lacking in
sits for local services or Independent
News sources but behind the scenes
unbeknownst to most people worse things
were happening in particular Facebook
seemed to be
underinvestigated warning for how
Facebook would integrate into
non-american cultures this would
eventually open the door for all kinds
of problematic content to be shared with
too few people working at Facebook
knowing about it and all of this
together the Relentless drive for growth
in speed with insufficient attention
paid to safeguarding the site to protect
its users set the stage for a truly
horrific
event Facebook's relationship with
mianmar began in 2010 when it was
launched it allowed users to access its
platforms without incurring data
charging which helped it rapidly rise in
popularity in 2013 the government in
Myanmar under Tain s introduced some
moderate reforms to the country
including allowing mobile operators in
for the first time which in turn
prompted a flood of cheap mobile phones
into the market this produced the
perfect conditions for free Basics which
was eventually introduced in 2016 to
many people in Myanmar Facebook quickly
became the most trusted source of news
so powerful that a print magazine was
even created for those not yet online so
they could read about various popular
Facebook posts each week however beyond
the technological changes taking place
ethnic tensions in Myanmar had been
escalating over the same period with
numerous leaders trying to turn the
country's Buddhist majority against its
Muslim population particularly targeting
the rahena an ethnic minority from the
Northern rakine State this involved
spreading stories about the Rena's
supposed misdeeds there were warnings
about new attacks which the renja were
planning but which never happened all
kinds of fake science stories were
spread around too for example a claim
that renja DNA was distinct different
from that of other human beings and this
was coupled with one of the most
worrying telltale signs that
precipitates likening the renja to
verman and in addition to all of this a
new problem all of this stuff was
spreading like wildfire on Facebook now
there were a few reasons why Facebook
was so powerful at spreading hate
messages in Myanmar the first is that in
comparison to the heavily censored State
media Facebook was seen by the
population as a source of legitimate
news news that came from the real people
on the ground another reason was that a
sizable portion of the population having
only just come online were not yet
experienced enough to recognize the
tactics and language of online
disinformation the gasoline as you can
imagine was Facebook's algorithms which
unwittingly promoted hate speech and
disinformation and lastly a crucial
oversight that allowed for the
unmitigated disaster that was about to
unfold a serious lack of content
moderation in fact as early as 2014 Matt
schisler a doctoral student at the
University of Michigan have been trying
to alert Facebook to the situation in
Myanmar eventually being promised a
direct line to one of their workers
groups however this group would turn out
to not be particularly useful as we'll
see there were numerous acts of violence
and outrages from 2014 to 2017 including
a riot triggered by a viral Facebook
post that falsely claimed two Muslim men
were to blame for the of a Buddhist girl
in the city of Mandalay many renja were
displaced during the violence that took
place as a consequence of that lie later
schisler noticed a dangerous post
beginning to spread about an elderly man
who' taken pity on the displaced renja
and who had been photographed delivering
rice to them the posts accus this man of
being a traitor prompting calls for him
to be punished schisler later recalled
that when he reported this to the
Facebook working group it took weeks to
get a response and when that response
came it was that there was nothing they
could do unless the man himself reported
the comments personally which was
impossible because he didn't have a
Facebook account and schisler had no way
to contact him in response to
accusations that they weren't doing
enough Facebook developed sticker packs
with statements like think before you
share which users could apply to posts
and comments theoretically these would
help f Facebook moderators spot
extremely harmful content however it was
reported that these stickers had an
unintended side effect which was that
the algorithm counted them as a sign of
Engagement so when applied they actually
Amplified hateful messages even further
around this time schisler would discover
that Facebook had only one moderator
working out of the Dublin office one mod
who only spoke burmes in a country of
around 54 million people and over a 100
languages not to mention dialects by
2015 the number of moderators was
increased to only four again all Burmese
speakers Facebook's automatic detection
systems regularly missed extreme hate
speech due to problems recognizing
Burmese script one such post translated
to English was the nonsense statement I
shouldn't have a rainbow in Myanmar
however the original Post in Burmese
script was nothing like that all the
Muslims that you see in Myanmar none of
them should be left alone by 2017 with
15 million people now on the platform
the Myanmar Security Services began a
massive social media campaign to
convince the public that it was time to
wipe the ringa from the map when it
began it was reported that Facebook had
almost no idea this was happening the
leader of myanmar's military at the time
posted we openly declared that
absolutely our country has no rohinga
race what followed was a systematic
campaign to and burn the Villages of the
renja official reports state that around
24,000 renja were during the campaign
including children with another 700,000
fleeing to dangerous and disheveled
refugee camps in Bangladesh a un
investigation after the fact announced
that believed Facebook played a leading
role in the amplification of hate speech
a report from Amnesty International
stated our investigations have made it
clear that Facebook's dangerous
algorithms which are hardwired to drive
engagement and corporate profits at all
cost actively F the Flames of hate and
contributed to mass violence as Muhammad
shaff a rahja activist put it the rahja
just dream of living in the same way as
other people in this world but you
Facebook you destroyed our Dream since
then Facebook has been met with similar
criticism for ifying hate speech in
other countries most notably in Ethiopia
to give one example according to an
investigation by Vice in 2020 it was a
central source of disinformation that
led to ethnic violence in the region of
Aria resulting in hundreds of deaths
warnings about tensions in Ethiopia
persist even today a situation
exacerbated due to the complexity of the
culture including around 80 different
languages in 2021 two posts appeared on
Facebook condemning a man named me Amara
a 60-year-old tigran Professor living in
Northern Ethiopia the posts wrongfully
accused him of helping a paramilitary
group commit atrocities during an armed
conflict these posts also included
pictures of Amara's home with multiple
people commenting on the post suggesting
that he be cleaned trusted Partners in
Ethiopia tasked with notifying Facebook
about things like this stated that
Facebook refused to take the posts down
because it didn't want to restrict Free
Speech soon after Amara was murdered
outside his home the posts that caused
this remained up on Facebook for a
further year and his are now suing
Facebook for $2 billion the case my
clients have made is that not only do
Facebook allow such content to be on the
platform they prioritize it and they
make money from such content I hold
Facebook directly directly responsible
for our father's or my father's murder
since then the trusted Partners I just
mentioned have ended their relationship
with Facebook with other multiple
Ethiopian observers reporting that they
feel there's just no point bringing
concerns like these to the company
because they don't do anything Facebook
actually has a process called break the
glass which they use in highly dangerous
situations allowing them to take
significant measures to prevent the
spread of inflammatory information
however in Ethiopia according to Amnesty
International there is evidence
suggesting that Zuckerberg personally
intervened to stop mitigation measures
from being applied because the measures
may have interfered with the meaningful
social interaction metric there are many
more stories like this but for the sake
of time I'll move on Facebook has since
announced a significant investment in
local moderators but will also need to
establish other safeguards to spot
dangerous Trends before they get out of
hand at the time of writing the
situation in Ethiopia is still highly
uncertain with news reports about
Facebook's presence in the country
popping up regularly this is one to keep
an eye on the original critics of free
basics who argued that a broke the
principle of net neutrality could hardly
have predicted how bad the situation was
going to get where Facebook became the
sole source of news crowding out local
sources this alone is validation of
their criticism but I want to add one
more thing to it one thing to bear in
mind about the idea of a company who can
become so powerful that they dominate
conversation in general Facebook has
made innumerable terrible mistakes
throughout their history as we've seen
and as we're going to see and every
single time they've been exposed it was
published via an external Source outside
of Facebook a privacy Advocate report a
tech blog a whistleblower publishing on
a different platform an open letter or
most commonly a news report by The Wall
Street Journal the New York Times the
guardian BuzzFeed Etc a service like
free BAS if it can get enough Traction
in a given country automatically
disadvantages external criticism of
Facebook by hiding it behind a pay wall
and crowding it out with their own free
content if Facebook became your sole
source of information you'd never hear
any criticism of Facebook a situation so
unacceptable I think free Basics should
be rejected wherever it's met
okay so to do this section Justice we
need to look back over one last aspect
of the platform I've not yet discussed
remember Tim Urban's blog which I
mentioned earlier about the different
kinds of posts he felt were self-serving
and therefore insufferable well in that
blog he proposed five negative
motivations that lead people to post
what he considered to be insufferable
stuff these motivations were imagecraft
trying to make others feel jealous
craving attention and narcissism but
it's the fifth motivation that slightly
rubs me up the wrong way although I have
to say this was written in 2013 the
article is obviously tongue and cheek
and I don't think Tim was intentionally
being spiteful here the fifth motivation
was loneliness seeing a lonely person
acting lonely on Facebook makes me and
everyone else sad so the person is
essentially spreading their sadness and
that's a thing to do this one caught my
attention because well it's a bit mean
oh lightning up with you your sadness is
really killing my buzz pretty Surefire
way to make a lonely person feel more
lonely now as I mentioned earlier in
this video sometimes when you see
content that's intentionally jealousy
inducing examples of how great other
people's lives appear to be it can have
a destructive effect on your sense of
self-worth my wife who works as a
psychotherapist have been noticing along
with her colleagues an uptick in how
social media played a role in people's
negative sense of themselves and their
accomplishments as far back as 2010 but
at the time there were obvious positives
too in 2007 an influential study
investigated the potential Facebook had
for developing Social Capital among
college students pointing out that it
could increase one's network of peers
where online relationships eventually
turn into face-to-face relationships and
this aspect of Facebook has not gone
away in May of this year I went to a
reunion gig for the band cardiacs which
took place in London after the show when
we were all hanging around outside the
venue I learned something I thought was
really sweet a few young fans who
couldn't afford to stay overnight in
London have been offered beds by some of
the local organizers who just wanted to
help others have their first cardiacs
experience all of this was organized on
Facebook apart from that ongoing
research leading right up to the present
day suggests that some neurod Divergent
people can benefit from Facebook which
due to its structured and predictable
communication system helps to facilitate
positive social interactions in part
because it removes some of the complex
social cues involved in talking to
someone face to face however going back
to the early years again the positive
stories were beginning to get
outnumbered by the negative ones for
example how Facebook was being used as a
tool for bullying as well as other
concerning developments one well-known
study from 2013 found that heavy use of
Facebook was strongly correlating with
the decline in users sense of well-being
later another widely shared study found
a correlation between time spent on
social media and feelings of social
isolation both studies acknowledged the
benefits I just mentioned but also
agreed that something unhealthy was
going on and that it seemed to be
getting worse when trying to understand
why this was happening I found it
interesting to read even earlier
research back when we were all trying to
figure out what social media was for and
how it could change people and I think
it's important to look at this for a
second go back to First principles as it
were to channel the sociologist marus
Rosenberg we all have something called a
self-concept which is our understanding
about how we appear to those around us
one of the core aspects of our
self-concept is our identities which we
construct through a kind of validation
process a social dialectic it starts
with an identity announcement which we
put the concept of our identity out into
the World by talking to someone wearing
certain clothes attending a certain type
of social Gathering Etc then in return
identity placement occurs where those
around us accept or reject the
identities we're trying to project
indicated through their actions
expressions or words now when we're
talking to someone face to face in the
real world we're aware that the
identities we're projecting will need to
be to some extent consistent with how we
look how we speak how confident we are
as well as a ton of other traits there's
a performance and appearance burden
needed to pull it off however identities
we construct online are not restricted
in this way we can withhold unwanted
information about ourselves we can hide
things about our appearance that we
don't like and we can roleplay on
Facebook which is all about projecting
our identities we can curate exactly
what others see allowing us an
opportunity to validate a hoped for
possible self an ideal self and this is
why the like button when it was
introduced in 2009 was so consequential
let's say you post something that's very
important to you and three people
comment on it positively then a person
you know posts something else and it
gets five positive comments no biggie
but if we add likes you got four and
they got 14 now it seems a little bit
like your identity announcement was a
little less validated by your peers than
this other person but then Facebook
decides that post with 14 likes is
rather popular let's show it to more
people which means that when you check
back later you see the tally has changed
you still have four but this other
person now has 59 you've been
obliterated a 2010 study found that
users with low self-esteem or
narcissistic traits tended to be more
active on Facebook tended to post more
self-promoting content on Facebook and
were much more likely to manipulate
their photos before posting them to
Facebook other studies run experiments
to understand the nature of social
comparison on Facebook in one experiment
female participants browsed the platform
noting the attractiveness of others and
reported feeling bad about their own
appearance by comparison another study
noted that when participants were
depressed they were more likely to
compare themselves negatively against
others leading to feelings of Envy all
of this seemed to point to a big problem
while Facebook seemed to be building a
refuge for people with mental health
problems they also seem to be creating
mechanics that could make those problems
worse then there's the second major
issue that was beginning to cause
concern children in 2011 Consumer
Reports released an estimate that
Facebook had 7.5 million users under the
age of 13 a finding that alarmed
Advocates of child protection in 2012
Bill price the chairman of Common Sense
Media a child advocacy group visited
Facebook's headquarters to meet with
Cheryl Sandberg and Elliot shage Price's
aim was to try and partner with Facebook
to help strengthen protections for
children however Sandberg and shr used
the meeting to express anger over a book
that Common Sense Media had just
published titled talking back to
Facebook which gave advice to parents on
how to protect their children from the
worst dangers of social media price
later recalled that when he suggested
tools aimed at improving the safety and
mental health of teenagers shr dismissed
him out of hand while also making the
threat that Facebook could sever
business relationships with any Tech
investors on Common Sense media's board
price later said I left the meeting
feeling pretty depressed it's sort of a
typical story of where ultimate power
corrupts people's perspectives and then
in that same year Facebook acquired
Instagram the acquisition of Instagram
was a big deal causing concern among
Regulators who worried about the
consolidation of social media power
under one company but it was ultimately
approved by the FTC a few months later
the final price tag $1 billion raised
quite a few eyebrows considering that
Instagram earned no revenue and had only
13 employees with the benefit of
hindsight of course we can see that it
was an incredibly strategically valuable
asset given its emphasis on imagery
rather than text its Rising popularity
among teens and its dominance on mobile
devices in its early years Instagram was
reasonably uncontroversial with Facebook
generating most of the bad headlines for
example in 2017 a 12-year-old girl live
streamed herself self ending her own
life on Facebook a journalist for the
guardian wrote at the time that when she
first saw this video she flagged it as
inappropriate content only to receive
the following response we reviewed the
share you reported for showing someone
injuring themselves and found that it
doesn't violate our community standards
this video would stay up for a further
two weeks before they finally bowed to
the pressure to remove it and although
this isn't related to children or mental
health I have to also mention here the
incident in 2019 where white nationalist
in New Zealand used Facebook to live
stream his attack on a mosque one of the
worst and most Savage mass shootings in
history now as for Instagram it's grace
period began to significantly erode
around 2017 a survey conducted at this
time found that over one in five
teenagers aged between 12 and 20
experienced bullying on Instagram also
in 2017 a UK report on the rise of
anxiety and depression among teenagers
caused a stir when the research
indicated that Instagram was actually
the most negative of all the social
media platforms what was going on well
again in 2017 an event occurred that
provided a very brutal answer something
that's shaped how the platform has been
viewed in the UK up to the present day
it began when a 14-year-old girl named
Molly Russell who was very active on
Instagram took her own life in the
inquest that followed her phone was
analyzed revealing that over the
duration of 6 months she had seen over
2,000 pieces of content related to self
harm or depression on the platform
official reports noted that some of this
content was recommended to Molly based
on her activity and not specifically
requested by her the psychologist who
had reviewed the content Molly had been
looking at reported not being able to
sleep for a few days afterwards and when
the coroner's report finally arrived it
contained something that had never been
seen before a world first the inclusion
of social media in the official cause of
death Molly Rose Russell died from an
act of self harm whilst suffering from
depression and the negative effects of
online content media reporting on this
event heavily focused on the tendency of
Instagram's algorithms to notice when
you viewed dangerous content and then
recommend more of it back to you various
studies emerged that appeared to back
this up according to one we found that
among those who were exposed to self arm
content on Instagram only 20.1%
indicated to have intentionally searched
for this content indeed the majority of
users seem to make contact with
Instagram's self harm content
unintentionally other research found
that hashtags concerning self-injury
Rose from 63,000 to over 110,000
throughout 2018 then in 2019 in response
to the Molly Russell case in particular
Instagram announced that it would no
longer allow explicit images of self
harm on their platform however at the
same time a related form of content was
exploding on Instagram the glorification
and promotion of what I'll just call EDS
which was being spread through a variety
of popular hashtags I won't name here
apart from highly disturbing and Bleak
imagery related to EDS participants in
this kind of content would often
publicly set themselves incredibly
dangerous Target weights as the
phenomenon grew bigger Ed coaches began
to emerge ostensibly to help others hit
these targets encouraging them to join
private groups where they could get into
even more horrendous detail after heavy
media reporting on this topic for years
Instagram finally began to crack down on
it but it wasn't plain sailing even by
2021 journalists were still able to
demonstrate by creating new accounts and
learning some of the new hashtags that
it was still relatively simple to access
this type of content pointing out that
when you did get access Instagram's
recommendations were then kick in to
promote more of it back to you around
this time another Scandal occurred when
it was reported that Instagram was
recommending terms like appetite
suppressant and fasting to those who had
searched for Ed content in the past then
Instagram released augmented reality
filters that could be applied to your
selfies which in one case showed you how
you'd look if you had plastic surgery
others applied lip filler or other kinds
of beautification effects to users's
faces these caused a lot of backlash
with some pointing out that they
promoted unrealistic body expectations
and were more likely to make teenagers
feel insecure about their appearance
internally Instagram began debating
whether or not to ban these filters we
now know that this was objected to by
Andrew Bosworth the same guy who wrote
The Ugly memo we looked at earlier
remember that the one that argued that
breaching users private data was
actually an act of virtue well in this
case he argued that by Banning the
filters users would simply move to other
apps which aren't as likely to be as
restrained or to put it in another way
leave it in we got to grow mercifully
his opinion was ignored and Instagram
began Banning some of the most
controversial filters in 2019 at the
heart of all of this lies the problem of
negative social comparison something
compounded by Instagram's tendency to
promote fashion and Beauty content as
well as celebrity Lifestyles Instagram's
internal research teams were also
digging into the causes of negative
social comparison at this time too one
document published in 2020 which was
later leaked highlighted a few troubling
areas for example it found that one in
10 people felt negative social
comparison on Instagram often or always
with teenage women being the most
vulnerable group it also found problems
with the high degree of celebrity
content that was being promoted on
people's feeds however it dependent on
the celebrity with Ariana Grande Kylie
Jenner Katy Perry and Jennifer Aniston
being among the names that tended to
cause the strongest negative comparisons
they also found that like counts
significantly contributed to negative
comparisons especially when it came to
people in your Social Circle for example
a celebrity's post needed to achieve
10,000 likes before it could cause a
negative social comparison whereas for a
peer it only took 10 likes now before we
move on I need to mention one crucial
thing about a lot of This research even
though there is an enormous number
number of damning studies on how social
media is negatively affecting mental
health so much so that one might
consider this topic an open and shut
case in the last 3 years a few new
studies have emerged that call a lot of
this previous Research into question one
of the most respected reports from the
Oxford internet Institute criticized
previous research for drawing
conclusions from unreliable methods like
for example questionnaires where
respondents can be influenced depending
on how the questions are asked another
problem they pointed out was the lack of
longitudinal research that tracks the
impact of social media over years or
even decades one reason this is
important is that social media changes
so rapidly research from even 5 years
ago might now be hopelessly out a date
we have no way of knowing longitudinal
research would help to fix this letting
us know whether mental health issues
were persisting over a long period of
time as the lead researcher on one paper
Candice aers put it there doesn't seem
to be an evidence-base that would
explain the levels of panic and
consternation around these issues now on
the other hand there's also a lot of
research over the last 3 years that
still finds significant negative
correlation
although all of them do agree that the
total body of research is not strong
enough problem is we've mountains of
correlation enough to make us very
concerned but not yet proof of causation
now as you can imagine meta loves this
research especially the one by the
Oxford internet Institute and they
reference it constantly with statements
like there is zero proof our platforms
do any harm however what they leave out
is that this research has not been
disproved either moreover the lead
researcher of the study they really like
Professor Andrew puki drafted an open
letter to meta signed by a large
Coalition of other Scholars pleading
with them to share their data so this
issue could be conclusively resolved and
if meta won't do it he called on
legislators to force their hand hardly a
ringing endorsement at the time of
writing meta has not complied with this
request and to hammer this point home
even the US Surgeon General Vic MTI got
involved this year recently issuing a
public warning for parents that included
the sentence social media has not been
proved safe but if we set aside the
issues of mental health there are also a
lot of fact actual reports of issues
that just can't be ignored like reports
of a massive rise in child grooming
abuses on Instagram during covid or the
Ed or self harm problems I've already
described and now imagine people's
reaction when in 2021 BuzzFeed revealed
leaked plans for something called
Instagram kids a version of Instagram
for children under the age of 13 media
coverage was of course blistering now
we'll return to Instagram kids in a
moment because there was a more pressing
problem children were already using
Instagram and serious questions were
emerging about the number of underage
accounts that actually existed on the
platform one embarrassing Revelation
occurred live when Adam maseri the head
of Instagram was interviewing Jojo siwa
Jojo you there can you hear me we're
good we're here we're live now the
offending part of this interview has
almost been completely scrubbed from the
internet but I was able to eventually
find a part of it the moment when JoJo
blurted out an admission that she'd been
on the platform since she was a child I
know you're not supposed to have
Instagram till 13 I did I had an account
many many my I don't want to hear that
you didn't hear that nobody else heard
that and with all this groundwork out of
the way we finally reached the point in
this chapter where we can discuss the
next worldwide Scandal arguably the most
damning Scandal of all to understand how
it all unfolded we need to momentarily
set Instagram to one side and return to
Facebook in 2019 the data scientist
Francis Haan joined Facebook's Civic
Integrity team the team whose job it was
to make the platform safe however it
didn't take long for hgan to become
disillusioned due to what she described
as hostility from her management towards
recommendations from her team one
example she'd later recount was that
instead of removing 97% of hate speech
as Facebook publicly claimed their
system was instead calibrated to be
highly permissive removing only around
5% of hate speech and actuality she was
also a pauled by the dysfunction of
something called cross check a manual
review process for potentially harmful
content posted by high-profile figures
such as politicians or celebrities hgan
would later write that cross check was
seriously understaffed meaning that if a
high-profile user posted something
appalling it would take up to 3 days for
it to be reviewed and since these posts
were allowed to remain public until they
were reviewed they could go viral
reaching around 75% of the audience they
were ever likely to get the actions of
the Brazilian football star Neymar was a
notable illustration of how unfair the
system was after woman had accused him
of he responded by posting her DMS on
Facebook which included naked pictures
of her even though this was a clear
violation of Facebook's rules he was
protected by cross Che which allowed his
post to be seen by 56 million people
provoking his fans to send a firestorm
of abuse towards his accuser hgan
eventually concluded that for any
civic-minded employee there were three
options you could either ignore the
truth about how the platform worked you
could quit or do your best to solve the
problem all the while knowing there
isn't enough institutional investment or
will to actually fix it her team created
a detailed policy for how Facebook
should handle disinformation or hate
speech spread by politicians all over
the world this was seen as a
particularly important policy given that
the 2020 us election was on the horizon
however the policy was rejected by
Zuckerberg who complained that he could
write a better proposal over the weekend
that proposal ended up being Facebook
will not touch speech by any politician
under any circumstances this new policy
would then be formally announced by
Elliot tr's replacement the former
deputy Prime Minister of Great Britain
Nick CLE but it is not our role to
intervene when politicians speak and
that's why I want to be really clear
with you today we do not submit speech
by politicians to our independent fact
Checkers and we generally allow it on
the platform even when it would
otherwise breach our normal content
rules so despite everything that had
happened in 2016 Facebook would not fact
check politician speech in the runup to
the 2020 election as one political
journalist put it while major news
organizations are strengthening
factchecking and accountability Facebook
is saying if you were a politician who
wishes to Pedal in lies Distortion and
not so subtle racial appeals Welcome to
our platform we will not fact check you
you are automatically newsworthy you are
automatically exempt from scrutiny to
give one example of this in practice
after violent protests broke out in
response to the shooting of George Floyd
in 2020 Donald Trump created a post on
Twitter and Facebook that ended with the
line when the Looting starts the
shooting starts Twitter took it down
where as Zuckerberg personally made the
call to leave it up despite the fact
that it broke Facebook's rules about
inciting violence not long after this
just as the team have Hogan was a part
of had overseen the exhausting mission
of keeping Facebook safe during the 2020
us election it was announced that they
were being dissolved with her members
being scattered across the company this
prompted the leader of her team who she
highly respected to quit right after
this hgan opened up link in to start
looking around for other work and
discovered a message from the journalist
Jeff harowitz who was wondering if she'd
be willing to share information with him
over time as they got to know each other
hgan began contemplating whether she
should go public with the information
she knew about Facebook the 2020
election will be rigged if mail and
voting allowed to take place how are you
handling the president of the United
States to let him know and let people
who are using your platform that this is
misinformation is it not I certainly
think that anyone who's saying that the
election is going to be fraudulent I
think that's problematic and I think
additional context needs to be added to
that the final straw for Hogan was just
after the 2020 election ended when the
stop the steel movement unexpectedly
began to explode aided by a technique
called super inviting where a small
number of users were able to send out
enormous numbers of invites to bring
people to stop the steel groups what's
particularly damning about this is that
according to Hogan Facebook had actually
developed really powerful protections
that would have stopped this from
happening protections which I mentioned
earlier called break the glass measures
to illustrate how effective they were
look at this data demonstrating how
break the glass measures obliterated Q
andon groups in the 3 months leading up
to the election so what happened why did
break the glass measures fail to prevent
to stop the steel movement well first as
I mentioned they disbanded the Civic
Integrity team in the beginning of
December the team who' been heavily
involved in developing these Protections
in the first place and second because
the protections caused a drop in Revenue
they were simply switched off before
Christmas despite the fact that stop the
steel was growing at this time and
despite the fact that an enormous number
of Facebook employees went on vacation
over Christmas which left the company
vulnerable according to Hogan Facebook
didn't switch back on to break the glass
measures until 24 hours after the
January 6th riots had occurred what
would have happened had we intervened on
December 15th or December 26th or even
January 1st unquestionably the
adversarial groups would not have grown
as fast as they had it was then that
hgan decided to go public with what she
knew but before she left the company she
decided to collect as much evidence as
she could by trolling through Facebook's
employee Forum searching through
thousands of internal documents and
sharing them with Jeff harowitz
ultimately this led to a series of
Articles published in the Wall Street
Journal all of them under the umbrella
title the Facebook files now in the past
Facebook had always been able to
plausibly claim that the harms they had
caused had occurred due to technical
mistakes that were unintended or social
developments they couldn't have foreseen
but this Mega leak was something new
leading to a simple overarching
allegation Facebook knew about the harms
they were bringing about Facebook
willfully chose not to fix the problems
that were causing these harms Facebook
intentionally misled the public about
the nature and severity of those harms
delivering reassurances they knew not to
be true the Facebook files was not one
Scandal it was around 12 different
scandals but the most damning of all the
one that caused the most outrage and
demands for justice was the article
titled Facebook knows Instagram is toxic
for teen girls the article references a
variety of leaked internal studies that
suggested Instagram was aware of the
harms they produced how they recommended
dangerous content leading to depression
EDS self harm or ending one's own life
and the kicker a revelation that one
study called the mental health Deep dive
was cited in a presentation given to
Mark Zuckerberg himself yet according to
the article the company withheld this
from the public and failed to act on
their own research now just as all this
was happening Facebook the parent
company rebranded to meta our mission
Remains the Same it's still about
bringing people together I'm not going
to dwell on the Rebrand here except to
say that from this point onwards I'm
going to be referring to meta as the
decision-making entity and not Facebook
anyway the Facebook files kicked off the
most unbelievable storm of activity
amongst journalists lawmakers and legal
experts around the world who began
looking back over meta's previous
statements about Mental Health many of
which bore very little comparison to
their own leaked studies new
Congressional hearings were set up
endless new articles were published and
almost all attorney generals across the
US began legal proceedings everyone else
is way skinnier and way prettier and
also sort of hurt my own self-confidence
about my own body which led to me
practically starving myself for like a
year as a consequence meta was then
compelled to share some of their
internal Communications too and these
internal Communications are something
else from them we've learned even more
about met meta's attitude towards the
toxic content problem in particular a
lawsuit by the Tennessee attorney
general against meta which was published
in its unredacted form in January 2024
contains a treasure Trove of internal
emails this document is incredible first
we learned that on March 8th 2019 the
director of research sent Cheryl
Sandberg a summary of their findings
about the damage Instagram was doing
recommending that meta invest to fix
these problems and also fund more
research on April 8th this request was
repeated in an email sent to sanberg
maseri and Zuckerberg eventually a
member of meta's Finance team responded
stating that the recommended Investments
would not be funded Adam Maser clearly
demoralized by this wrote on the same
day unfortunately I don't see us funding
this from Instagram anytime soon he
later wrote well-being is the
existential question we face and we lack
a road map of work that demonstrates we
care about well-being Nick cleg chimed
in too saying that meta needs to do more
and we're being held back by a lack of
investment on the product side which
means that we're not able to make
changes Innovations at the pace required
according to the document Mark
Zuckerberg did not respond to any of
these emails then as the Instagram story
exploded things got crazy dysfunctional
Zuckerberg Under Pressure to make a
public statement about all of this
decided to deflect the problem in the
strangest of ways he was in the middle
of a personal Rebrand at the time a
Rebrand intended to present himself as a
funloving guy so instead of meeting the
issue headon he instead pushed the head
of communications to put out a joke
statement that referenced a video clip
of him writing a hydro foil the idea of
the joke was to correct a reference to
his Hydro foil which the New York Times
had mistakenly called an electric
surfboard the post read look it's one
thing for journalists to make false
claims about my work but it's crossing a
line to say I'm riding an electric
surfboard when it's clearly a hydrofoil
and I'm pumping that thing with my legs
Nick K's exasperation about all of this
deserves to be read out in full am I
missing something here on the day a meta
rep is pulled apart by US senators on
whether we care enough about children on
our services Zuckerberg is going to post
about surfboards maybe I've lost my
humor about this whole thing but I
really think this would seem to any
casual Observer to be pretty toned deaf
given the gravity of the things we're
accused of if I was him I wouldn't want
to be asked while your company was being
accused of aiding and abetting teenage
why was your only public pronouncement
to post about surfing the Wall Street
journal's reporting has dramatically
Consolidated a wider narrative that
we're bad for kids which has been
brewing for some time it now makes
regulations certain and in my view makes
launching Instagram Kids N impossible
I've told Zuckerberg and Sandberg this
already defending the hydrofoil post the
head of communications responded I'm
really eager to just do whatever he
wants at this point my spine has been
surgically removed the lawsuit also
revealed internal frustrations with
Zuckerberg who due to his majority
shareholding was the only person in the
company who could make big decisions as
Adam misseri put it Zuckerberg was the
only non-metal manager at meta another
executive put it more bluntly referring
to meta as an AB absolute dictatorship
it's surreal if you've read nothing else
I've referenced in this video read this
lawsuit you'll find everything Linked In
the description in October 2021 just
over a decade after Mark Zuckerberg was
times person of the year he appeared on
the cover once more this time the
headline was delete Facebook quite a
reversal anyway just as the Facebook
files was midway through its run Francis
Hogan went public announcing that she
was the internal whistleblower that had
shared the documents with the Wall
Street Journal she then testified before
Congress about everything that she'd
seen while working at Facebook
the documents I have provided to
Congress prove that Facebook has
repeatedly misled the public about what
its own research reveals about the
safety of children and its role in
spreading divisive and extreme messages
at the end of 2021 Adam maseri was
called to testify too by now the
questions being put to meseri and other
meta representatives were broadly better
more specific and more informed in
particular the chairman Richard
Blumenthal as well as the Senators
Marsha Blackburn and Amy kashar were
always sharp and well prepared how
however these hearings were a common
spectacle at this point and it was
becoming clear that an impass had been
reached by now meta's boilerplate
defense was that legislation was needed
on an industry level which is right on
paper and we'll get back to this the
position of the lawmakers was that in
the absence of legislation meta needed
to invest much more in making their
platform safer while also being more
transparent with their data and research
which is also right and due to this
impass hearings are generally become a
bit of a whipping exercise the person in
the hot seat looks penitent for a bit
they get slammed for things they've done
and said they announce a few new
initiatives that sound nice and then
everyone goes home inevitably this led
to criticism about the ineffectiveness
of lawmakers to legislate and solve
these problems and with all these new
leaked documents now out in the open
more and more articles kept emerging at
a constant rate alleging all kinds of
new damage Facebook and Instagram were
causing it was a negative PR Avalanche
advertisements for human trafficking in
the Gulf facilitating sex slavery all
over the world Mexican cartels using the
platform to hire Hitmen and posting
videos of the murdering people
governments using the platform to crack
down on pro-democracy protesters out of
control images of videos of abuse and
Gore on newsfeeds in India new leaked
documents indicating meta was aware most
of their automated flagging systems
didn't work in Ethiopia agreeing to
suppress anti-government protesters in
Vietnam in return for favorable
treatment from the Vietnamese government
and on and on and as for Instagram the
story just kept getting worse too in
November 2023 more Communications were
unsealed indicating that Instagram knew
it had millions of under users but only
restricted a fraction of them within the
company meta's actual knowledge that
millions of Instagram users are under
the age of 13 Is An Open Secret that is
routinely documented and zealously
protected from disclosure to the public
the outcry following all these
Revelations finally seemed to kick
Congress into life throughout 2022 and
2023 new legislation with bipartisan
support began to appear including the
kids online safety act the purpose of
this bill is to force platforms to
change their design to eliminate harmful
content or provide an out for
algorithmic recommendations altogether
and to ensure this happens the bill also
proposes a duty of care which makes
platforms liable when harm is caused to
miners this led to another big moment
when in January 2024 Zuckerberg was
again called to testify before Congress
to answer for meta's failures on Teen
Mental Health the existing body of
scientific work has not shown a cause a
link between using social media and
young people having worse mental health
outcomes however this time around the
stakes were higher Not only was the kids
online safety act now a looming threat
but the Senators themselves were armed
with much more damning material
meanwhile social media platforms
generated 11 billion in Revenue in 2022
from advertising directed at children
and teenagers including nearly 2 billion
in ad profits derived from users age 12
and under Instagram also displayed the
following warning screen to individuals
who were searching for child abuse
material these results may contain
images of child abuse and then you gave
users two choices get resources or see
results
anyway Mr Zuckerberg what the hell were
you thinking um the the the basic
science behind that is that when people
are searching for something that is
problematic it's often helpful to help
direct them towards something that um
that could be helpful for getting them
to get help
understand get resources in what San
universe is there a link for C results
anyway kids safety is an area where
quote we are investing heavily end quote
we now know that statement was untrue we
know it from an internal email it's an
email written by Nick kle you know who
he is he summarized Facebook's problems
he said quote we are not on track to
succeed for our core well-being topics
Nick CLE was asking you pleading for
resources and you rejected that request
here's a quote from your own study quote
we make body image issues worse for one
in Three teen girls 37% of teenage girls
between 13 and 15 were exposed to
unwanted nudity in a week on Instagram
you knew about it who did you fire
Senator this is why we're building
alls Senator that's I don't think that
that's who did you fire uh I'm not going
to answer that there's families of
victims here today have you apologized
to the victims would you like to
apologize for what you've done to these
good
people youve all gone through it's
terrible no one should have to go
through the things that your families
have have suffered and this is why we
invest so much and are going to continue
doing industry-leading efforts to uh to
make sure that no one has to go through
the types of things that your families
have had to suffer a month later in
February 2024 theid kids online safety
act got the backing of over 60 Senators
assuring its Passage through the Senate
at the time of writing it is yet to have
a companion bill that will be voted on
in the house my bet is that It
ultimately won't see the light of day
but I might be wrong it's possible that
if there's enough public pressure enough
Representatives might voted through so
to finish off this section let's address
the question of why legislation is so
hard since this is a very large topic
I'm just going to touch on one or two
aspects the trouble with trying to
legislate to prevent harms being caused
by search engines or social media
platforms is that it's probably
impossible to do so without accepting
negative trade-offs this goes all the
way back to the foundations of the
internet now I'm sorry for another mini
story here but it's impossible to
understand where we are with legislation
now if you don't know about this see
while the internet was still in its
infancy in the early '90s there was an
online bulletin board called Prodigy who
promoted themselves as a family-friendly
platform and thus used human moderators
to filter inappropriate content however
a major problem occurred when one of
Prodigy's users posted a SCA defamatory
criticism of the brokerage firm Stratton
Oakmont the same company depicted in The
Wolf of Wall Street in response Stratton
Oakmont sued Prodigy for hosting the
defamatory post and won the reason the
Court ruled in favor of Stratton was
because they were applying the same
standards of liability reserved for
traditional news Publications in the
Court's opinion since Prodigy actively
moderated its message boards it was
acting more like a publisher than a
simple conduit of information and was
therefore liable for the defamatory post
this was rightly seen as a destructive
precedent how is the Internet going to
flourish if companies could be bullied
in this way and how is the Internet ever
going to be safe if internet services
fearing liability were too afraid to
moderate the existing legislation was
not in line with the technology that
much was clear to many to fix this
Representatives Chris Cox and Ron weiden
introduced section 230 as part of the
communications decency act in 1996
section 230 is the legislation that made
the internet as we know it possible in
essence it protects services so they can
actively moderate content posted by
their users without being held liable
for it this protection means meta can't
be held liable even when illegal content
is posted on their platforms although
they must take it down once they become
aware of it this is why those who report
on meta who want to see them rained in
tend to focus on stories where they can
demonstrate intentional inaction now the
kids online safety act or kosa for short
doesn't seek to directly amend section
230 but it certainly butts up against it
in a few key ways while section 230 is a
clear Legal Shield for platforms so that
they can be held liable for content
posted by their users kosa makes
platforms liable if harm is caused to
Children which is very very plausibly
going to be done by content how can this
work well the smart aspect of kosa is
that it seeks to avoid unintended
censorship by allowing social media
platforms to choose the ways they would
protect kids one proposed approach to
comply with kosa is to alter the
platform significantly if the user is
underage however we don't know how this
would play out an accepted global
standard for digital age verification
does not exist even if it did exist
exist children could still trick the
platform to be recognized as an adult
anyway what happens then it could be
argued that kosa might Force platforms
to overcorrect censoring a broader range
of content for everyone although I must
say I find that a little implausible
ultimately it's up to each individual to
decide for themselves whether this is
the legislation they want to help
protect children on social media
platforms my only aim here is to frame
it as transparently as I can I should
also mention that this is by no means
the only legislation currently being
proposed either there are too many to
try and explain in this video so I'll
just list them for those interested in
researching for themselves and with that
we've just about covered all the
important events that led up to 2024 all
that's left is right
now hello oh dear I look a bit different
don't I well yeah I got my haircut and
you don't know how many times I've
recorded this bloody part the news keeps
changing so I have to keep redoing it
also I really wanted this video out
before the US election so hey we're
breaking continuity let's go anyway
congratulations we're still here you've
made it to the end of this video uh I'm
aware the running time is like insane
but at least you know I wasn't slacking
off over the last year and don't worry
we're not going to limp to the finish
line here the stuff I'm going to talk
about in this last chapter is quite
something and by the way if you've liked
what you've seen so far and want to
support my work please consider
subscribing to the video streaming
service nebula where you'll find videos
of mine not available aable on YouTube
there's a special link in the
description that benefits my channel if
you use it alternatively consider
supporting me on patreon instead and get
access to behind the scenes content and
other kinds of special videos and other
stuff support from these places is how
my channel gets funded anyway with all
that said let's finally bring this thing
home now after digesting all this
material this enormous and convoluted
history I can't help but wonder what
stage in the evolution of social media
we're currently living in is it still
early days are we still essentially
guinea pigs Generations whose aggregate
Misfortune will help to temper a better
and safer social media in the future or
is what we're experiencing now the early
warning signs of a far worse future
existence one that needs to be averted
well to try and help us answer this
let's look at meta right
now at the time of writing meta as a
business is in better shape in no small
part due to the rise of AI because meta
had a surplus of gpus as well as a
longtime experience in the field of
machine learning they entered the AI
race really quickly since then they've
released multiple versions of their
large language model llama which is open
source in contrast to the closed models
of open Ai and Google think of Lama as
meta's answer to chat GPT but the
current Rosy Outlook is only a recent
development just back in 20202 with the
global economy souring meta's stock
dropped massively due in large part to
skepticism over Zuckerberg's metaverse
strategy to tackle this Zuckerberg
engaged in what he called the year of
efficiency letting around 22% of meta's
Workforce go over over a very short time
frame something most companies of that
size are unable to achieve this drastic
cost cutting combined with their quick
entrance into the AI race incorporating
AI features into Facebook before Google
or Apple could do the same caused meta's
stock to explode at the time of writing
meta is once again the darling of the
stock market resulting in a significant
Improvement in how business Publications
talk about them it's like this guy
reorganized an entire company in 3
months it's unbelievable what Zuckerberg
did regarding the metaverse strategy
itself I'm not going to dwell on this
too much because the technology requires
a few more breakthroughs what I will say
is that I always find it a little bit
irritating when Publications refer to
Mark's vision of a metaverse because
it's not his vision setting aside the
Decades of sci-fi novels about this idea
from a tech point of view it's much more
Microsoft's Vision in 2015 when I worked
at Microsoft all of these ideas
conferences and virtual spaces arranging
apps around your room a large virtual
cityscape where people can interact Etc
were being discussed like adnauseum
for a while I worked on a team that
built applications for the Hollens so I
was right in the thick of all this stuff
loads of people I knew ended up in meta
so when I saw these ideas recycled by
Zuckerberg in 2021 it felt a bit like
deja vu and again when Apple recycled it
in 2023 bringing absolutely nothing
original to the table themselves with
that in mind I did actually enjoy
Zuckerberg's takedown of the Vision Pro
it was kartic and also convincing I I
know that you know some Fanboys get
upset whenever anyone dares to to
question if Apple's going to be the
leader in a new category and that takes
me to a different Point Zuckerberg's
personal Rebrand which seems to have
kicked into a new gear now for as long
as he's been in the public eye he has
consistently been the butt of the joke a
lot of this began with the movie The
Social Network which portrayed him as a
cold-hearted dork and even though I love
that movie there are aspects of the
portrayal which I have real big problems
with some aspects are just untrue in
particular the idea that he had no
success with girlfriends and that his
obsession with social media was a cope
to get over it in fact he met his now
wife Priscilla Chan while he was
studying at Harvard you ever end up uh
seeing seen the film The The Social
Network yeah I I did cool oh thanks uh
and uh what did you uh what you think it
was
interesting his personal gaffs up until
this point are pretty much never ending
being sweaty during high-profile
interviews having a booster seat during
Congressional hearings looking weird on
a hydrofoil having a generally robotic
delivery that incredibly creepy looking
metaverse video I think it's time for my
workout anyway as part of his personal
Rebrand Mar has been an increasingly
visible figure in the world of MMA he's
done away with the tightly cropped
hairstyle allowing his hair to grow out
more naturally he's changed the kinds of
clothes he wears to not look so stiff
and crucially he's generally far more
natural in interviews these days and he
does a lot of interviews especially on
YouTube and his choice of subject matter
and interviewer has decidedly changed
too in the past up until around 2019 and
2020 it appears that the strategy for
communications was to be seen to be
engaging in big questions about tech and
its effects on society you can see this
clearly in in his conversation with Y
Val hereri who really challenges him I
know that Facebook faces a lot of
criticism about kind of encouraging
people to to to move to these extremist
groups I think also it's it's something
that you can solve if you put enough in
enough energy into that what I worry
more is uh increasing inequality and
secondly undermining human agency and
undermining the the the basic philosophy
iCal ideas of democracy and the free
market and individualism Mark gives a
decent account of himself here but
ultimately he's always on the defensive
and regularly deflects criticisms rather
than directly engaging with them and
consequently the comments under the
video are almost entirely hostile
towards him but in the following year
after the pr disaster of the Facebook
files which for one thing forced them to
drop Instagram kids there's been a very
clear U-turn in their communication
strategy now the focus is almost
exclusively on the topic where he's
strong Cool Tech and the choice of
interviewers is pretty clever too they
are all to a person toothless Tech
podcasters intellectual lightweights or
sympathetic Bros many of whom see the
opportunity to interview Zuckerberg as a
giant boost to their credibility like
you and I share we're Tech optimists and
I think almost all of this Tech if not
all of it ends up being a net benefit
for Humanity in the long term the one
thing that unifies all of these more
recent interviews is that Zuckerberg is
rarely if ever meaningfully challenged
it's also useful for meta that the world
has largely identified a new villain in
Elon Musk due to his consistently
ridiculous decisions with respect to
Twitter as well as a variety of other
things but I'd be remiss if I didn't
mention that Mark and Priscilla pledged
to give away or sell 99% of their
Facebook shares within their lifetime
with the funds going to a new LLC they
set up that would allocate money to
various charitable efforts this is by no
means the only charitable work they've
done but it's the most eye-catching it's
almost like Mark's intention is to
continue doing what he's doing for many
years to come and when he's finally gone
he'll donate a ton of money by way of
apology for all the damage he's done and
hopefully a positive Legacy combined
with all the good business press the
question is will this work will the
general Public's perception of meta and
Zuckerberg over the coming years get
better as new generations transition
into adulthood will they be able to
leave behind the incredible Legacy of
mistakes and damage more to the point
will meta eventually become a company
people broadly agree or a Force for good
well to answer the first point about
public perception never underestimate
Zuckerberg's problem solving skills long
gone are the days where Cheryl Sandberg
is wheeled out as the public
spokesperson when the gets in trouble
Sandberg star fell during the scandals
I've already covered she stepped down as
coo in 2022 and stepped down from the
board in January 2024 what's left is the
new com strategy I've just outlined
focus on the positive text stuff and
deflect everything else and I think at
the time of writing that it's working
have you heard the term zakas son uh
zakas son you haven't heard that it's
zuck's Renaissance As for the question
of whether meta is beginning to turn it
around it's going to be very interesting
to look back on this video and 5 years
to see how things actually play out but
to my mind the answer is I'm very
pessimistic even though there hasn't
been a mega scandal in the last 2 years
there's been a lot of negative
developments developments which
demonstrate the same brutal drive for
growth and control as well as new
developments that could link together in
dangerous new
ways starting with the smaller stuff
let's talk about instore Instagram's
current Incarnation which at the time of
writing is recommending brutal shocking
content of people getting murdered or
mutilated animals and children being
severely injured fatal car crashes
electrocution people falling off
buildings the list goes on I'd heard
people talking about this new brutal
trend on Instagram but not being a
regular user myself hadn't seen it so I
turned to my Discord group and asked
whether any of them had and I really was
not prepared for what came back 20
minutes later I had to shut off my
computer and try to go to sleep with
just horrible images banging around
inside my skull
in particular things I saw happening to
small children where I couldn't help but
imagine my own small children in the
same situation so why are people
uploading this kind of stuff well some
things don't change for numerous pages
that I've seen there's an accompanying
lengthy text promoting cars or other
products many different accounts of
identical promotions indicating they're
owned by the same people I probably
wouldn't have mentioned this if I hadn't
experienced it the problem here isn't
just that the content is horrible it's
the relentlessness of it that makes it
so much worse a Compound Effect where
every 15 seconds you're watching another
brutal injury another death another
animal getting mistreated another child
being mangled another death another
injury and then Instagram interprets
your stunned call in the headlights lack
of action as engagement and just pumps
out more of it after only 2 3 minutes of
this you enter into a kind of elevated
sense of borderline Panic it feels like
your buddy's kicked up your adrenaline
levels due to a sense of imminent danger
to your person it's horrible it affects
you it's been widely reported that
moderators for meta are at serious risk
of developing PTSD and I can see why so
what about data and privacy well meta is
doing terribly here too let's take
Europe in July 2023 the EU court of
justice ruled that meta was in violation
of our data Protection Law gdpr by
forcing users to accept targeted
advertising as a condition of using
Facebook or Instagram gdpr States very
clearly that users have a fundamental
right to opt out of having their data
shared for the purposes of advertising
and meta actions really give me the
sense that they've nothing but contempt
for it so what did they do when that
ruling was handed down in July well they
finally created the option to allow
people to opt out for a subscription fee
of €2 251 a year a tactic now referred
to as pay or okay in April of this year
the European data protection board ruled
that pay or okay was not okay it now
seems meta has run out of options and
will be forced to provide a proper free
opt out mechanism soon although God
knows what new tricks they'll cook up
next that EU legislators won't be
expecting meta's relationship to the
European Union is going to continue to
be very interesting especially now that
the Digital Services act has come into
full force in 2024 this legislation
requires online services to swiftly
remove illegal content and other harmful
online activities they also require much
more transparency about exactly how
online services moderate if successfully
enforced this would tighten the screws
in such a way that lack of compliance
would be much easier to prove and if it
is proved the legislation now gives the
courts the power to fine up to as much
as 6% of meta's annual Global turnover
that's not a find that could easily
brush off now for my money the Privacy
related story to keep an eye on a
scandal let some emerging right now is
how meta is using the stuff we Post in
their platforms to train their AI models
in the US where protections aren't yet
in place if you'd like to opt out of
this you are frankly screwed they don't
need to inform you that your data is
being used to train their Ai and if you
submit an objection they're not obliged
to act upon it in the EU where
legislation prevents them from doing
this they pushed out a highly convoluted
notification to its users which I think
takes the award for worst collection of
dark patterns in meta's history and
that's a fiercely competitive pool I
tweeted about this in May a few days
after they rolled it out and that tweet
certainly did the rounds let me
summarize see I've worked in growth
teams for years and I know how to design
and streamline an experience to maximize
traffic the rule is the simpler the
experience the more people who make it
through to the end with every additional
step you add large percentages of people
will drop out now meta did the opposite
of this it's hilariously awful okay so
step one you get this notification with
the misdirecting non Seer we're planning
new AI features for you learn how we use
your information notice the absence here
of the terms private data or opt out and
once you click on that step two you get
shown this notice where they explain the
legal basis they're using for collecting
your information legitimate interest let
me quote the opinion of the European
Center for digital rights on this
instead of asking users to consent opt
in meta argues that it has a legitimate
interest that overrides the fundamental
right to data protection and privacy of
European users once their data is in the
system users seem have no option of ever
having it removed right to be forgotten
the shameful bit here is how hidden the
right to object link is placed towards
the end of the second paragraph seems to
me there's a rather larger and more
intuitive space down here that they
could have used instead ugly stuff also
notice the line that says if your
objection is honored it will be applied
going forwards don't see that too often
so let's object which leads us to step
three this big form you need to read
it's only at this stage the stage where
you are objecting that they inform you
about which of your content they planty
used to train their models they also
State amazingly that they may choose to
ignore your objection so step four you
post your objection bear in mind that
needing to fill in a form is not a
necessary friction they don't need it
and I highly doubt any humans are going
to read it the one thing I am sure about
is that it will turn more people away
because they couldn't be bothered
filling it in step five once you've
confirmed your objection you're then
told you need to check your email and
grab a code they sent you I'd love to
hear the justification for this step six
you open the email Des sent which
contains a code that's it's only valid
for 1 hour so if you miss it you'll need
to start again anyway now you copy the
code step seven enter the code and get a
confirmation message and then comically
in the space of around 8 seconds you
receive an email letting you know
whether or not your objection is going
to be honored wow those metap folks sure
know how to work efficiently I should
mention that when I tweeted this some of
the people who responded to my tweet
told me that they got an error when they
objected which is just like classic
Facebook so let's get into AI now when
it comes to this subject I'm not a deep
pessimist yet I'm excited about the
potential of the technology even though
like most others there are aspects I
find pretty horrible like sorry to be
the dead horse here but as someone who
spent enormous portions of my youth
learning to draw and learning different
kinds of styles and techniques on top of
that I feel really deeply for the visual
artists of today who are particularly
vulnerable to the rise of generative AI
in a way I don't think is true for
musicians it sucks if you've been using
Instagram to promote your work for years
and now find yourself at no recourse as
that same work is used to train programs
that are literally in the process of
replacing you but when discussing Med AI
strategy I want to avoid leaning into
hyperbolic pessimism like your garden
variety video essayist the only
observation I can make with some
confidence is that as is always the case
with meta they provide tools for free
which could be potentially very
beneficial to the outside world while
also locking things down in such a way
that they guarantee their own long-term
dominance so that's how I'm going to
frame this on the beneficial side is
meta's choice of open sourcing a
significant number of trained models
making them available to the public
apart from their Flagship large language
model Lama you also Al have detectron a
computer vision system that can detect
objects and segment them with enough
reliability imagine how this could be
utilized and say Healthcare tumor
detection glucoma detection assisted
surgery or any one of a thousand other
possibilities and those are just two the
list goes on there are many more useful
models like this which could serve as
incredibly powerful tools to smaller
businesses and startups and it must also
be said that meta has some form when it
comes to releasing beneficial
Technologies to the public like react
and react native or pytorch where all
this starts getting hairy is when you
start thinking about the wider strategy
being employed first let's investigate
how they're open- sourcing their AI
models taking Lama if you look at the
terms of the license it's clear that
this model is in fact only partially
open source to put it charitably first
the data training the large language
model is proprietary as is the code used
to do the training this prevents others
from forking the project to create their
own version a version that could say be
much more open so that you could
interrogate it to find out what sources
it used when answering your questions
that's not an open source approach not
even close and this also raises
significant suspicions about where their
training data is coming from if it's
being trained in our conversations on
Facebook and Instagram then the data
could never be released because it would
be the biggest privacy breach in history
and just to be clear I'm not saying they
should definitely release everything
open source but they just can't call it
open source unless they do that but the
most eye- openening part of this license
is definitely the Clause that if you're
a company with over 700 million monthly
active users you can't use lammer for
free and must obtain a commercial
license instead hm 700 million what's
that about well Snapchat hit 750 million
in 2023 Tik Tok and WeChat passed 700
million a few years before and this
helps us to understand the dominance
part making something free to the end
user and calling it open source is great
for PR but it can also be a pretty
sharp-edged business strategy too
because it kills competition giving
their AI Services away for free suits
Facebook's advertising model whilst also
undermining competitors in their weight
class like Google or open AI who charge
for access to their AI Services making
it free also re reduces the risk of new
tech Giants emerging to compete in the
future but it can also strangle small
businesses too so that they never get
off the ground over the last year I've
spoken to a few well-known AI startups
who've expressed grave concern that
their entire business model could be
completely snuffed out if Facebook
decides to roll out a similar feature
for free so in summary open- sourcing
their AI models is a clear power play to
broaden their domination as a tech
superpower by disadvantaging other Tech
Giants while also making it unlikely
that new businesses can grow big enough
to become properly competitive too and
it's our data often given without our
knowledge or consent that's empowering
them to do this it is as I hope I've
demonstrated clearly throughout this
video classic Mark Zuckerberg and then
there's the other side of the AI coin
and prepare yourselves for another
variation on a classic theme Here AI
content is completely out of control on
metas Platforms in 2024 an alarmingly
creepy new trend is kicked off with vast
amounts of bizarre AI generated images
flooding Facebook one example is a
double plus uncomfortable series of
images featuring young children from
historically disadvantaged countries
surrounded by elaborate or impossible
structures made of food in particular
the theme of overabundance of food it
just feels really ugly and mean-spirited
to me there are many others that are
just overtly racist in theme which I'm
obviously not going to show then there's
the endless series of pictures of Jesus
shrimp Jesus crab Jesus Jesus performing
Feats of heroism or revealing himself in
unexpected places there are all kinds of
hyperreal cutesy images of babies babies
with kittens wided babies with miniature
kittens babies with Jesus okay okay this
one's actually kind of funny and there's
all kinds of other things there are
images of amazing stuff people
celebrating their 120th birthday amazing
scenes of various kinds damn This
Woman's garter Stitch technique is off
the charts we are quadruplets today we
turn 90 we are waiting for
congratulations from you uh how's your
arm doing that what's going on over here
this one is an amazing category families
sitting around a table that contains the
preserved corpse of someone's mother
okay so I've kept most of these examples
light and you might be thinking this all
seems harmless enough tacr ah tanacu get
a grip well you see with this stuff
flooding Facebook an enormous number of
these images are going viral in the case
of some of the Jesus imagery this is due
to Devout Christians around the world
feeling obliged to comment on them amen
and res sharing them further problem is
according to a Stanford internet
Observatory report in March 2024 a
significant number of the pages that
blast out this content are either
spammers trying to direct people off
platform to content Farms or just
looking to straight up scam the
vulnerable using the comments section to
obtain information from them and and
there's evidence yet again of multiple
Pages owned by the same people acting
together to boost virality and of course
because anyone can blast out tons of AI
generated images every day The Compound
Effect is that it feels like the
platform is being taken over by it once
you've seen a few you get sucked into
the AI Vortex this aspect has been
reported on by a few YouTubers already
many of whom fall into the category of
crap focusing their attention on what
they see as the real story here how
stupid people are that they believe this
stuff is real thing is when it comes to
scamming I don't think it's a stretch to
suggest that one of the advantages of
using AI in this way is that it acts as
a filter much like the famous Nigerian
prince scam that helps to identify the
older the more gullible or the less
techsavvy the easy marks but there's
another worrying reason why these AI
Pages exist which is to grow them to be
as large as possible in order to sell
them almost always to unknown third
parties who want those pages for unknown
purposes like imagine there was an
election in a majority Christian country
with a population that has historically
been vulnerable to disinformation like
Ethiopia well if you've managed to
create a significant following among
Ethiopian Christians on Facebook through
the use of seemingly harmless AI
generated Jesus imagery there might be
some folk interested in the outcome of
that election who'd be willing to take
that page off your hands the marketplace
for buying and selling accounts is not
hard to find I mean it's all over Reddit
have a Facebook page with 50k followers
to sell please contact me just serious
buyers hi is the followers majority in
the USA please PM me the details on
swap. at the time of writing you can buy
an Instagram account with 1.4 million
followers 90% of whom are women 25% of
whom are in the US for $5,000 many would
feel safe signing up to unicorns are
cute until congrats you're now a card
carrying member of alpha battle
Brotherhood Iron Fist nation and this
leads us nicely to the thing we've all
been waiting for the beginning of AI
being deployed to sway political
discourse in May 2024 meta dismantled a
network of over 500 fake Facebook
accounts and 32 Instagram accounts
linked to the Israeli firm stoic
according to meta the accounts presented
as being owned by US citizens but were
all spouting AI generated comments in
various discussion threads praising
Israel and criticizing us campus
protests over the war in Gaza in this
case meta to their credit seems to have
been ready for this kind of inauthentic
Behavior now the thing we've all been
expecting to see is of course the use of
AI generated disinformation to influence
the US elections this year but because
this approach is so obvious meta must
have been preparing for it for ages sure
enough in August of 202 before they
announced the removal of tons of AI
disinformation content with the majority
of abuses coming from oh I wonder which
country it might be so if we're destined
to see yet another major disaster in
this upcoming election I'd be surprised
if AI plays a big part in it in fact I'm
now going to boldly suggest that because
Facebook will be so focused on not
getting yet another black eye this time
around the social media story if there
is one will happen over on Twitter but
that doesn't mean Facebook's doing great
apart from AI we can also rely on Garden
variety disinformation the type spread
by humans take for example a story
originated in Russia about Alena zalena
the wife of the Ukrainian President
Vladimir zalinski which falsely reported
her lavish spending during a shopping
spree a lifestyle they pointed out made
possible due to us war aid another video
did the rounds that claimed falsely to
show Hunter Biden assaulting a woman in
a hotel in August 2024 two British men
were jailed for spreading false
information about immigrants and Asylum
Seekers which contributed to Violent
anti-immigration riots that lasted a
week in the UK the riots themselves were
set off by the LIE spread around
Facebook and Twitter that a man who
three children in a violent spree was
himself an asylum seeker and in a move
that may Elevate risk a bit further meta
has just announced their intention to
shut down support for a service called
crowd tangle a tool that enables outside
observers to track the spread of
disinformation on meta's platforms crowd
tangle has been used to prove
embarrassing stories about meta on
numerous occasions the choice to shut
the service down in the runup to the US
election and replace it with a new tool
many feel as much more restrictive is
what can I say the decision has been met
with damning and widespread criticism
beyond that the outcome of the US
election might be really consequential
for Facebook the initial choice between
Joe Biden and Trump was a pretty
uncomfortable one for Zuckerberg Biden
strongly supported legislation to bring
meta to heal whereas Trump has a massive
axe to grind he hates that Facebook
banned his account and cracked down on
disinformation after the January 6th
riots and he even threatened on Truth
social and in his new book that he'd
imprison Zuckerberg for life if he
interferes with the upcoming election
Trump has also expressed strong support
for repealing Section 232 which would be
a disaster for Facebook although it's
highly unlikely Trump would actually see
that through the addition of JD Vance to
the ticket is a curveball because he's
the Protege of Peter teal teal himself
is a major donor for Trump which I'd
imagine bought him a degree of influence
to my mind that could only really work
in Zuckerberg's favor but to what degree
is anyone's guess probably not that much
Ca Harris has similar sentiments to Joe
Biden although she's somewhat less
fervent about them even so she's
expressed report for Section 230 reform
as well as antitrust legislation and
social media legislation too so one way
or the other it's clear Zuckerberg won't
have too many friends in Washington for
the next four years next there's even
more reason to be concerned about
children in 2023 there was another
massive finding by Jeff harowitz and I'm
going to have to be super careful about
how I phrase this here the Revelation
that there's a collection of grown men
who are now using Instagram to satisfy
their interest in extremely young users
not only that but if you were inclined
to follow these men say it with me
Instagram's recommendations would kick
into gear recommending you more of the
content they were looking at a New York
Times article from February 2024 found
even more evidence of this running a
story about the experience of some
parents who reported receiving vile
comments from grown men on pictures they
posted that included their children with
some men making offers to pay to see
more now with that we've tied up just
about everything and I had been planning
on ending the video here but I'm
actually not quite done because there's
one last really strange aspect to this
story I think you need to be aware of
because because it's happening right now
and it's often directly affecting us in
ways we don't see this was a rabbit hole
I inadvertently stumbled into almost 2
years ago it started in early 2023 when
I published a video about dangerous
online forums in that video I also
briefly touched on Section 230 the
legislation we looked at earlier after I
released that video in order to stay
informed about section 230 I made a few
contacts in the US and also followed a
bunch of different legal experts who
specialize in matters related to privacy
free speech and Tech regulation this
allowed me to keep track of the latest
development ments by reading relevant
articles summaries and think pieces in
particular I valued articles that
offered deep legal analysis and when
searching for that stuff I eventually
stumbled across a group called The
Chamber of progress now the Chamber of
progress members are staunch Advocates
of section 230 and they believe it
should remain unchanged a perspective I
thought it important to understand
because I didn't want to be naive as I
mentioned amending section 230 would
involve a very complex balancing of
harms and I wanted to understand those
trade-offs in detail so with this in
mind I'd occasionally read posts by
members of the Chamber of progress
especially when they were discussing
ongoing lawsuits or legislation aimed at
Big Tech sometimes I found their
explanations very enlightening however I
also noticed something strange about
them for example one of their members
tended to get inv vicious arguments on
Twitter like all the time also some of
their takes were just baffling to me
here's an example tweet I found
particularly odd people AI companies are
scraping my posts to train their models
also people here's a public photo dump
of me when I was 19 because Twitter
Twitter Trends this struck me as really
childish and mean-spirited seeming to
suggest that if you happen to be naive
about privacy you don't deserve privacy
there was another time when the Chamber
of progress began posting criticism of
the EU AI act the first sweeping
standard for AI regulation in the world
arguing that it was a death blow to
Innovation thing is like any legislation
there's a balance to be struck between
protecting people enforcing transparency
preventing potential harms and yes not
overly hampering innovation in general I
expect civic-minded legal experts
providing commentary on these things to
give an holistic overview to help others
appreciate whether those balances are
acceptable or not that said their
articles did give me Paws from time to
time they made me concerned that perhaps
the EU had overstepped nevertheless over
time I began to see them as a bit of a
broken record ideological zealots who
you could always rely on to trash any
legislation of big Tech with unwavering
certainty I also got sick of their
constant bickering on social media too
so I quietly unfollowed their members
and moved on then about 6 months later
while making this video I put out a call
on Twitter to interview section 23
experts on the topic of the kids online
safety act and lo and behold one of its
members got in contact offering to speak
to me and wanting to know more about
what I was up to so I outlined the basic
purpose of my video and received no
response not even oh I'm a bit busy just
nothing which I found a little bit weird
they seemed really interested at first
well that got my Spider Sense tingling
until that point even though i' followed
some of its members I was only aware of
the organization itself in the most
haziest of ways so I quickly logged on
to the the Chamber of progress website
to finally look at what they actually do
chamber of progress is a new tech
industry Coalition devoted to a
progressive Society economy Workforce
and consumer climate we back public
policies that will build a fairer more
inclusive country in which all people
benefit from technological leaps oh
that's reassuring then I looked at their
partner section up here and ah they're
funded by meta and Google and Amazon and
apple and and mid Journey ah then to
verify I checked meta's page under
political engagement the candidates they
fund how much they spend on lobbying Etc
and sure enough the Chamber of progress
was listed there too and that's when I
realized that this entire time I'd been
a total sucker I'd read so many articles
on big Tech often with so many different
threads to follow up on I hadn't
scrutinized stuff from this group
carefully enough I'd failed to ask the
most basic of questions that you always
need to ask when encountering opinions
that don't quite add up how do these
people get paid I thought I'd been
reading the opinions of completely
independent legal Scholars what really
bothers me about this is that there's a
broad spectrum of opinion out there and
it's already not a Level Playing Field
but for meta to pump Millions into one
particular opinion the opinion that
happens to serve their interests so that
they're dramatically Amplified strikes
me as highly unprincipled I couldn't
believe they'd managed to manipulate me
from Beyond their
platforms to the outside Observer the
materials produced by these
organizations can appear as Grassroots
opinions from civic-minded citizens like
if the Articles I'd read have been
accompanied with the disclaimer chamber
of progress is a lobbying group that
receives funding from meta it would have
completely changed how I regarded their
work and this is the final part of the
new Comm strategy I mentioned earlier
enormous spending on lobbyists and
influence groups to try and shoot down
legislation or drive popular anger about
tech regulation Often by creating PR
campaigns and even documentaries that
try to undermine legislators in the eyes
of the public in 2023 meta spent $19
million on lobbying but 20124 looks set
to dwarf that spending in the first half
of 2024 is already way higher than 2023
and so Miles higher than any other Tech
Giant the Chamber of progress is run by
Adam kovasovic as one tech journalist
puts it Adam kovasovic has become a dil
quote for reporters always happy to make
big Tech's case as the companies stay
above the frey for their money the big
tech companies get an organization
willing to push their viewpoints in the
Press sometimes with Spotty disclosure
what does he mean by spotty disclosure
well listen to how kovasovic is
introduced in this news report he's the
founder and CEO of chamber of progress
the center left tech industry policy
Coalition and it aims to ensure all
Americans benefit from technological
advances and works to make sure the tech
industry operates responsibly hearing
that I'd think kovasovic is holding big
Tech to account for another example in
an article he published on a site called
sepa the Chamber of progress is
described as a center-left tech industry
policy Coalition promoting Technology's
Progressive Future No mention of funding
again but if you go to the about section
on the sepa site and select supporters
boom hello meta kovasovic pops up
regularly when you look up legislation
that seeks to reign in big tech
companies usually in the form of an
article on medium that trashes that
legislation sometimes this trashing is
Justified sometimes it's really forced
clutching its straws for example take
the proposed American innovation and
choice online act championed by senator
Amy clashart which seeks to limit Tech
Giants ability to unfairly promote their
own Services over those by smaller
competitors specifically it seeks to
prevent the intentional disadvantaging
of smaller businesses by doing things
like forcing them to pay in order to
rank highly in search results the
Chamber of progress's response to this
legislation is that it would break
Amazon Prime that's the Doomsday
scenario forcing Amazon to rethink how
Prime works on all of this I'm joined by
Adam kavaki founder and CEO of the
Chamber of progress Adam uh they're
funded by meta Amazon and a bunch of
others you forgot to mention that talk
to us about how significant this bill if
past could be Z that would mean that
Amazon couldn't uh feature Amazon basics
Brand Products it probably couldn't
highlight Amazon Prime 2-day shipping
products even if true would that not be
a price worth paying for a properly
competitive playing field where big Tech
can no longer monopolize absolutely
everything listen to Amy kashar outline
the degree to which these groups are
interfering with the legislative process
let's talk about what we're up against
I'm talking about some of the most
powerful companies in the world with
armies of lobbyists and lawyers they are
everywhere in every corner in this town
at every cocktail party and all over
this building I tell my my colleagues
that they don't even know sometimes when
someone is trying to influence them I
tell them they should ask the person if
they're being paid by a tech company or
if they are on a board of a tech company
or if they have some affiliation with
one of the big tech companies they are
also lobbing the American people with
astr Turf campaigning and other
dishonest PR tactics these companies
have been telling anyone who will listen
that acting to protect competition in
our digital markets will some times or
somehow seed our national security or it
will Outlaw Amazon Prime claims that
were disputed by the Department of
Justice and Amazon's own lobbyists but
they don't stop there because providing
what appears to me as incredibly
one-sided legal analysis isn't their
only approach they also run
fear-mongering ads on Facebook too your
Amazon Prime subscription is in danger
hoping I suppose that they'll motivate
their Target demographic to complain to
the representatives to put them under
pressure and then of course there's the
money I think this is actually the best
evidence of just how big and dominant
and bullying these companies are running
ads in States where people are in tough
races how obvious can it be message
received they also run other kinds of
cringe PR campaigns my favorite is their
2024 gem generate and create a campaign
that celebrates woful how generative AI
is a force for Creative Liberation
actually opponents of fair use are
working to shut down AI created art
through legal and legisl postive action
we're fighting back and being paid by
metag Google and mid journey to do so
how are they fighting back well by
creating a laughably produced YouTube
video where they drag three artists to
the stage to argue their case for them
these sad sacks then proceed to mumble
unconvincingly about how gen is useful
for their workflow kind of my favorite
line by kavas vich is this gen AI is a
net plus for creativity overall it's
expanding access to creative tools for
more and more people and bypassing a lot
of the traditional Gatekeepers what
gatekeeping is he talking about the
salon De par is he talking about like
the admissions process for art colleges
or Animation Studios to whom it may
concern it's been a dream of mine to
study at your institution I'm passionate
creative and hardworking enclosed is my
AI generated portfolio looking forward
to hearing back Timmy they even created
a rubbish website to kick off their
generate and create campaign and it's
filled with hilarious cringe I really do
love it when legal professionals weigh
in on matters to do a creativity it's so
cute we didn't hire a professional
designer or need to learn Adobe
Illustrator to create our campaign
mascot Arty
fish we created Arty to Mid Journey an
AI tool to expand creativity with AI
anyone can instantly create custom
designs well well done guys yeah that is
how image generation Works get a grip I
don't even understand why this is here
is this meant to be inspiring and also
Arty fish please tell me the concept was
AI generated too but the icing on the
cake was a tweet one of their more
overzealous members put out clearly
getting a bit carried away after one to
minutes many doctrinaire Zoom calls it's
a masterpiece of nonsense one of the
most condescending backwards pieces of
mumbo jumbo you'll ever read for context
it's aimed at the artist community on
Twitter and reads many of the artists on
here have demonstrated their dedication
to keeping marginalized folk including
those with disabilities out of their
community and Marketplace J AI says that
those barriers come down now and I'm
here for it as you can imagine this
caused absolute uproar with an enormous
number of critical respons es coming
from disabled artists who pointed out
that far from being marginalized their
ability to create art provided a vital
way for them to earn a living and
interact with others online one of my
favorite responses was this double combo
the diversity and gatekeeper card played
at the same time this is why big Tech
pays so much for this lobbying but
that's not all another purpose of this
ridiculous campaign is to try and sell
the idea that artwork generated by AI
should be protected under fair use yeah
I know so in order to do that they have
to try and Mesmerize the general public
into thinking that if you tell a
computer to make you art you're an
artist and even if you've sympathies
with that idea just remember the reason
they're saying it is not because they
actually care about creativity or have
the faintest clue what they're even
talking about when it comes to
creativity it's to try and manufacture a
broad consensus as a step towards
protecting generative AI from claims of
copyright infringement now I'm not a big
lover of the copyright holders of this
world but I can tell you for sure I'd
rather a world where those guys are
still holding the aces rather than the
entirety of Earth's artwork being
subsumed by the likes of meta another of
their big pushes is to Advocate that
section 230 be extended to also cover
generative AI meaning that Tech firms
will be completely shielded from
anything the AI outputs and by the way
the original authors of section 230 Ron
widen and Chris Cox do not share this
opinion according to Cox section 230 is
about protecting users and sites for
hosting and organizing users speech and
has nothing to do with protecting
companies from the consequences of their
own actions and products according to
wien and it isn't a particularly close
call now you might agree with some of
the Chamber of progresses positions I
agree with some of their positions but I
think it's completely disgraceful that
meta is willing to actively pump them
with money which enables them to hire
more staff take out ads and waste
legislators time and our time it's fine
for big Tech to hire third parties for
research or advertising or legal
representation but these relationships
have to be completely transparent and in
my opinion given the examples I've just
shown as well as tons of others I
haven't the transparency test has not
been passed not even close and if you
take all this together that's why I can
finally conclude that I have incredible
low faith that meta is going to turn
things around because there's seemingly
no end to their callousness no end to
their incredible lack of respect for
their users every time there's an
opportunity to improve they choose the
most self-serving and disappointing
option which regularly makes the world
around them demonstrably worse bear in
mind that in January 2024 Mark stated
boldly that he welcomed regulation and
wanted it applied at an industry level
when I first heard him say this I felt
it was a good sign I felt he'd accepted
change was needed but for meta to then
go and fight regulation at every turn
that's about as low as it gets they've
now gone completely through the Looking
Glass they work for them not for us and
their behavior is as objectionable as
it's ever been what else needs to be
said meta regularly ranks in the top 10
lists of the most hated companies in the
world and this is really troubling
because Zuckerberg answers to no one yes
he looks bad if shar's plummet but he
can't be ousted for bad performance he
can't be ousted by his own company on
any grounds making him to put it bluntly
possibly the most influential person on
the planet given his control over how we
communicate but he has consistently
demonstrated a pattern of terrible
judgment when it comes to negative
effects on society why who knows it's
hard to know how much he's been
influenced by the techn libertarian
ideas of those like Peter teal but
whatever the reason he seems to be both
ideologically or intellectually
incapable of living up to his
responsibility for the damage his
platforms do he's a top tier developer
and businessman but unfortunately for
all of us that's all he is as his
onetime mentor Roger mamy later wrote
what I did not grasp was that zuck's
ambition had no limit I did not
appreciate that his focus on code is the
solution to every problem would blind
him to the human cost of Facebook's
outsized success and I never imagined
that suck would craft a culture in which
criticism and disagreement apparently
had no place his recent Retreat from
engaging in valuable social
conversations coupled with his attempts
to actively hamper legislation have made
it clear to me at least that he's given
up on the world and that he sees his
critics as opponents that need to be
beaten so what can be done well there
are three angles the first and most
obvious that we've already spoken about
is legislation that erects appropriate
safeguards first forcing social media
platforms to openly share their
analytics and research so they can be
tracked and held accountable for their
failings and establishing standards they
have no choice but to follow but if
that's not your thing the second option
is antitrust legislation which could
seek to split meta up into smaller parts
because it's simply become too big and
too monopolistic just as was done with
standard oil in 1911 or with AT&amp;T in
1982 moves which we can now see were
massively beneficial for fostering
competition and innovation in the US
this would not solve the problem of how
to regulate social media but it would
weaken Zuckerberg's iron grip including
his ability to pump money into lobbying
his ability to set terms favorable to
himself and his ability to stifle open
competition at the very least it would
help to diversify the approaches being
used to make social media safer and less
intrusive and just so you know at the
time of writing there are already three
new antitrust legislation bills being
actively discussed in the US right now
the Third Way is to kill meta with our
feet either by just closing our accounts
or by moving to a competitor but
obviously the choice of competitor is
important here in order to avoid
repeating the same problems I don't
think it's a stretch to suggest that
most of us would be happy to leave
meta's platforms if there was a proper
alternative which had the potential to
achieve Mass adoption and which we
believed would do right by us in the
long term now there are many alternativ
ative social media platforms out there
run by rival tech companies or by
nonprofits it's an enormous topic which
I could dedicate an entire video to but
for now I'll just summarize quickly
since for-profit companies are clearly
just too dangerous to run a social media
utility the ideal solution would be a
nonprofit like the Wikipedia Foundation
however it would need to secure enough
funding to be competitive because money
is needed for it to be useful fun and
well moderated apart from that it would
also need a system where its leaders are
either reelected every few years or Ed
if they under form then there's the
experience itself now many of the
existing nonprofit Alternatives fall
into the Trap of championing Technical
Solutions to solve social problems like
Federated social media using open
decentralized Technologies such as
activity Pub things that sound great to
the techsavvy but which means nothing to
regular people who only notice the
usability taxs that makes them confusing
and annoying to use regular users should
not need to understand how a fediverse
Works they should not need to understand
what server they're on and how they can
post to other servers it's not good
enough in order to beat meta it's not
enough to be virtuous it's not enough to
have a cool technical solution you have
to be able to provide an excellent
experience or there's just no point
apart from that any social media firm no
matter how virtuous would eventually
face awkward challenges when it comes to
free speech so would need a public
charter and an oversight board when
decisions need to be made that might
curtail Free Speech a process made much
simpler when you don't have to worry
about a hit on ad Revenue gosh just
thinking about it I'd love to be
involved in setting up something like
this or just joining an existing
promising effort if there was enough
enough momentum behind it one can dream
so the final thing I'll say given
everything we've looked at over this
terrifyingly long video is to emphasize
the importance of trust trust is the
most precious of assets and meta's
biggest problem is that Mark Zuckerberg
has lost it looking to the future we
need to have solutions that we trust
because it's impossible to avoid
mistakes we will never have social media
that's completely safe we will never
have social media where horrific abuses
or manipulation or exploitation doesn't
happen but what we can have is better
people at the top motivated by the right
things making the best they can out of a
bad situation and as I've just pointed
out we do have options here you can
force trust by supporting safeguarding
legislation you can avoid the need for
so much trust placed on one person by
promoting antitrust legislation or you
can vote with your feet by closing your
accounts or by going somewhere more
worthy of your trust But whichever
option you prefer if you agree with me
that something has to be done take
whatever active steps you can to make it
happen
if you like my diet dbe subscribe
