so my name is Asher um I am a qri
collaborator um in like yeah various
different ways uh of which we will see
in this presentation um my background is
an analytic philosophy primarily uh and
like suffering reduction and sentience
research I've been doing a PhD for like
6 years and uh still ongoing but like
should be finished pretty soon hopefully
um and
yeah this talk is basically an overview
SL inroduction to the particular
research approach that qri takes um for
I guess researching phenomenology and
then looking at how that informs
Consciousness research um and also I
wanted to say I have a surprise at the
end of this talk so definitely stick
around um like really cool surprise
announcement um also if hopefully this
doesn't um you know lose too many like
favor points but would it be possible
for someone to shut that door just in
case the uh there's like a siren that
goes off um cuz yeah I'm recording the
presentation
amazing and um yeah one more thing I'd
like to say is yeah maybe just before we
start if we can all kind of take a
moment to just feel into like our
Sensations how we're feeling at the
moment um I can give a a brief
qualitative report on myself I'm feeling
somewhat stimulated I've had a few cups
of coffee and I just just had a Coke
Zero which has some caffeine um I'm
feeling a bit overheated feeling a bit
nervous because there's so many eyes in
front of me and uh yeah this is a a talk
that I'm really excited to share um it
touches on some really exciting ideas um
but yeah otherwise feeling feeling
pretty happy and uh excited to actually
get through it and then discuss it all
with you so uh yeah this will come up
later um but basically just a
phenomenology kind of reading of of how
are you feeling and uh see if you can
just like lean into certain Sensations
and explore them and also throughout the
talk um so I should also note this is
the third time I've done this talk this
is the most updated version the first
time was actually with Andre a few weeks
ago at the Borderland which is a Swedish
burn um that this is my second
Borderland I think it was his first
Borderland um we had like a pretty
amazing turnout um and that was just
like a very kind of loose uh you know
how to write rigorous uh kind of uh
report of exotic STS of Consciousness um
kind of Workshop we had a lot of people
turn up um and I didn't have any slides
I did have my my iPad there with my
notes uh but then I was in Berlin
immediately after the burn and rather
than decompressing fully I decided okay
I'll I'll do this talk again but I'll do
it more properly so I gave it at the um
uh this is yeah also from a few weeks
ago um at the Q Berlin Meetup and this
is the third time I'll be doing it so
anyway um just some brief housekeep
housekeeping before we begin um so by
Consciousness I'm referring to
phenomenal Consciousness um can have a
show of hands of like how many people
we've heard of that term
before yeah so roughly maybe half um so
phenomenal Consciousness refers to the
raw qualities or properties that make
our subjective experiences feel the way
that they do um other descriptions
emphasize the the wat's likeness of
being in a particular moment of
experience or of having a first-person
perspective
um and it's important to note uh and
this is one of the reasons that qri
exists as an institution is that we we
don't know what Consciousness is it's
completely absent from our models of
reality uh at this current point in time
and to the extent that Consciousness
actually exists and it's not just a
leaky abstraction from our models of
reality this is a a serious epistemic
problem um I I think Consciousness
exists it's one of the the foundational
aums for my entire doctoral dissertation
so I'm going to I'm going to assume this
is this is a real thing and we have to
understand it better um also veence uh
veence refers to you might have heard
this talked about in the context of
effective state or hedonic tone but
veence refers to the intrinsically
positive or negative uh quality of
conscious experiences uh and common
examples would include say Pleasure and
Pain Euphoria and dysphoria happiness
and unhappiness and uh many other such
emotions um as you can see in this
diagram taken from Prince Pia qualia uh
veence is not a binary property so some
experiences you know obviously feel
better or worse than other experiences
uh there's also significant variation
between different veence states of
Consciousness um and it's important to
note that because Consciousness is
missing from our models of reality uh we
also don't know what veence is and
veence is a property of phenomenal
Consciousness um and to this extent or
to the extent that veence has a
normative value um which is essentially
to say that it's important to consider
in our actions you know we typically
think you know necessary suffering is a
bad thing to to cause to another being
um unless we have you know overriding
reasons which yeah um to the extent that
it has normative value this is a serious
ethical problem that we don't even know
what this thing is you know we have a
lot of sophisticated ethical theories
and this is my background actually in in
Animal Welfare research we have a lot of
like models of things that are you know
highly correlated with I guess like uh
what we expect would be like you know
suffering or various veent States Of
Consciousness in certain contexts for
different organ or for different people
but we don't actually know what it is um
so yeah understanding what both
Consciousness and bance are and also how
we can directly interface with them is
one of the uh the core missions of the
qualia research
institute um so can I also get a show of
hands who here has heard of
phenomenology oh wow actually okay so
yeah more people than phenomenal
Consciousness seemingly um yeah so
phenomenology is a philosophical
tradition that began in the early 20th
century um primarily with the works of
German philosopher and mathematician
Edmund hell along with various other
European philosophers such as ma sheller
Martin heiger uh Jean Pat and uh Maurice
Muro Ponte um phenomenology as a
discipline of philosophy aims to
investigate the structure of different
varieties of conscious experience such
as thought uh emotion desire imagination
uh expressed through various different
sensory modalities and uh modern
approaches to phenomenology such as
neurophenomenology you can see this is
an excellent paper I would recommend on
the subject um strongly emphasize uh or
or or look for correspondences between
first person and third person data um
using modern scientific methods um and
like theoretical tools such as
differential uh geometry topology Vector
field analysis dynamical systems theory
nonlinear flow yeah various things that
that didn't maybe exist when when hosal
initially embarked on the project of
establishing phenomenology as a research
practice uh but in the time since R's
writings um phenomenology it hasn't
actually really Advanced that much like
there are certainly you know papers like
this and then there are like lots of
other stages that are you know are
substantial or significant um in its
development as a field but still a lot
of people haven't heard of it I suppose
there's a selection effect a selection
effect in this audience uh with so many
people having heard of phenomenology
before so um but usually when I use the
term people are like oh hold up you know
what is this big bundle of of letters
that you're throwing at there
um so yeah Q's approach to phenomenology
um strongly emphasizes investigating
non-ordinary or exotic States Of
Consciousness uh and by exotic or
non-ordinary I mean States Of
Consciousness which fall outside of the
set of ordinary human experiences um you
know those which were recruited by
natural selection because they have or
had a useful signaling function given
our evolutionary history um given some
basic assumptions about the conditions
under which we evolved and Consciousness
evolved uh so we think that looking at
you know Altered States uh is somewhat
neglected uh not only in phenomenology
but just more broadly in Consciousness
studies um uh and to give a brief
example just imagine if uh you know
chemistry had restricted itself to
analyzing matter at room temperature you
know we think it would have made little
theoretical progress so you can conceive
of like imagine two Chemists in like the
17th century and they're both studying
um H2O and you know want to build a
model of of of water and one of them
only studies it at room temperature and
has like you know a really sophisticated
model and it has it perfectly explains
the behavior of the phenomenon that
they're looking at but then the other
chemist is like oh hold on I'm going to
heat the water up or I'm going to cool
it down I'm going to play with the
temperature parameter and then you see
when you heat it up you know it turns
into a gas and you can observe a phase
transition and then you cool it down and
it turns into a solid um you know we
would think that the second chemist
would have a better model of the
phenomenon and that's because they're
actively looking for ordinary States I
guess like of matter and then they're
updating their model based on that um so
yeah C approach is basically we should
be looking actively for edge cases of
Human Experience outside of room
temperature Consciousness uh to better
inform our models of Consciousness so
for example you know we could look at
Advanced meditative States um such as
like I don't know if anyone's heard of
the janas before or cessation
experiences um we could also look at you
know more generally extreme emot or
physical experiences that humans
experience in everyday life um but
perhaps one of the most significant
tools we currently have for studying
Consciousness through this method are
psychedelics so at the moment there's a
lot of data on exotic States Of
Consciousness such as those induced by
by psychedelics um on platforms like
aroid uh blue light psychonaut Wiki um
there are lots of trip reports that you
can read about you know these these
platforms are free and have been
available for a very long time there
some of them are very procastinating um
but unfortunately the quality of the
phenomenology that you find on these
platforms is is often very poor and it's
difficult to extract the right signal in
order to say update your model correctly
about you know the exact character or
the texture of certain States Of
Consciousness that might result from
like taking you know like 4 hme for
example or you know whatever other kind
of psychoactive compounds are being
researched or just like written about on
those forums um has anybody heard of
this classic qri post
yeah one maybe a few awesome yeah this
is one of my favorites um so I would
highly recommend checking that out you
can see it's on c.org blog rigorous
dports um like there are many different
ways we can improve the quality of
phenomenological research especially
when applied to studying psychedelics um
and and other such compounds uh but the
main problem that we have is that we
tend to focus on describing the semantic
or intentional content of our
experiences rather than their phenomenal
content so you can consider that
experiences have uh structural content
so I would Define this as the
rudimentary properties such as you know
shapes patterns textures that make up
individual moments of experience looking
at like the the most basic indivisible
properties of conscious experiences and
trying to kind of describe them both
within individual moments of experience
and how they evolve over time uh and
then there's the represent the
representational content and these are
basically like candic Concepts that one
might use uh to characterize these
properties at high levels of abstraction
um and so here here's a quick example
that I made um it's a bit silly but yeah
hopefully you get the idea so yeah
imagine this this isn't you know it's a
thought bubble but just imagine this
represents my my conscious experience in
a given moment um and I'm seeing
something that like you know a
representational analysis would say oh
it's it's a smiling cat of course um but
if I'm a really good phenomenologist
then I'm going to want to try and give
maybe like mathematical analysis of the
the the different shapes and you know
maybe the different angles so I could
say right and left Isles triangles each
containing a smaller triangle middle
Center horizontal ellipse and then there
are three lines and then I can I can
list the the degrees that they seem uh
to appear to me in that moment so this
would be like one example of time trying
to take a more structured um approach to
I guess analyzing um the phenomenal
character of moments of experience um
and yeah it's also important to note
that
like why do we take this approach or why
do we think this is relevant to to like
doing high quality research well it's
because you could have an arbitrary
number of experiences that encode the
the representational content of a
smiling cat but when you're giving a
description of an experience at at a
structural level or if you're trying to
give like a you know a mathematical
analysis of like the the exact shapes
and the relationship between the
different components this like heavily
constrains the set of possible
experiences you could be having so I
mean we're still not like perfectly you
know with our words we're still not
perfectly capturing what we want to
capture which is like the what it is
likeness of being in a particular moment
of experience um but we are like heavily
constraining it yeah so uh at qri we
believe the best way to understand
subjective experiences involves
analyzing their structural rather than
their representational content um and
then I'll just give a few more examples
as well so uh an example of a trip
report you might read would be that
focuses on the structural content would
be the ceiling was tesselated with a
highly detailed texture organized along
the 632 wallpaper symmetry group more so
this tessellation was Dynamic and that
all of the shapes were shifting and
morphing um and symmetry group uh is
like refers to like a basically it's a
mathematical concept to describe like
there are a finite number of ways in
which like a repeating pattern across
the surface um can you can transform it
shape and and maintain its structure and
so yeah there are a finite number of of
symmetry groups and this is like quite a
precise account of exactly you know what
is the say in this case the visual
experience of searing at the wall um
another example the left part of my
visual field had a vertical wall I was
attending to with peripheral vision the
wall felt like it was about one m to my
left and at a right angle this
hallucinated wall was vibrating at
around 8 htz and had two alternating
layers that looked about 1 cm apart one
blue and one yellow the colors were
alternating at about half the speed at
which the wall was VI ating um so this
is another good example um especially
because yeah it tries to capture you
know like the the frequency of the the
vibrations over time um so this would
refer to you know not just taking a
single frame uh and and analyzing it but
looking at you know how Quia change over
time and then just like one more um this
is an example I really like is uh
referring to uh a positively veent 5mt
experience which I'll talk about later
uh I could not point out where in my
experience the positive feeling was
located suggesting Global rather than
local coherence additionally while the
information content of the experience
was extremely low the feeling of
connectedness was extremely high I
remember observing this as I was coming
up and coming down from the peak the
perception of synchrony between
different sensory modalities directly
mapped onto the perceived intensity of
my
experience um so yeah so this is the
kind of this is the kind of research we
want to uh or not not in encourage but
this is the kind of research we would
like to in a very safe and responsible
manner um like actually you know grow
because we think this has like a a
non-trivial likelihood of actually
advancing our understanding of of what
kind of thing Consciousness is um
looking at it from the
inside
so uh yeah other relevant information
for writing high quality phenomenology
reports might include say basic
demographic information such as age sex
and ethnic ethnicity um you might
include health information such as how
you were feeling in the time leading up
to the experience uh how well you slept
the night before in addition to say like
General familiarity with with exotic
States Of Consciousness uh a good
example would be like um I'm not sure
how many people have experienced
cannabis for the first time or the
hundredth time or the thousandth time
but like it really changes you know the
the the more experience you have with a
certain State of Consciousness um you
know you could consider it almost like a
different drug um so that kind of
information is is useful if you're you
know hypothetically if you're writing a
trip report and you want to be as exact
as possible um it's also important to
include information about what
substances are consumed and in what
doses you could say the method of intake
um as this like drastically changes you
know how fast um something might absorb
and and how quickly changes to your
experience might be noted um you can
also note yeah say at what time you
started noticing subjective effects and
variability in its inity at different
stages of the trip in order to more
precisely kind of uh plot different
phases such as you know the come up the
peak and the come down um this is a a
cool uh diagram from this a paper neural
correlates of the DMT experience uh
assessed with multivariance EEG um and
yeah and this one it was published in
2019 and participants were asked to
provide uh minute to- minute ratings of
the subjective intensity of ndmt uh so
as you can see there's significant uh
differences between the uh uh the group
that we administered the DMT and the
placebo group um which is what you'd
expect hopefully uh again Consciousness
is real you know like uh we're actually
doing something when we take these
substances um so yeah you could also
consider your methods or like the
quality of your methods for attempting
to capture information about these
states um so most people who I've talked
to who write trip reports tend to wait
until the next day when they're feeling
you know a bit more back to normal
before attempting to capture information
about their state of consciousness uh
but it's it's actually important to note
that the longer you wait the more
information gets compressed um it's
similar to I don't know if any of you
have the experience of you know having
like a really Vivid amazing dream and
you know you're kind of like you you you
wake up from it but you still have your
eyes closed and you can just really
picture certain like aspects of the
dream I often have the experience of
like I will create characters in my
dream and I can still imagine their
faces but only when my eyes are closed
you know as soon as I open my eyes the
world floods in and then it's just like
it's it's gone and I just lose that
access and so yeah trying to kind of
like minimize the distance between um I
guess recording the information and and
maybe an analysis of the experience uh
and the experience itself that can help
um I personally like to use like for for
dream journaling like I have an audio
recorder on my phone so that I don't
even have to you know open my eyes and
uh and write things down
um but yeah uh also I think yeah the
more you do these kinds of things like
also like a dream dream journal the the
more experience you get the more skills
you get and the easier it
becomes so finally uh something this
this might seem a bit like leftfield or
maybe I'm like biased because my
background is in in analytic philosophy
uh but yeah it's really important I
think to State one's philosophical
background assumptions before like I
guess writing an analysis or inter
intereting their experience in the
context of say a report um so this is uh
like a basic example of the relevance of
background philosophical assumptions
would be uh direct versus indirect
realism about perception these are some
really cool diagrams that I I really
like the slide um but yeah so a direct
realist might speak about uh directly
accessing intrinsic properties of the
external world within their experience
and an indirect realist assumes that the
relationship between their experience
and the external world is contingent in
other words that relationship is not
necessary um so it's you know the
mapping could be different um on the
slide here you can see diagrams of uh
two such theories of visual perception
so one illustrates ID's refinement of
the Pythagorean extrem theory which
posits that visual experiences are the
direct product of observers literally
scanning their environments with visual
Rays um this is like quite a popular
theory for you know some some hundreds
of years um in like ancient Greece um
and the second is from Steven Lahar who
isn't from ancient Greece or you know is
is still alive and well um and he he
posits that visual experiences are
literally volumetric Gestalt
representations of external objects
implemented within a warped space
resembling the Bubble World so yeah like
what am I saying with that it's it
sounds crazy I'm not going to elaborate
I would recommend uh reading C flippers
uh post series introducing step L's work
if you're interested in in learning more
um on smooth brains. net uh so yeah
check that out but Lahar is like a very
um like yeah a fantastic uh researcher
with regard to you know kind of studying
uh not only visual perception but just
like more broadly um how experience kind
of um you know shapes itself in order to
represent the external World um but the
point I'm making in this is like more
General and I think can be applied to
Any Given modality of experience so in
the context of talking about trip
reports um if you read a trip report
written by a direct realist uh that says
something like I tasted the sweet golden
color of laughter uh you can assume they
really mean it like laughter has a
golden color and this color has a sweet
taste and they accessed it directly um
but then conversely an indirect realist
might interpret this phrase as the
parameters of my internal World
simulation were altered so that when I
laughed this triggered my visual field
to erupt into a brilliant Golden Light
what's more it seemed I could taste this
Golden Light it had a soft sweet texture
like powdered sugar but the sensation
was not local to the mouth region of my
body map rather it occurred everywhere
within my visual field with this Golden
Light permeated suggesting the formation
of multimodal gals this isn't a real
trip report I I literally just made this
up to demonstrate a point but it was
kind of fun um and these these kinds of
experiences absolutely do exist so um
yeah in other words it really matters
how we frame our analysis of
phenomenology and yeah by making our
background assumptions explicit we not
only increase the usefulness of the
report but it becomes a lot easier in
the process of writing it because I
don't have to clarify every time I I
want to make a statement that you know
this is the parameters of my world
simulation have shifted or something
like that um and yeah I'll also briefly
mentioned Q have developed a
psychophysics tool for quantifying
visual psychedelic effects with various
parameters such as Trails uh strobe and
Replay in addition to modifying effects
such as persistence intensity and
frequency um yeah this is more
psychophysics than phenomenology but I
think it's highly relevant because it
allows you to analyze Trends and
reported subjective effects for various
States Of Consciousness providing some
you know more kind of uh empirical
grounding for for observations you know
if we collected enough data within
phenomenology um and also this is a a
web app and it's free so if you're
interested in trying it out uh there is
psychop physics. q.org down there you
can even access it on your phone um and
if you wanted to contribute to research
this is just like very preliminary at
the moment um based on what people
online you know theyve just submitted
parameters looking at the effects of a I
just like a brief description um it's a
web app that has just like a a blue ball
just bouncing around a box and if you
look at it in certain States Of
Consciousness you can observe oh you
know like maybe this has a trail or this
strobes at this particular frequency and
then you kind of go back to it when
sober and you try and replicate the the
effects based on your memory of what the
the the pattern looked like um and Yeah
we actually do see like fairly
consistent Trends and and the effects of
of some of these um you know these these
submissions so yeah you can check it out
you can submit your own parameters if
that's something you're interested in um
but yeah finally I will get to the the
exciting announcement which is uh so for
the last two years uh qri have organized
two uh completely legal phenomenology
research Retreats um so yeah I think it
was maybe a year and a half or two years
ago there was the Brazil Retreat and uh
there it was studied uh siloc cyon and
aosa and then last year um uh this is
the one that I I was fortunate enough to
attend uh got to go to Canada where 5o
DMT research is or taking 5 DMT is is
completely legal and um the aim of these
Retreats was basically to uh attract
researchers with skills from various
quantitative domains such as physics uh
maths signal processing uh visual
artists experienced meditators and
Psychonauts uh and then me the token
philosopher um to live and and work
together uh on on the shared mission of
better modeling the phenomenal character
of certain exotic sets of Consciousness
so why did we take this approach because
obviously there are like many different
ways in which you could conduct research
uh on olded States Of Consciousness um
yeah to a first approximation there are
three modes of conducting research there
are you could do third person studies
you could be an individual Explorer just
go really deep by yourself uh or you
could take the think tank model and Q is
essentially betting on the think tank
model being the most likely to yield
high quality information about these
stes to actually solve some of the the
open questions or problems uh and this
is like broadly because so like we focus
on the the third person studies um the
methods that they employ are typically
not not always but like uh typically in
the case of like detailed phenomenology
too superficial to capture the nuances
of something as as complex and intrinsic
to physical reality as phenomenal
Consciousness um so for example if
you're a researcher in the mid 19th
century investigating the physical
properties of magnetic fields you
wouldn't get research breakthroughs like
Maxwell's equations by taking random
people off the street and uh and letting
them play around with a bunch of magnets
uh and and then you know giving them a
series of surveys it just wouldn't
happen you know you need people who are
like very like technical technically
minded and have relevant skills that are
actually like allow them to solve the
problem um and yeah to take a real word
example actually there was a recent
study that investigated the subjective
effects of combining MDMA with LSD AKA
candy flopping and uh it concludes quote
MDMA co-administration with LSD did not
change the quality of acute subjective
effects compared with LSD alone end
quote and then they Ed the five
dimensions of Altered States Of
Consciousness scale uh which you know
I'm not going to like you know ask any
of you what you think of that but like I
think it's like blatant you know not
true um or at least it shows the
limitations of of the methods that are
used in many of these contexts with like
you know kind of third person research
like yeah obviously MDMA
co-administration with with LSD has has
uh you know novel effects that are kind
of you know different than just taking
them individually but yeah this is just
like a a tangent um on the other hand so
just like moving on if we look at the
individual Explorer method of doing
research you know pioneered by the likes
of John Lily Terrence McKenna and others
um I think it carries serious epistemic
risks actually and by epistemic risks uh
this is like a twofold risk I mean both
there is a chance that you'll go crazy
in the sense of making bad inferences
based on evidence and having like a
model of reality that is either like
really overfitted or really underfitted
this is something under has written
about um in some of his his blog posts
on Quia Computing um or and this is
something I I find more interesting uh
you'll probably find it difficult to
meaningfully communicate your findings
to others or your experiences to others
which kind of undermines the utility of
such efforts or research purposes um the
reasons for this are like
philosophically quite nuanced and I
won't go into it although I can talk
about it later if anyone's interested um
but like just in a single sentence um
it's because you're internalized
reference frames for conveying sem I
information have to be sufficiently
synchronized to Common frames of
reference in order for meaning to be
transmitted or for meaning to even exist
in the first place um at least if you
take uh Vicken Stein's private language
argument seriously which which I do um
although this is like a personal comment
I don't know about Q as a whole but uh
uh basically yeah you you need uh like
common frames of of semantic reference
in order for like you know to be able to
like convey you know your experience
with with
any degree of fidelity at the very least
um and then yeah the think tank model
Works precisely because individual
researchers have the freedom to venture
deep into exotic States Of Consciousness
they can really kind of you know get get
deep into these states and look at them
closely um but they remain embedded
within a linguistic Community containing
shared frames of semantic reference
which kind of grounds them in a sense
it's like a safety net to you know like
even if you have an experience that
seems like totally out of this world you
know you can still kind of integrate it
within like kind of shared understanding
of like what you know the experience is
and what it's doing and that that's
really important um also having
everybody together in one place for an
extended period um we hope to create a
critical mass of research activity that
would lead to more substantial kind of
research breakthroughs so you could
think of this as like this is quite
trendy to use as a metaphor but like the
Manhattan Project of Consciousness um
and yeah while we're still processing
the research outputs the the ETA I have
been given is is about a month from now
so if you're interested in like staying
updated because yeah like we didn't we
didn't just do these Retreats and then
just like talk about them and then just
like make a presentation we actually
have like heaps of C essays and like and
an art like representing what the five
Meo DMT State of Consciousness is
actually like um yeah it it'll be ready
in a month um hopefully in early
September so you can sign up to like the
qri newsletter if you're interested um
yeah or just like stay out to date with
the social media feed
um but nonetheless I will share some
general information about uh what we got
up to um and this is as I mentioned
before this is the third time uh this
has been discussed because we uh we we
wanted to save it and and make it like a
a big announcement once everything was
ready so first of all where did we go so
we went to the Sentinel uh in British
Columbia Canada which is a 5 m DMT kind
of retreat center um they also do other
types of primarily like healing work
like most psychedelic Retreat centers
are more focused on healing um and yeah
kind of conventional applications of of
altered setes of Consciousness um they
were kind of gracious enough to to let
us in as like you know kind of like
crazy I guess like nerds who just want
to be like really quantitative and and
analyze these states in a very different
way so we we are like super thankful for
them um for that uh as you can see in
the photo it's like super secluded um
perfect for the type of research project
that we were attempting um The Retreat
Center itself uh as I mentioned amazing
staff um they looked up uh after us
throughout our stay so we had like um
kind of shared breakfasts and shared
dinners and lunches and we're able to
you like actually Focus not only on the
research aspect but also the
decompression as well um and it was
situated right next to a mountain lake
so kind of great for you know early
morning swims and the likes uh with a
variety of different outdoor activities
like including like hiking available in
the area um which also helps with
decompression so we booked an Extended
Stay um approximately 2 and 1/2 weeks to
give ourselves really just like as much
time as possible to study the State of
Consciousness um without having the time
pressure to go too deep too soon this is
like especially relevant to note in the
case of 5mt um and I should also just
like put a you know kind of verbal
disclaimer here uh like and talking
about it cuz yeah like during the Q&amp;A
I'm happy to answer questions if anyone
has them
uh it is I I wouldn't even consider it
like a psychedelic it's a in my mind
something completely different and has
to be treated very seriously so I would
yeah like really strongly encourage if
you're interested in the State of
Consciousness um not just kind of like
experimenting by yourself uh or kind of
treating it like something else um it's
the kind of thing that like I think if
we only had like 3 days I don't think we
would have made much progress or maybe
it would have actually been like bad in
some respects of having to like really
you know having that time pressure um so
yeah that was good uh the the days were
mostly broken up into research days and
working days um but we also had a lot of
flexibility depending on on what came up
in the process say you know if there was
a research thread that I really want to
investigate and I was like okay I want a
second consecutive day of like you know
using the the 5o vaporizer and just like
studying this particular aspect you know
we had the the freedom and flexibility
to to do that um this is the uh the Mala
which is a ceremonial space um at
Sentinel uh and that's where most of the
the research activities took place in
addition to uh morning meditations which
is really good for kind of grounding uh
you know our experience and also just
creating kind of like a shared sense of
like you know we're we're in this
together trying to trying to understand
um Consciousness um so yeah earlier in
the retreat we tended to host larger
group sessions while we were still I
guess familiarizing ourselves with fiveo
State of Consciousness um holding space
for each other and really just like
focusing on optimizing for well-being as
I mentioned like 5o is like extremely
extremely powerful um it's not something
to to Dive Right into um and so yeah we
kind of had that Focus but then as time
progressed we started to host yeah I
guess like smaller more focused group
sessions with specific aims um rather
than having like everybody you know
assembled together um but it is a like
beautiful space and it really like you
can have you know up to like 20 people
in there pretty comfortably and uh also
just the amazing views um yeah so here
here's a photo of uh some of the doses
we were working with this is 5o in free
based form um so we were vaporizing it
using a heated Loop of stainless steel
mesh uh kind of like roughly similar to
the eish method that's discussed in some
online communities for for ndmt
vaporization um and we had a dosing
schedule that started very low at 1.5
milligrams and then gradually worked our
way up in like small increments um but
like actually one important finding that
like uh I I kind of stumbled across like
very very early on because I think I'm
I'm from memory I was the first person
to to to do it even at the low dose is
that 5 MOS is actually if you have an
efficient vaporizer and the vaporizer
that we were using is perfectly
efficient um it's active and like
significant lower doses than online uh
kind of you know online resources would
otherwise recommend so if you kind of go
on like psychon Wiki and it would say
you know low dose is like maybe 1 to 3
Mig and then high dose is like you know
more than six or something like that I
honestly found that like half a
milligram would be like enough to really
like maybe I you know depending on on
the context and depending on on how how
fast the come up was or or how the trip
progressed um it could be like extremely
powerful um
and I would speculate that like most
analog methods of vaporizing fiveo DMT
so like using an open flame uh actually
result in a lot of the material
combusting um and so and yeah combusted
5 Mo to my knowledge is not CYO active
or at least it's like substantially less
than than if you get like the right
vaporization setting so yeah like so
little research has been conducted on 5o
but I think this is like really relevant
to note that like you know if if you
have a good vaporizer that that is
actually efficient and is actually not
combusting it um yeah like online
resources are actually not that useful
um and you should just start really low
um and then yeah last of all here's a
photo of under and I after we we met in
the the airport on the way to the
retreat center um this is I was living
in London at the time and yeah flew over
I didn't get much sleep on the flight so
I'm just like eating a a plenty bar and
somehow holding myself together but it
was it was exciting because it was
actually the first time we met in person
but I've like kind of been following Q
stuff since maybe 2019 and so this was
like a yeah an awesome meeting
um yeah so like some some kind of key
points uh I guess like summarizing some
of it we learned just like really a lot
about this the State of Consciousness uh
but yeah I want to emphasize there's
like so so much that we have yet to
discover it sounds kind of cliche but
like really like there's there there's
so much here and even though we have
like a lot in the the output um that you
will soon see there's just yeah um I
feel like you know you need thousands of
people working on this maybe um in order
to like actually figure out what's going
on um but yeah uh still very excited to
share um you know what we've discovered
and like the kind of the early um I
guess methods that we took you know
sharing what worked and what didn't work
for trying to kind of pioneer research
of this of this type um as I mentioned
before we all had different skills that
we brought to the table um so yeah as a
philosopher the shape of my contribution
was an essay kind of analyzing 5's
effects on veence and also it's
persisting Afterglow which I I found
like particularly interesting like um
yeah my experience of 5 Meo itself was
like seemingly less interesting than
like almost everyone else but I seem to
have gotten like one of the biggest
effects in terms of just like really
just changing how I perceive the world
or or yeah just my default mode of like
sensory processing which I'd be happy to
talk about um afterwards if anyone's
interested um but yeah we' also uh like
to note we want to host more
phenomenology retreats in the future um
we think this is a neglected but like
high leverage approach to modeling
Consciousness from the inside out and
Yeah given this specific approach that
we took focusing heavily on quantitative
analysis and psychophysics um it's also
exciting because these Retreats are like
a world first like this has literally
never been done before so um yeah like
really really cool to um to try and like
you know build traction and then try and
like push this approach because yeah I
think there there's a lot to it um on
this note uh if if you or anyone you
know has like technical skills that you
think could be relevant for this kind of
research um we are welcoming I guess
applications or you're just like welcome
to send an email to maybe like Hunter on
the qri website and and you know provide
like relevant information such as your
background um because yeah like as we
were saying before like trying to get a
critical mass of people with like not
not even just focusing on just like
everybody has to be a mathematician or
something like that CU cuz I have like
very few quantitative skills but having
someone else in that environment
actually allowed me to like make use of
their skills and I got to like visualize
a whole bunch of like uh crazy like
Victor field effects on on my perception
of my my body map that I wouldn't have
been able to do otherwise so that's also
in my in my in my essay um so just like
having people who have like technical
skills but like across uh a wide variety
of different areas relevant to this kind
of this kind of
analysis um and also yeah just get in
touch if you're interested in just
helping to establish this particular
approach to to research and
Consciousness um in my mind at least you
know it's it's not only cool and
exciting to be a part of it's also one
of the few serious attempts at uh you
know figuring out what Consciousness and
bence actually are as I said at the
beginning of the presentation and and
how they relate to to the rest of
physical reality which is extremely
ethically important so yeah I think like
there are actually strong ethical
reasons to be like supporting this kind
of research um we are also open to if
you know like somebody who has a bunch
of money who wants to throw at these
kinds of Retreats we're open to to to
further funding as well so that would
allow us to increase the scope of the
Retreats and increase their frequency
and also maybe even just like try and
like I I had various other ideas for how
to like you know encourage this kind of
research approach um but as as I said
before like it is really important
actually that this is all done legally
and um it requires like flying to to
countries that have like you know ret
Retreat centers established and that
have um the infrastructure set up um in
order to like enable us to just focus on
Research like I don't think we would
have been able to go to to the level of
depbt that we did if we just like rented
you know an apartment and and make r or
something like that um so yeah uh
definitely uh yeah I mean you can find
contact and on the Q website or you
could even just like send me an email um
afterwards I would like to finish with
uh what what I think is for me at least
one of the most uh inspiring uh kind of
passages that makes me want to kind of
work on this and like dedicate you know
more resources toward it um and and more
effort it's uh this is David Pi uh he is
a good friend of mine and he is also one
of the the founding reasons for Q's
existence and also a lot of suffering
reduction work uh both within effective
altruism but also just more broadly
within like animal advocacy um which is
yeah as I mentioned something that I
have a a background in um so here has
this like 2009 interview uh and I'll
just read uh a passage um from the
interview so he says I think it's hard
to overstate the cognitive significance
of major psychedelics for the future of
sentience but it's also hard to convey
why these agents can be valuable tools
for investigation for academics who have
never tried them I know just
distinguished drug naive philosophers of
mind um and transhumanists who are
certain that psychedelia can't be
significant and that and it would be
irresponsible to urge them to put their
assumptions to the test perhaps the best
I can do is to offer an analogy imagine
an ultra intelligent tribe of
congenitally blind
extraterrestrials their ignorance of
vision and visual concepts is not
explicitly represented in their
conceptual scheme uh to members of this
hypothetical species visual experiences
wouldn't be information bearing any more
than a chaotic drug induced eruption of
bat-like echol echolocator experiences
would be information bearing to us such
modes of experience have never been
recruited by Evolution to play a sensory
or signaling function at any rate
sometime during the history of this
imaginary species one member of the
tribe discovers a drug that alters his
neurochemistry the drug doesn't just
distort his normal senses and sense of
self it triggers what we would call
Visual experiences Vivid chaotic in
texture and weirder than anything the
drug taker had ever imagined what can
this drug intoxicated subject do to
communicate his disturbing new
categories of experience to his tribe's
scientific Elite if he simply says his
experiences are ineffable then the
Skeptics will scorn such mysticism and
obscurantism uh obsc
obscurantism if he speaks metaphorically
and expresses himself using words from
the conceptual scheme grounded in the
dominant sensory modality of his species
then he'll probably Babble Delirious
nonsense maybe he'll start talking about
messages from the gods or whatever
critically this drug user lacks the
necessary primitive terms to communicate
his experiences let alone a theoretical
understanding of what's Happening
understandably the knowledge Elite are
unimpressed by the drug Disturbed users
claims of making a profound Discovery
they can exhaustively model the behavior
of the stuff of the physical world with
the equations of their scientific
theories and their formal models of Mind
are computationally adequate the drug
taker sounds psychotic yet from our
perspective we can see that the alien
psychonaut has indeed stumbled Upon A
profound Discovery even though he has
scarcely glimpsed its implications the
raw materials of what we would call the
visual world and all its glory and uh I
will end with that so thank you all for
coming
the these are two of my websites and
then the Q but um does anyone have any
any questions uh after all of
that yeah just very very nice talk thank
you um I just had a question about what
kinds of methods you're using to bring
together all these
different reports of the Psychedelic
experiences like what what methods we're
using in our our own analysis like yeah
conducting Retreat so yeah initially it
was a bit more structured as I mentioned
we kind of had like a larger group um
kind of you know holding space for
everyone um and kind of like just
getting familiar with like very low
doses of it and it was kind of just like
tipping you know dipping your toes in
the water uh testing the water type uh
type stuff but um it really actually
like there's no unifying method there is
like a unifying kind of like uh
agreement that like you know we should
be studying uh or modeling these states
with a lot more detail than has
previously been done but um but the
exact method will probably depend a lot
on um you know the relevant skills of of
the researcher so andrees for example
he's really big into psychophysics he's
got some like really cool um stuff to
show from the Brazil Retreat and also
the Canada Retreat of uh like patterns
uh and gals that you can see within
patterns that you can only see in
certain States Of Consciousness and you
can actually just look at it sober and
then you can look at it in that state
and and you have a different visual
experience um so there's that kind of
thing but this is is also like outside
of like my scope like I'm probably a bit
more interested in the kind of
philosophical you know how do I kind of
use like semantic Concepts to latch onto
the the phenomenal character and how can
I how can I model veence in a way that's
productive um in order to you know solve
various ethical problems that I'm
concerned with uh and so for me it was
like much more just like dive head first
um have as many possible different
experiences of different varieties and
then the interesting ones like maybe
like less than 10% of my experience I I
had actually like over 100 experiences
with 5 at The
Retreat based on a firy estimate that I
did uh afterwards so like you know it
might have been more or less um yeah
like like most most of my experiences
were actually just kind of like okay
like I just need to know how how to be
in the state like what what kind of
mental moves do I do um you know in
certain States you you kind of want to
like focus on on maybe certain aspects
to you know to to invest the the quality
of certain certain sensory modalities or
Sensations through those modalities with
5 I found that like I was unable to to
contract my my awareness to to to like
attend to any part of my experience uh
at higher doses without it being very
painful so I actually had to learn to
not pay attention to anything in the
state which is just like totally
counterintuitive but yeah my hypothesis
is basically 5 kind of wants to be like
as unified uh or like you know it wants
complete Symmetry and and what attention
does within the field of experience is
kind of breaks those symmetries um so
yeah that was my method I'm not sure if
that answer your question but yeah lots
of different
types any other questions
yeah uh yeah so I I really like your
side about the uh different
philosophical approaches and how that
might impact your uh reports of your
experience I think that's true and I
think it's it's been a a long-standing
problem in the phenomenological
approaches the Consciousness people just
sort of you know report things that seem
to embed their own theoretical
assumptions uh and then that that leads
it seems to be not objective and you can
kind of take that worry further in the
direction of eliminative materialism
where you think actually just our best
whatever our best scientific theory is
eventually going to tell us that's what
Consciousness is like um but I wonder
whether actually the qri approach that
you've been talking about um does that
partly aggress that response but with
the idea of focusing on these structural
features and though structur Fe is
actually uh you could
argue invariant under those changes of
the background Theory so you know
descriptions of these symmetrical
patterns geometrical descriptions seems
like that's how you would describe them
even if you came up a completely
different Theory Of Consciousness and
that might be an advantage of of this
approach yes yeah AB absolutely yeah
that that's a really good point and yeah
May maybe I as I said I'm kind of biased
in making or emphasizing that point
about philosophical background
assumptions because I am a philosopher
and that's just what I'm interested in
um in in my case because you know my
output was was almost entirely you know
kind of word based and I was writing
essays I think that's a lot more
relevant in the context of like yeah
kind of creating like writing an essay
or writing like a theoretical analysis
of a state of consciousness but like say
if you're a mathematician and yeah
you're analyzing like the the Symmetry
group that appear within like
tessellations within you know within
your experience on on a c like maybe not
5 but maybe like in or or LSD or
something like that then you're right
that's kind of like invariant uh like
regardless of if you're a direct realist
or an indirect realist you know if you
have the the right conceptual Tools in
order to do this kind of like
phenomenological analysis then it
doesn't actually matter you know like
what what your background assumptions
are um and so yeah this is like
certainly like a strong argument in
favor of uh actually trying to you know
to the best of our uh to I guess like to
the best of our capacity try and provide
descriptions that are somewhat
ontologically agnostic so you don't have
to assume I am an elit eliminativist
materialist you don't have to assume I'm
you know a non-materialist physicalist
or I'm an idealist or or whatever uh in
order to to actually do do a lot of like
meaningful research uh although
depending on the shape of your your
essay that could help yeah
yeah um uh you talked about uh the
distinction between um uh structure and
content right I you say structure and
representation langage um it's something
I think a lot about and I I wonder
whether the two are entirely distinct or
whether there's a gray area in between
and I wonder
if yes yeah so the question was uh like
regarding uh kind of structure and
content or like the the phenomenal
content or the representational content
and the slide that I that I had earlier
um and if if it's like as clearcut of a
distinction right is there like is there
a space in between um I definitely think
so I think this is like kind of it's a
useful framing of of like a problem in a
lot of trip reports that I see where
it's just like I mean you know like
standing here right now like I have to
actually assume a bunch of axioms that
that allow me to like you know assume
that I'm conveying meaning to all of you
um and you know I'm speaking at the
semantic level just because I'm using
words right um so like it's definitely
like you know it's not it's not a matter
of just like entirely doing one or the
other um I did have like a there is a
part of my essay um where I am kind of
like probing at this kind of the space
in between where um I'm talking about
the the Afterglow of my experience and
um something I I personally had as a
result of uh yeah like doing all the 5o
was my my Instinct up until I guess the
retreat was you know I would have an
experience and there'd be a sort of like
implicit kind of like uh labeling or
categorizing or kind of creating
dualities within like different
different perets or or the phenomena you
know like like chair person you know
room space you know non-space you know
that's like filled up with something um
and and then maybe like with sounds you
know sometimes you you kind of like
associate certain like emotions or
certain concepts with certain like
vocalizations or or patterns and sound
um that that kind of implicit labeling
uh or conceptualization really
significantly reduced so I found that
like rather than like like not even in
the conscious sense of like thinking
abstractly and thinking there is a chair
there there is you know like this and
that in my experience it was almost like
like I could kind of like lock onto that
way of looking but that wasn't the
default State anymore and I think
there's kind of there's actually
something to this and like a maybe a
pre- theoretical sense of just like just
really sensing different between
different different phenomena or
different like you know kind of qualia
values within our experience um like
yeah um anyway that's addressed in my
essay but certainly worth
considering yeah um let take one more
question
and um yeah sorry if this is little
incoherent um I I guess kind of relate
to the last question I just wonder if
you think there are any limits to this
kind of like data driven instructional
analysis kind of approach because when
you were talking I was kind of drawing
analogy in my mind with like art and
making art you know which also deals
with qualia with like Phenomenon with
like subjective experience and it's like
so for example you know the scene before
all of our eyes at the moment it's so
infinitely complex that kind of approach
structural kind of approach to try and
describe everything that we're seeing
even though you know it's not
particularly remarkable or even a
representational approach where again
you try and sum this up in a very
literal way um it seems like literary
history tell you that neither of those
approaches are actually affective
instead it's it's metaphorical use of
language that would allow you you know
made like a skilled writer could you
know in in a few phrases a few cross
strakes like give you something that
actually Eves what we're all seeing now
much more effectively than either a
structural or representational approach
so I guess yeah for me there seems to be
like a really strong relation between
creation of Art and work you're trying
to do I just wonder like with this uh
approach of like you know collecting
masses of data it it would kind of be
contrary to what you see in art where it
is like you know you're able to sum
these things up where a metaphorical use
of language can actually capture
something that may a large
data yeah yeah this is this is actually
something that I was recently in um in
Tucson uh Arizona for the science of
Consciousness conference and I got to
meet one of my my intellect ual Heroes
sham chandaria um and have a
conversation with them and I was kind of
like actually addressing this kind of
thing like I I have even though like I'm
a you know consider myself a pioneer of
this particular approach to doing
research I still hold that like it's
impossible to to perfectly capture you
know the what it is likeness or the the
the kind of texture or the quality of
the experience I think there are like
more or less skillful ways of pointing
toward the thing that we're trying to
that we're trying to capture um or
trying to express it you know using like
um frames that are kind of like publicly
exist um but yeah I I see this is like
maybe like a problem at the level of
like phenomenology is itself it's not
individually sufficient to solve the
problem uh I I think it's like maybe
jointly sufficient with like more kind
of third person research and maybe like
um yeah like I I think you kind of you
need a collection of different
approaches but shamir's uh kind of
comment to me was basically what you
just said he was like all you can do is
really just use poetry to to to express
and uh yeah I think there's actually
like there is something to that like
when when I you know in my essay um
hopefully this this comes across but
like I am like very analytical but I I
am also trying to use language
beautifully because this is like yeah I
think there's there's really something
um yeah to this point and and Q also
more broadly I should note has like
emphasized um you know actually
involving like artists and and making
like the project of phenomenology also a
project in and you know art both like
visual uh and also like you know through
different sensory modalities like music
is a you know an example of of art that
is is non-visual but uh yeah I think can
clearly like capture certain emotions or
or textures of experience so
yeah cool um and I will also uh there
will be a I guess extended Q Q&amp;A maybe
as a part of the young conference and so
yeah just like if you have any more
specific questions come up and talk to
me there but uh thank you all for for
coming
