Matt Canard a former investigative
journalist for the financial times in
his book The racket details the
nefarious tools the United States
employs to shape and manipulate power
abroad to serve its quest for Global
hemony his reporting done over four
years in more than a dozen countries
including Bolivia Mexico Haiti Palestine
Tunisia and Egypt shatters any idea that
the US is concerned with fostering
democracy or protecting human rights in
case after case he illustrates how US
military and economic power serve as the
enforcer for Global corporations in the
service of exploitation the US
instigates coups uses natural disasters
such as the 2010 earthquake in Haiti to
sell off the country to foreign
corporations breaks labor unions removes
from Office those such as Jeremy Corbin
who pose a threat to its interests in
Haiti in one example in the book The us
establishes a publicly funded but
privately run educational system this
privatization of the educational system
saw $700 million of ha's tax revenue
turned over to corporations while more
than half of the country's school
children lost access to schooling at
sweat shops in Honduras half of which
are owned by us multinational
corporations he found that managers were
administering birth control pills to
female employees each morning to ensure
they can continue to work and there were
notices stipulating the hours during
which workers were allowed to use the
toilet he writes of us-backed
assassination attempts in countries such
as Bolivia the consequences of us
intervention abroad are impoverishment
for workers and the installation of
puppet governments that are enemies to
National sovereignty
the reality of us Imperial power he
Riley notes is not covered in domestic
media which continues to pump out the
ftic fictitious narratives of the us as
a light among nations and a beacon of
Human Rights and democracy but the ugly
face of American power especially with
its complicity in the genocide in Gaza
has turned the country into a hated
Global Pariah joining me to discuss his
book The racket Rogue reporter versus
the American Empire is Matt canar
who is head of Investigations at the
investigative journalism website
Declassified UK which he co-founded with
author and historian Mark
Curtis I think the power of the book is
that by the time you're done you have
delineated most of the patterns of uh
control most of the methods or tools the
US uses and not just in the global South
but even even within the UK and we can
talk about that um but let's begin with
uh some of the examples I alluded to in
the introduction of Bolivia I mean maybe
we can start with Bolivia and then talk
about
Honduras uh and Mexico but let's start
with Bolivia yeah Bolivia is a very
interesting case and um should be much
more widely talked about amongst Pro
Progressive forces around the world
because in my opinion it might be the
most successful SU stained the
experiment in Democratic socialism in
history um Evan Morales won the election
in 2005 and took power in 2006 and he
was the first indigenous president of
Bolivia uh this is a country which had
effectively been uh under the control of
uh wh- skinned Elite since the Spanish
came and the indigenous people have been
brutally uh repressed uh in all sorts of
ways for centuries and he came up uh in
a democratic Revolution and really
straight away way uh transform the
society So within the first 100 days had
a program of um nationalization of
different Industries um uh investment in
Education Health Care all the stuff
we're told uh that the well bank and
others are are concerned with but
actually promote policies which do the
opposite but anyway he was a huge
success and I was quite inspired by
watching this Democratic Revolution from
the UK at the time uh and then I went to
the states and and continued to follow
it and then I was actually and then in
2008 began well there was straight away
there was attempts at subversion in fact
there's a quote in a book from an
American I interviewed when I was in
Bolivia who um uh was an activist but he
went on his trip uh in Bolivia and there
happened to be some US Embassy us Aid
officials on it as well and he he he's
quoted in a book talking about they he
overheard them talking about how we've
got to get rid of Morales uh quite
explicitly um but the US subversion
started right away but it picked up in
2008 when the Eastern provinces
threatened to seed from Bolivia which
has been um uh one of their goals uh
ever ever since that they didn't control
central government they basically wanted
to break up the country in fact that was
only kind of reversed because Hugo
Chavez was in Venezuela at the time and
he threatened to invade um if they were
if they overthrew democracy or at least
uh illegally seeded anyway uh I went
there when I was at the financial
times and uh it was a real window into
how the US Empire operates because
essentially all the institutions you
talk about the patterns that I call it
Empire of acronyms you know when you go
to these countries you see Ned us Aid
DEA uh CIA if you look hard enough and
what all these institutions have is huge
amounts of ideologies bolted onto them
uh to justify them as benevolent um uh
organizations which take great things to
the developing world so Drug Enforcement
Administration we're told is about
stopping uh drug production uh and and
cracking down on narcos National
Endowment for democracy is about
promoting democracy us Aid is about Aid
and and bringing uh uh wonderful
benefits to poor people and that kind of
works okay in in that ideology and that
propaganda works okay when things are
running as they should which is you have
some client um ruler who who basically
just does whatever he's told by
Washington and by corporations which
want to ransack the country for
resources but obviously that that that
wasn't the case in in morales's case and
so all the different pressure points
were exposed and all those uh
organizations became exposed as well so
I started looking into the National
Endowment phography and looking into
okay what are their programs in in
Bolivia and you realize actually it was
nothing to do with promoting democracy
what was it they were funding groups
which were opposed to Morales and trying
to bring him down us Aid is the same
thing uh and I got internal reports when
I was I was in the financial time in
Washington and um sent Freedom of
Information requests and had tons of
data and then also read every single
cable when the Ricky cables came out
from 2005 to 2010 which is when they
were up to and it just shows that there
was a wide ranging effort to destroy
this really uh um uh promising
development not just for Bolivia not
just for Latin America but for the whole
world because we're constantly told oh
socialism doesn't work uh you can't run
an Economy based on the needs of the
people you have you need foreign
corporations to come in and develop
resources that's like the strongest
ideology they promote and obviously they
promote it for a reason because it
enriches uh corporations and the 1% but
he re and they say well if you have
socialism what you do is you get uh
dictators and and and they end up uh
basically just uh uh exploiting their
people for for the regime rather than
corporations he showed actually this is
a movement-based Democratic Society and
the point is that that is what happen
that that occurs naturally a lot of time
and huge amounts of resources are put in
by the us to try and smash that hope
when it arises and they and they they
nearly did it in under Morales and in
fact there was a CIA back to coup in
2019 um when uh when he which involved
other organizations as well based in
Washington the OAS and again not talked
about enough on the left but that was a
a majorly historic moment because he was
taken out in a us back coup in
2019 but returned and democracy was
restored the following year and I don't
know of any other case where a CIA coup
like that has been reversed that quickly
and democracy has been restored and his
party which had won the election in 2019
won the following elections the
following year so it really opened my
eyes to
um the the nefarious nature of the US
Empire the fact that we as a is the
biggest enemy of human progress um I
believe around the world because it
smashes any way any leader any movement
that wants to do things differently and
the key point is wants to use the
resources of their country for the
people rather than the global market and
Global corporations and um yeah and and
obviously the key point of all this is
that this is the opposite of the
propaganda we're fed from the moment
we're born effectively in the US and the
UK as well which is that the United
States is unlike all previous Empires uh
which were which did uh operate on
exploitative terms but the US is
different it operates on Noble
principles like Freedom democracy um
development whatever these words are um
and it's pervasive everyone you have to
believe that to to work in the
mainstream media effectively for the
financial times you can't believe what
I've just said about us power so it
works in a filtering mechanism um and I
realized as well when I was at the
financial times I couldn't
write uh about us subversion of Bolivia
uh which I was seeing which if you
actually had a free media you'd be free
to write stuff about that if I was if I
was publish if I wanted to publish
stories about Chinese or Russian
interference in a in a country I was
visiting they'd welcome it and promote
it and pay me to do it but when it was
us verion it was I was getting NOS from
all editors about specific stories so
what I've realized quite early on being
in the financial times was I'm not going
to stay here because I can't do the
journalism I want to do so what I want
to do is collect as much information
information as I can from the cace to
try and uh and then expose how the
system works when I leave which is what
the racket is and effectively what the
racket does is use a lot of the
information I gathered at the financial
times and obviously you have access
which is amazing like when I went to
Bolivia I could interview the chared
Affairs there wasn't an ambassador
because he' been kicked out but I
interview I went to the US emby and
interviewed the charged Affairs I
interviewed us Aid um and and and then
and then cross reference that with the
Wikileaks cables because the Wikileaks
cables are the window we've got into how
us Empire really works and how US
foreign policy really works because
they're talking they think privately uh
and they're much more honest obviously
and there isn't the space for the
ideologies which I've talked about so
you can get the real information and
what you see is that they just admit in
private that all the stuff they're
saying in public is rubbish and actually
uh the cables showed in the case of
Bolivia that they were actively working
with the opposition um to to take down
Morales um so I think that uh uh the
Bolivia is actually the longest chapter
in the book because I feel like it's
such an important case study because as
you say it's also patterns what I've
described in Bolivia has happened in
countless other countries uh anytime a
democratic left leader who wants to use
their resources comes along the Ned
mobilized the US Aid mobilized DEA is
mobilized and it's very very hard to
move in that in that ecosystem and
that's why they want it it's it's a
straight jacket um and actually Evan
Morales realized that quite early on and
he kicked out USA and he kicked out the
D
which I think is a prerequisite for
actually uh any leader in the global
South wanting to run their uh their
country as a sovereign country you need
to get rid of these agencies because
these agencies aren't there to help you
they're there to enforce us power and
enforce Us corporate
power well they Al that they work in
tandem with a banking system to strangle
the economy that's certainly what they
did with sesa in Greece um so there are
U the inter organizations you have a
line in the book that the Ned just does
publicly what the CIA used to do in
private um uh uh but they have the
ability to essentially shut the country
down I just before we go on I want to
talk about the Wikileaks cables but that
pattern has been rep I lived in Latin I
actually studied Spanish in Bolivia and
Coach abamba but uh and lived in Latin
America for six years that pattern uh
was has been repeated for decades uh
whether it's aende and Chile uh whether
it's arbend and Guatemala uh anytime
there was a movement uh a popular
movement that sought to reclaim
sovereignty uh you know control over in
of course in Bolivia a lot of it is tin
uh uh the famous tin mines um that the
the US intervened on behalf of
Corporations and uh I think a lot of
people you and I do but a lot of people
don't realize how important the
Wikileaks cables were uh not just for
the uh debacles and war crimes in Iraq
but for shining a light on us complicity
I mean Haiti being one of the most you
right about Haiti as well but the
Wikileaks cables
exposed that uh the US government was on
behalf of us corporations which ran
sweat shops in Haiti you were also right
about this in Honduras but was uh
working to essentially suppress a
movement to raise the minimum wage to I
mean something insane were they trying
to get $2 an hour I don't remember how
much but talk a little bit about the
importance because in Independent Media
in the global South uh the Wikileaks
cables uh which was also true in Tunisia
uh were huge a huge Revelation yeah I
mean I think it's the best repository
for historians and journalists there's
ever been uh for understanding the
global system because the US is this
kind of
us power is the governing dynamic in
world affairs if you look from what's
going on in Gaza to regime change in
Venezuela Venezuela Syria wherever you
look American power is is the overriding
factor and we were given a Decades of
them speaking privately or what they
thought was privately about how they
operate and actually it significance is
why that is completely ignored by the
mainstream media in the US and the UK
because their role is not to reveal
truth they're they they say it is and
we're told it is in civics class and and
journalism school we we're a check on
power but what you realize when you work
on the inside and I'm s sure you saw
this at the New York Times as well is
that actually if you start doing proper
journalism like Julian Assange did and
really revealing truth as we're told we
should then you get attacked by the
journalists that uh that operate at the
top of society and one of the Awakenings
I had when I was at the Ft was I was
there in Washington this was under the
Obama administ ation when the Wikileaks
cables first started coming out and I
remember being really enthused and
excited about this I was thinking this
is a treasure Trove for journalists I
remember the first editorial meeting at
the at the at the ft's Washington Bureau
and it was just everyone was uh
attacking Assange and basically
dismissing the cables and I was just
thinking wow if that is their reaction
to the the revelations that might give
us some clue about how the system really
works then they don't see their role as
really exposing power what they see
their role is and I still believe this
is that they project an image of that
through covering Frost stories uh
scandals like small fry and then but
never ever do stories which uh impact on
our understanding of how the system
works at a much deeper level that's the
red line for these journalists because
effectively and this goes in fact the
liberal class may be even worse than the
rightwing in fact I think they are um
because they essentially believe in the
system and they have to believe in a
system to get where they are um so I
think the Wikileaks cables are are are
hugely significant and they just appear
all throughout the book in fact the
book's dedicated to Chelsea Manning
because she uh well she Chang she
changed history uh by what she did and
it was completely heroic you know and
again uh wasn't supported by the media
in the in the way that she should have
been uh wasn't supported by the guardian
in the way she they should have been
Julian Assange wasn't supported by the
guardian look at not to go off track too
much but this is very linked to the US
Empire because this was a historic
moment in in in exposing the US Empire
what Julian Assange and Chelsea Manning
managed to do but the guardian was the
the paper that published most of those
early leaks and then they later on
became the biggest uh vehicle for the
information War which was being fought
against him by the CIA the British State
and other elements outrageous they even
he was in belmar's prison for 5 years
Maximum Security Prison never without a
conviction for anything um the Council
of Europe just um voted which is the
highest human rights body in Europe of
which the UK is a signatory they vote
their parliamentary uh um institution
just voted that he to to declare him a
political prisoner for uh for the 5
years he was in it's quite incredible
that not one UK newspaper has written a
single word about it um you would think
that the highest human rights body in
Europe ruling that we held a journalist
as a political prisoner for 5 years in
our most in our higher security prison
would interest journalists and at least
would should be on the front page of
every paper if we had a genuinely free
press nothing and that's because Assange
is the enemy because he took journalism
too seriously and he did he exposed them
he exposed the American Empire but he
also exposed journalism because he he he
set the standard for actually how you
really do what we're told you meant to
do which is which is help our
understanding of how our society works
and and in the case of Haiti it was very
very uh I used the cables throughout
because as you say I think that Haiti is
maybe the emblematic example of how this
system operates and emblematic example
of how the US Empire destroys countries
uh because I was sent there the year
after the earthquake in 2010 which was
an unbelievable disaster you know
300,000 people died instantly I remember
getting there and I was just I couldn't
believe my eyes it was apocalypse you
know the the presidential Palace had
collapsed all the government Ministries
the whole of Porter Prince which was
where I was was was was living in tense
the whole of it and um just incredible
and uh I I started looking into the
history and at that time I was working
for the Ft so I got all the I got the
the the the tour that you get as a as a
corporate reporter for elite paper and
and that is how it works you know you
stay in the five-star hotel you get
taken around in a air conditioned 4x4 by
the World Bank to the nice projects that
they're funding and they're telling you
all these wonderful things that they're
investing in and restarting the economy
and blah blah blah and it's very
seductive and in fact if you don't come
into journalism with a uh a very very
defined idea of how the world works or
at least you you some kind of backbone
to resist that ideology and that
seductive system no no you don't go
against it and not many people do go
against it and they were taking me to
these uh special economic zones which
were being opened funded by us Aid one
of them was in the north we flew to the
north and they took me and I remember we
went to another special economic zone
which had been set up previously by a
company from Dominican repu public but
with Aid money and I was taken in
and uh interviewed the CEO and he was
they had a union so I was talking to him
about the union and he was saying well
we had some teething difficulties but
now we have the the best running Union
in the country and I remember I looked
at the Wikileaks cables afterwards and
firstly I found that that sez had been
built on peasants land that didn't want
to move and they' been actually removed
by uh uh uh corporate and state forces
and then I found out that the the union
had been uh talked about by us officials
because the union had taken its uh role
too seriously and was demanding better
rights for the workers and then was
disbanded and then replaced by this
what's called a yellow Union which
basically just works for the corporation
so you saw there's these two worlds
there's the fantasy world the hyper
reality World which is created for you
if you're a corporate journalist and you
go to Haiti and and it's very easy to
accept because it that what's your
interest in not accepting it and then
there's the real world which is
evidence-based and uh and and really
exposes the Dynamics which govern the
decision- making of the US and their sat
traps in hati and other places and
they're completely at odds and they
never can meet um and that's why there
was a brief opening when Wikileaks
cables started coming out you know we
did have some real uh evidence of how
the world works this hyper reality was
smashed but actually I've been thinking
recently about that because it was an
amazing moment but the powerful forces
who created the discourse in in the US
and the UK they have all the resources
and they managed to even though we had
amazing Revelations like the collateral
murder video and others which showed
that the US just gunned down uh
journalists and kids and and others um
it didn't Dent this what we're talking
about this overarching ideology of the
benevolent and benign American power it
didn't Dent it in in the long term and
that's because they have all the
resources to kind of just squash the the
the evidence that come up and that that
if it was sustained it would be but the
whole point is it's not sustained there
it's this little brief blink and then
you get put ass in prison and it all
goes back to how it was before so I
think us in alternative media that's why
I think what's going on in alternative
media and and um the the in the power
the internet gives us the circumvent the
mainstream media is so important and
obviously does worry the powers that be
because the Empire operates on
propaganda that is one that is why they
took Assange so seriously because one of
their biggest priorities is that they
can't the truth about how the world
works and in whose interest it's being
run is is Central to them being able to
project power if you damage that and
people understand then uh uh how the
world works and what we're involved in
and for example in Gaza then they they
really there will be pressure to change
and in fact I do believe that's what
makes a journalist complicit in what's
going on in in Gaza now because we at
Declassified have been doing a stream of
stories about the use of the UK base in
Cypress this is a bit off topic but it
is related to the US but because the US
has been flying flights from there and
that's caused an absolute uh scene in
Greece I mean sorry in Cy in Greek
Cyprus there's been um demonstrations at
the UK base it's both pres presidents on
both side of the Border have had to talk
about it never a word has been written
about in the UK media but if if the
resources of the
BBC and the guardian were used to really
expose the US Empire and it's and its
little poodles like the UK then I think
that it would really make the system
running as it does much harder and may
have they would have to change it uh
they might get more sophisticated way to
propagandize and uh but but but that
pressure is not there at all and this is
not a left right issue Guardian which is
held up as like uh as as the the kind of
like liberal left you can get an
Anti-Imperialist perspective they signed
up to the you American Imperial project
and all the propaganda that goes with it
so it's it's not about a left right the
whole of the the the left center right
in the establishment all regurgitated
stuff and believe that stuff and you
have to believe that stuff to get into
the media and and and get a column or
get uh become a news
reporter well that's what n chsky told
us several decades ago um I just armed
Cyprus I think it was Declassified UK
which you run
uh broke this story that uh armed
shipments were being flown from
Cyprus uh to Israel uh to fuel the war
in the genocide in Gaza that's correct
yes and it's it's actually really
relevant to what we're talking about
which is US Empire
because the obviously Britain is part of
the American Empire we are a junior now
we're an adjunct to the whole system but
one of the major ways we uh remained
relevant to the United States after the
second world war which is the time when
we're told the Empire died and it but
which never happened it just got
repackaged in and in different ways but
one of the ways we remained relevant was
we basically opened up our bases which
we have all around the world from
Forkland to Cyprus to Bahrain to napole
we made them also us bases and Diego
Garcia being Ematic example that's
actually called a Joint Base but
unofficially all the others are joint
bases and I went to Cyprus so a bit of
background on this bace as well about
which shows how The Empire never died as
the British Empire never died so Cyprus
was a British colony until 1960 when it
got independence under Archbishop Marios
who was The Liberation leader the first
democratically elected leader of uh
independent Cyprus but in that treaty
that we sign the British signed they
retained 3% of Cyprus which we still own
and not many people no one knows about
this even in Britain but um so it's
these huge sves of land which aren't
just military bases uh there's military
bases on them but you talking about 3%
of the islands so they're big and uh I
went there and did a a series of stories
one of them was about revealed for the
first time the the real presence of the
US Air Force there because the British
and Americans had said for 50 years the
Americans have a presence there but they
wouldn't say the size and they wouldn't
say the um the uh the complexion what
what what units were there but I found
that 129 us ammen were permanently
stationed at RF criteria which is the
main base there and but but as I say one
of the services we provide is not only
use but the all UK sites around the
world and this is very important people
know this and no one knows this and I
only know this because I've been trying
to get information but I operate as
black sites for the Americans you cannot
get a single bit of information about us
activities on UK basis as sync from the
UK side I've tried they and they come up
with a blanket statement which is we
don't comment on allies movements on or
activities on our own basis and there's
so it's more secret effectively than our
intelligence agencies and our special
forces what us do and they've got huge
presence within the within Britain as
well there's 12 thou over 12,000 us uh
troops permanently stationed in the UK
me most of them are two sites just
outside London called RAF milen Hall and
RAF Laken Heath Laken Heath they're
talking about what it's rumored uh and
it seems likely that they're redeploying
nuclear weapons the US is to to to that
plus you have the intelligence
occupation of Britain you know Edward
snowden's leaks showed that gchq bu now
gchq is the UK's largest um intelligence
agency it was exposed extensively by
snowden's leaks and it has a site in
Corall which is in the west of England
um by the beach and it's called gchq bu
and it all the transatlantic cables go
there and um he his leak showed that the
NSA the National Security Agency pay for
half the maintenance of gchq bued uh so
it's effectively a US site you can't get
any information about how many US
Personnel are there or anything because
there's just a blanket statement saying
we don't comment on intelligence matters
but then you have ARF cron which is
another base within the UK itself north
of uh in the Midlands where they they
say that there's a thousand CIA uh
officers based there it's 25% of all
Communications which come from Europe
back to America go through RAF Crow and
that's also the site where uh the the
alleged CIA officer uh anak koues killed
Harry Dunn that child uh which was a
case which got very big here I don't
know if it was big in the States but
what you see when you start looking into
it and this and let let me just
interrupt Matt because she was then
spirited out of Britain and uh all the
requests to
extraderm with this false claim that she
had diplomatic imun
exactly yeah and and they first denied
that she was working for the CIA because
it's not official none of this stuff is
official they've never acknowledged that
RF cron is a huge CIA station so it was
all very embarrassing for them but
effectively the U the UK just takes its
orders from Washington that there's no
and that and and the the quid pro quo is
that um the US uh uh keeps us I guess
gives us the we can have the pretense
that we're we're we're this still this
powerful force and the British
establishment really care about that
just on a personal level there's an
arrogance in the British establishment
which has been fested and pickled over
centuries of ruling the world which and
they don't want to let go of it so
they're willing to do anything for
Washington if they can stay part of the
US Empire but we have so we have this
huge occupation which means that we're
not a sovereign country and I know it's
a cliche to say Britain's the 51st state
but it really is we cannot go against
the US and actually uh the preface to
the book um is all about this and we re
that again this was really exposed
during Jeremy Corbin's leadership of the
labor party because that was a historic
moment in Bri British history you know
he was elected labor leader in 2015 he
was the first well the second non-
atlanticist labor leader ever to be uh
elected post the Second World War uh the
other one being Michael foot in 1980 to
83 but he was destroyed again but uh cor
Corbin really showed that uh the the P
the power that the US still has here and
actually when I started looking into all
the agencies that you mentioned you know
like the Ned and stuff I was uh through
the whole of my career I'd always looked
at those in the global South who were
operating in Weak States uh and
basically running the show and I I kind
of assumed that even before I was going
there because you in a country like hati
the state so weak that even one of those
institution is more powerful than
government my hunch was okay well this
doesn't operate the same way in Britain
where we've got a longer history we got
these strong institutions but you real I
realized pretty quick when I started
looking into what these agencies were
doing in Britain that the same patterns
uh were occurring and in fact even more
resources were going in because
obviously as an Imperial Center uh
Financial Capital it would it it's at
the top priority to keep the U to keep
the UK uh uh Pro atlanticist so Jeremy
Corbin was a massive massive nightmare
for the US and in fact it it was it
became really explicit you know Mike
Pompeo when he was Secretary of State
who was previously director of the CIA
came to the UK in the summer of 2019
this was before the 6 months before the
election uh of 2019 which um Jeremy
Corbin lost to Bor Johnson but he was
recorded privately saying to a group of
people we will do our quote level best
to stop Jeremy Corbin becoming prime
minister of Britain and he said it's too
hard to do it once he's prime minister
so we we'll do it now like this was and
it was reported for a day in the papers
but then it just disappeared and you're
sort of thinking this should be a huge
huge scandal this is a senior official
uh coming to the UK and basically saying
we won't allow it and there was no
investigations of what he meant by that
and obviously he was referring to
certain programs they had and and and I
think those programs are like the Ned so
the Ned F I did a story about The NED in
the UK and it their investments in the
UK uh in media organizations picked up
massively after Corbin became leader and
they included groups like index on
censorship Belling capap um Article 19
uh open democracy all had received money
over uh since
2015 and it was in the millions of
pounds plus um there's I I'll finish
with this because there's a very very
interesting um organization which again
is the Dynamics of it and the setup of
it and how it works is very very much
part of this pattern of how the US
exercises power sort of covertly but it
it as I mentioned the only other leader
of the labor party post 1945 who was non
atlanticist was Michael foot and he was
in he he he was elected leader in 1980
he lost the election in 1983 and left
but he the election in 1983 was uh he
was really radical well comparatively
like if you read that Manifesto from
1983 he called for the UK to withdraw
from NATO for example um and really
showed that he wanted to move Britain
away not to the not towards the Soviet
Union but away from the United States he
wanted Britain to be a kind of
non-aligned country and he lost the
election badly but and it was called the
longest suicide note in history but
Declassified us CIA
files have shown that they were
massively worried about Michael foot's
leadership and what had brought him to
power which was a real sort of
anti-imperial um movement within the
labor party and they uh and the US
embassy at that point started this
organization which is called the British
American project and it was quite
explicitly about kind of cultivating the
progressive left end of the British
political Spectrum into um a
pro-american position and it developed
massively during the 80s and it still
exists today and it was mobilized
massively during Jeremy Corbin's
leadership of Labor and many many senior
figures in that organization were became
the biggest critics of Corbin uh and and
you saw they had to come out the Shadows
they w't because they how it's presented
is it's a nice uh membership
organization where journalists
politicians um intelligence officials as
well by the way UK military as as well
uh get together and have they have
dinners and events and they have a
conference every year in the US and the
UK uh alternate years uh but what it is
actually is about trying to cultivate
and bring um uh uh the left of the
political Spectrum away from any
anti-imperial position it's been very
successful and I actually interviewed a
MP or a former MP called Emma code she
won the she won her seat in Kensington
for the first time for the labor party
in 2017 served till
2019 and she's told me that she was
recruit what they tried to recruit her
to the British American project in the
80s when she was a journalist and she
said that um uh they said come to this
conference it's just about helping
develop relations between Britain and
America and and uh helping uh poor kids
and stuff like that and she said
something smell fishy and this was a
senior official in CND by the way which
was uh which campaigned for nuclear
disarmament which which was which called
for the US to I mean for the UK to unit
Lally uh decommission its nuclear
weapons but she found out subsequently
she told me this and this is not a
fringe figure or a conspiracy theory
she's quite a prominent figure here in
the US in the UK she said her fr the the
the boyfriend who was no longer the
boyfriend of of this woman that tried to
recruit her told her actually I found
out that uh she works for the CIA and
she was working for the CIA at the time
and that's ENT code said that and that
we put that in the article um obviously
didn't get any pickup in the mainstream
media but you see time and time again
that the CIA its main focus in the UK uh
has been to try and stop uh the the
Anti-Imperialist left getting anywhere
in the labor party uh and that really
they really had to come out of the
Shadows during the Corbin years because
that was he he is a genuine
Anti-Imperialist and he has a long
history of um uh uh opposing us Wars and
UK Wars and he was kind of the biggest
sniper for the United States and they
successfully did it you know they they
want like Jeremy Corbin in 2017
was what within 2,000 votes of becoming
prime minister spread across different
constituencies if he hadn't been
fighting a Guerilla war against these uh
different elements for two years he
would have won that election and and
British history would have been
different but but the whole point about
the British political system is it's
never been allowed to we've never been
given a real choice and we're not
allowed to have a real Choice partly
because we're controlled by the US in
all these different ways military NOS uh
uh intelligence uh and and and you can't
talk about it it's an it's a it's an in
interference that literally you can't
talk about so we get endless stories
most of them rubbish about Russian
influence every day every day but
literally nothing about the fact that we
can't move because we're controlled by
the us and that figure I mentioned about
over 12,000 uh US troops permanently
stationed has never appeared in the UK
paper so just emitted from the record no
one so no one will know that we have
this occupation
so it's it's a it's a silent Empire and
again as we as we mentioned and as as
you know this is this how it operates
across the world they there's so much
propaganda put into um uh uh presenting
the US power as benign and belant but
there's also a whole other side of this
which is propaganda by a mission where
all the nefarious things that the US
does around the world are just admitted
by the oligarch media so no one knows
about it so so we need to change that
yeah I'm the first story I ever wrote I
was in college was uh company called
Gulf and Western uh which owned many
corporations including Paramount
Pictures and I went to the Dominican
Republic they were assassinating labor
leaders uh I wrote it up uh and it was
set to be printed in the Outlook section
of the Washington Post I was a
freelancer and paramont pictures told
the Washington Post that they would
withdraw their advertising millions of
dollars of advertising and the story was
never printed it was eventually printed
in the Christian Science monitor in a
reduced form uh only because the
Christian Science monitor at the time
did not take
advertising um so I mean that it and of
course you and I both come out of the
mainstream media we understand exactly
how that pressure works and and
journalists most of the people of the Ft
or the New York Times a good careerist
uh you don't need to write rules on the
walls they get it um they don't want to
become a management headache and end up
like you and me uh I want to talk about
Zionism because uh there were two forces
that brought down Corbin one was this
neoliberal American Imperial Force but
also it they the the way they
discredited him was as an anti-semite
they got him to purge his own party you
also had the blairy faction within the
labor party that was working against him
and part of your book is
written from Palestine so let's let's
talk about about that that force of
Zionism and and what you wrote about in
Palestine yeah well I mean uh uh to link
it to what I was just saying I think
that Gaza the horror that we've seen
over the past year has ex has kind of
stress tested the propaganda system and
the propaganda system has failed you
know we have you've had like a a year of
people millions of people and actually
the general population seeing on their
phone some of the most awful things
they've ever seen in their life just uh
straight uh terrorism by the Israelis
and yet they've seen Joe Biden who's a
Democrat and they've been told their
whole life is the good guy against the
Boogyman Trump uh getting up and
defending it all uh and ventriloquizing
Israeli propaganda sending billions more
weapons um and I think that
contradiction is really having an impact
on a societal wide level I've talked to
people who are just they're like my
wellview has completely changed over the
past year uh because they're not like us
in the sense of that they haven't worked
in it and they don't have this kind of
uh understanding cuz they're not working
within the system or or at least trying
to uh do journalism about this stuff and
and so if you've been fed that
propaganda and you're seeing this that
contradiction is has never been as
extreme because obviously us and UK
Imperial crimes throughout history have
been there has been awful stuff
happening
similar to Gaza you know like what the
British did after the Indian Mutiny in
1857 people should look into that it was
the savagery was out out off the charts
and then obviously Viet or the Mal or
the Mal Mal exactly and then you have
the Vietnam LA and Cambodia but we
didn't have social media then like this
is the thing that I think G why gaza's
be is changing the consciousness of
humanity because everyone is seeing it
and the mainstream media you won't see
it or you won't see the real stuff but
there's a way we can circumvent it so I
think that uh that that that's changed
the world for the better in that the
cost has been way too high obviously
because it's it's it makes you
speechless often looking at what's going
on but I but another part of it is to go
to what you talk about Zionism as well
because previously in the UK in Corbin
period we couldn't ever talk about
Zionism even like people around Corbin
and uh stuff we couldn't talk about the
Israel Lobby uh we did on the fringes
but we were called cranks and dismissers
uh but uh but it was people were so
scared to touch those two things and
that has also changed you know we can
talk openly about what is Zionism it's a
settler Colonial ideology um which uh
which is predicated on uh the supremacy
of Jews over the indigenous people um uh
uh and it intellectual Godfather is japa
insky who was a fascist uh and admir of
melini and kind of his philosophy is one
out the L
goodnik ad all that and uh and and and
the way that the Zionist Lobby in the UK
and I think around the world it central
goal has always been to present Zionism
as a progressive Force they say they
they they they try and Link it always
with the history of uh uh persecution of
Jewish people uh when it's Zionism and
Judaism are two totally different things
but there's this real real um uh attempt
to do that and in fact within a labor
party it was it was those or
organizations that really went for
Corbin you know because because of his
Pro Palestine position nothing else he's
never said anything anti-semitic in fact
they picked on uh uh uh the the most
storied anti-racist of his generation in
Parliament by far Jeremy Corbin he's
been a longtime suppor of the Muslim
Community the Jewish Community every
minority he's famous for it so it was
kind of like you know that Swift boats
Veterans for truth thing with John Kerry
where right KY Ro said we got to go for
his his strength that's what they did
anyway uh but they don't some of those
groups call themselves like Israel have
Israel in the title like the labor
friends of
Israel um but others like the Jewish
labor movement say they well they said
they nothing to do with Israel but in
fact have run effectively as proxies for
the Israeli Embassy um and they did I
mean very there's a very good journalist
we got in the UK called ASA win Stanley
who I think you've had on the show
before but he he wrote a book recently
and he but he was literally the only
journalist really doing this at the time
there's more stuff coming out now but it
was uh but it was completely suppressed
and in fact I I don't think the Corbin
Administration dealt with it at all they
didn't really realize what they were up
against because I think they were quite
naive you know they kind of got
catapulted into this position no one
thought Jeremy Corbin was going to win
in 2015 there was not many personnel
around that he could but they basically
they they did they never pushed back
against the the smears which is what
they should they said they they kept
saying uh we're sorry uh we we don't any
anti-Semitism is wrong which everyone
agrees with obviously but but they never
said actually this is a Witch Hunt which
has been instigated by the Israel Lobby
actually and other forces as well who it
was useful to uh to destroy the one bit
of Hope we've had in the UK for many
generations which is what they should
have said um and uh but again uh I think
all this has changed now because I think
if if if we're looking at what's going
on and we're not brave enough to speak
in clear eyed terms about what Zionism
is and what the Israel Lobby is because
we're scared we're going to get smeared
as anti-sites or um uh or or bigots or
whatever it is then uh yeah you you've
lost your your Humanity because we it's
too serious you know and I think that's
a lot of people have had that
realization and are speaking out um uh
in a in a clear throated way and
hopefully it will continue I mean I
don't I don't know where it ends I don't
know what you think but it seems to me
that um Zionism is dying in in terms of
the narrative uh I think
that it I can talk to the UK side
because we've got actually a lot of
amazing activism in the UK against
Israel and uh um uh prop Palestine
activism all the biggest marches
actually about Gaza have been in London
um and we have this group called
Palestine action which is actually
making actual strides to shut down
Israeli weapons factories elbit
factories in the UK but there's a
massive backlash from the state because
and there's polls that have come out
recently there was a poll that said 71
uh it was that the favorability for
Israel was minus 71 in the UK and that
was the lowest ever in recorded history
and so the the population is and want
arms embargo on Israel they want to
ceasefire but you've got this massive
breach now between the ruling class
labor Party conservatives and pretty
much the rest of them and the population
and that's not sustainable for that long
I don't believe and what the state is
doing in response is to try to
discipline the population through legal
means so they so they using these laws
that have been that were passed to
prescribe Hamas and Hezbollah which were
actually done at the beest of the Israel
Lobby by the way Hezbollah was banned in
the UK in
2019 but um what they what what this
what the terrorist act says in section
12 is that you cannot voice support for
prescribed groups now Hamas and hezb are
prescribed but they they're now using
that they're wielding that legislation
against Pro Palestine activists so Sarah
Wilkinson who's an independent
journalist had a house raided by 13
police uh this is a woman who runs a
Twitter account just giving updates on
God she was bundled into a van they
through the the ner with her Mom's ashes
against the wall she was held in at a
police station and interrog ated uh you
had the week before Richard medhurst
another independent journalist who was
detained for 23 hours in solitary
confinment in at heo airport uh again
under section 12 of the terrorism act uh
and charged under it Richard Barnard I
was just at court the other day in
London um he's been charged under
section 12 uh of the terrorism act for a
speech he gave so they are they know
they're losing and they know Zionism is
losing because we're talking about it
people are seeing the real uh uh uh
basis of it which is it's a set a
colonial ideology which which has no
place in the 21st century we we we left
we should have left all that behind but
um the but but the repression is getting
worse here um and we don't have the
culture of free speech that you have in
the in the U us like whatever you think
of Hamas and Hezbollah you should it's a
massive attack on free speech that you
can't speak freely about um uh
resistance groups around the world it's
it's kind of tantamount to say to the US
uh uh Outlaw saying you support the Viet
Kong during the Vietnam war it's it's
it's it's a it's an attack on free
speech and it's an attack on the basics
of freedom but it's being done at the
beest of the Israel Lobby and they are
clamping down massively now but I don't
think it will work because they can't
put uh millions of us in prison well
maybe they can try but but but the The
Awakening that has happened here is
incredible and I see it in the United
States as well you know like look what
happened with the student demonstrations
I was student at UCLA and Columbia at
different points in my 20s and I
remember I was a columnist on the UCLA
student paper called The Daily Brun uh
and you couldn't say anything about
Israel back then anything like it you
would get editors would tell you don't
say if you wrote anything mildly you'd
get attacked and then you saw the UCLA
all these students coming out doing an
encampment uh it was the same at
Colombia so things are changing and I
think they know that but what people are
saying and I think it's quite accurate
is that democracy is being and free
speech is being eroded in the US and the
UK to defend the fascistic genocidal
regime of Benjamin Netanyahu which is an
absolutely insane scenario these are
victories for Freedom that have been won
by centuries of popular struggles and
they're all being dismantled to support
this genocidal state which is smaller
than
Wales yeah well they've come down very
hard on the universities the
universities and colleges spent all
summer with security firms many linked
to Israel to uh impose all sorts of new
rules you can't have encampments you
can't have uh tables with leaflets etc
etc um so yes the the response
especially targeted at the student
activists who perhaps the only people in
the United States with a conscience
along with Jewish voices for peace and a
few others um they've targeted them you
know with very Draconian means uh I I
want to talk a little bit before we go
about
uh the
the transfer of manufacturing over seas
this is you you raised this issue in
particular in your chapter in Honduras
um and the role of the US in
essentially uh as the as the protector
of sweat shop labor um so you after NAA
are able to move uh large Industries the
Auto industry Etc over the border into
Monterey Mexico uh work workers who were
once making $25 $30 an hour with union
union members with Benefits a pension
plan they could buy a house uh they
didn't need to work 70 hours a week they
could send their kids to college that
vanished
evaporated uh and uh and our work in
China Vietnam Bangladesh you know it all
becomes this sweat shop labor but an
important point in in the enforcer of
this sweat shop labor is the US Empire
and that's something that you write
about in the book yeah well I mean uh
there's a whole section in the book uh
one of the four sections is about the
Empire at home and how the Imperial
Elite in
Washington um and other places uh they
when when they do have to defend this
system they'll they will say uh oh well
we get lots of benefits from being
engaged in the world you know for the
people with these resources are coming
back and and and America's prosperous
because of it but it's it's it's it's
all a lie you realize that when you
start looking at the sorry state of the
United States uh uh Society you know
like the huge levels of inequality the
poverty the people without uh Health uh
health care it's outrageous when you got
the richest country in in history and
and and you have a situation like that
but that's by Design you know all that
wealth comes back and is not distributed
in society in fact the poor subsidize
the rich because the military their
taxes go towards the military which
enforces the system system which then
benefits the the 1% so it's a transfer
of wealth from the poor to the rich
globally and domestically within the
United States and one of the main ways
they do that is by offshoring production
uh because it takes jobs away from
Americans um and and and set and and and
gives them to uh the poor world but not
good jobs to the poor world so they go
there because they can uh undercut uh
the wages um and they can in fact often
these sweat shops are built on special
economic zones as well and one of the
facets of special economic zones and one
of the um incentives for corporations in
the US is that specially economic zones
have even less regulations than the
national state on what how you can treat
labor and taxes and Customs so you send
so so you open these uh sweat shops um
in on a special economic zone you pay
the workers pit and you get all the
resources out without having to pay
Customs or tax so the the state in
Mexico or Haiti or wherever it is where
they're offshoring this production
doesn't benefit at all either and that's
by Design you know so you just see that
the coffers of the state are always the
ones that that that that never get um uh
uh increased and it's and it's the
corporations that do that the benefit
and that operates domestically and there
I mean there was quite a lot of um
opposition to NAFTA within the United
States and also within Mexico because
there's a chapter on the in the book of
Mexico uh which is kind of C on
Resistance and successful resistance and
obviously the
zapatistas uh rose up in on the New
Year's Day in 1994 on the first day of
NAFTA because they what they were
rejecting the neoliberal model the
sweatsh shot model for Mexico and they
uh it was a uh it was a unarmed well
nearly all unarmed uh Uprising they they
took control of San christoo de laas in
where they were based with like uh guns
carved out of wood just symbolically and
but but they they fought a battle and
won you know there was 1996 the San
Andre Accords um gave them well not gave
them they won uh 13 autonomous Stones
within uh um chapas and so the book I
went to one called oventic uh and it's
it's amazing and again a story not many
people know and it should but it shows
what can happen when this system is
resisted because uh and I I do believe
and I think this is also the case with
the previous book I did with corporate
power like that these institutions
project power so forcefully partly
because they project this
omnipotence uh and this idea that they
can't be Force back but you see time and
time again that they often are paper
tigers that if there is a resistance
they don't know what to do and they
can't handle it and the zapatistas as I
say a ragtag army of unarmed mostly uh
peasants uh won these uh autonomous
zones where the military still can't go
in um and but just to go back to the
sweatsh point the US Empire and this
Sweatshop model um and the international
development organizations they're all
intertwined they're all part of the same
system and they're all effectively the
US Empire you know the US Empire is a
system which runs for the benefit of
corporate power um and and in fact the
book is the title of it is the Racket
and that comes from a speech by Smedley
Butler who signed up to um uh the
Marines in 1898 during the Spanish
American War when he was 16 Spanish
American War by the way is when
historians say the overseas American
Empire F actually began when they took
on the possessions when they won the war
from Spain like Philippines and Guam and
Puerto Rico but anyway he he you'll know
this story but not a lot of people do in
the UK I don't know if it's well known
in the US but Smedley Butler was died
the most decorated Marine in US history
he was very very senior uh he fought in
Haiti Honduras China during the Boxer
Rebellion but then later in life had
this Awakening about what he his what he
had been doing all those years because
obviously he you're told in the military
and you're told in society at large well
the military is about defending the
national interests of America or Britain
or wherever it is and when he left he
realized actually no I wasn't defending
American people I wasn't defending their
security I was defending American
corporate interests and enforcing
corporate Rule and that the speech he
gave which became very famous he says um
uh I wasn't in Honduras or wherever it
was for national security reasons I was
there for brown brother's Bank in New
York and then he says I was a high class
muscle man for big business Al Capone
could operate in four districts I
operated on four continents uh and he
and he said uh he said war is a racket
so and I think he's right that's why I
opened the book with that quote because
that's what I saw at the financial times
the US Empire there's two elements
obviously it does want geopolitical
control as well but the primary role of
the US Empire is to make a global
economy run in the interests of American
corporate power it's called an Open Door
Empire nowadays because it's not like
old Empires where you'd have formal
garrisons of troops and formal colonies
but effectively they are formal colonies
because you can't go against American
corporate Rule and if you elect a leader
who does like Evan Morales will take you
out whether it be through intelligence
agencies doing it through subversion if
that fails we'll send in the military as
a last resort and you see it as you said
time and time again throughout Latin
America Africa Asia and we need to as a
as the left Progressive forces or anyone
interested in truth and progress
understand that the US is the major
impediment to human progress and like
that William Bloom book called killing
hope I I think that's a great title for
a book because that's what it is is
wherever hope arises that maybe things
can be a bit different maybe humans can
live at peace with each other maybe
humans can actually benefit from the
resources they're living on top of all
these things that we're told that are
basic things that I think are very very
possible they get smashed by the US
state by the US military by the CIA in
infancy um and uh we need to fight back
against uh uh the idea that there's
anything benevolent or anything benign
about the US Empire because that is a
prevalent ideology which is just the
opposite of the truth in fact it's
orwellian that anyone actually believes
that great that was Matt Canard on his
book uh the racket a rogue uh reporter
versus the American Empire I wrote the
introduction it's a great book uh I want
to thank uh Christian and uh Sophia
Thomas uh Diego and Max who produced the
show you can find me at Chris edges.
substack do.com
