hello everybody I hope I hope you can
hear us um welcome from the citizens to
our virtual event a warning to America
2073 and the arrival of techno
authoritarianism so we're going to be in
conversation for a bit and then if you
have questions we'll take them in the
chats we're going to show you a clip of
the film uh quite early on um but uh and
yes let me say this at the starts there
is a website 2073 film which has got
much more information about all of this
um but let me introduce this amazing
panel that we have here so it's such a
huge pleasure to be among
friends um all of these people very
special uh great friends and colleagues
um who I am just very honored to know
actually
um so I am going to start with Maria
ressa who is won a Nobel peace pride
which was quite an astounding moment um
she is a former CNN bureau chief she set
up a very
Innovative um News website in the
Philippines Raper and uh as some of you
might know she came under incredible
attack in from
2016 when President duterte came to
power and singled her out and um she was
fighting for her life for many years and
we we'll hear more about that we also
have Rana iub who is joining us from
Bombay raana is an incredible
investigative journalist who has done in
remarkable work um has gone undercover
deep investigations into corruption
and many of the people she investigated
are very close to Modi and as a result
of this she s found herself very
personally targeted and um has come
under attack in similar ways as Maria
through legal actions and through online
assaults and uh Rana you also see her
work in the Washington Post where she's
an opinions
columnist and then it's uh we have
really delighted joining us is Asif
capadia who is one of Britain's leading
filmmakers um who we're here because of
his latest work
2073 but you may know him from previous
documentaries including the Amazing Amy
which uh won an Oscar a few years ago um
so I want to just with the three of you
you know we're here today
because I think many people when when
ASF first started showing his
documentary at
screenings um earlier last year it what
it did seem like science fiction to
people I mean that's as you'll talk
about is the frame of the film he's he's
done this very clever thing of setting
it in the future in 20173 but using
footage from the present day to create
this atmosphere of dystopia and using
both documentary and also dramatic
scenes and I think ASF can talk about
this but I think some of his film
Executives found it far-fetched and
unlikely and you know a distant sort of
dystopian dream and I think even now it
seemed that since the election people
are really seeing how actually this
future which is based upon the Collision
of both authoritarian and populist
leaders and the technology surveillance
tools and the power of social media to
corrupt the truth those have now we are
seeing those coming together in real
time and we thought you know we're now
we're only five days away from the
inauguration of Donald Trump and the
elevation of Elon Musk the richest man
on the planet who controls one of the
most powerful communication
communication tools the world world has
ever seen become part of a global super
power and the way that that power can be
used to Target people to influence
opinion to corrupt and absolutely
destroy even the concept of Truth and
facts we really felt that it is the
people who we really need to be
attending to and listening to are the
likes of Maria and Rana who have been
there who have seen it who are living it
they have lived are living with techno
authoritarianism and the things that
they have learned through the last year
are really critical things which we felt
people in America um especially those
who are going to be on the Frontline
public officials journalists lawyers all
of those people are going to be amongst
the first targeted so that's the idea of
why we've come together today and I
think uh Ben if it's if we could play
the clip now the trailer and then we
will go to questions from the three here
if that's okay
I hope someone finds
this the event wasn't just one
thing it was a slow
creep no one said or did anything
anything to stop
them it's our memory they want to wipe
out this year 72% of the world is under
authoritarian rule we're now in a
democratic recession and it's endemic in
Europe in the United States India the
Philippines minorities silenced Des
centers arrested so media
Cooperative we are worth more when we
are addicted polarized and disinform
than if we are living breathing free
Citizens We're in new San Francisco have
you
visited if you don't have facts you
can't have truth without truth you can't
have
trust we have faced Wars and famines and
genocides but this is bigger than any
of it's too late for me may not be too
late for
you oh gosh as if that music gets me
every time I find it very emotional even
just watching the trailer there um Maria
can I kick off with you I think when we
I think I messaged you shortly after the
um Trump's Victory and you the thing
that you said so clearly which sort of
really sticks with me which is you were
just it just happened so fast and I
think to explain to the audience so in
2016 Rodrigo duerte took power this was
it was interesting it was just before uh
brexit happened and Maria can you just
explain what happened next and how the
Philippines went from you know a sort of
vibrant Democratic state to something
else I mean it's it's really simple
because you're seeing it it's happened
all around the world now um uh we didn't
disagree on the facts leading up to the
elections of Rodrigo duterte Facebook
played an incredible role in that um he
uh is the first social media president
and then what happened was the growth
algorithm polarized our society if you
were Pro DTA you move further right if
you're anti- dutta further left it's the
friends of friends algorithm was the
first thing and then what happened was
that um he had a brutal drug war um
estimates of how many people killed
ranged anywhere from what the police
said which is 8,000 to 30,000 which is
what our Commission on human rights so
you have this instance of no one knows
what the truth is the facts are
debatable and then you have fear and
violence uh as part of it and you had a
very strong man leader who was in charge
we have a constitution that's patterned
after the United States three branches
of government I would say and this is
pretty much what we've lived through
right um within six months Rodrigo duter
became the most powerful leader we've
ever had because you had the
institutions collapse and what what is
scary about this moment in time um is
that you have President elect Trump
coming in in a few days you said uh he
is uh he now understands the way
government works he's actually appointed
people who are more loyal far more loyal
and they and there is a plan so it isn't
farfetched it may even be faster than
the 6 months it took in the Philippines
um I won't leave you completely
depressed about 6 months because look
the Philippines we were in hell and now
we're in
purgatory uh so you can move but it
feels to me like other countries like
the one we're talking about is just
moving to
hell oh thanks
Maria ra can I come to you now and and
can we talk about in particular the
relationship between the tech companies
and between an authoritarian government
which is what you have in India and how
you've seen that play out the
interaction between these two things and
and where that's
LED well absolutely I think this is uh
this is a pattern with authoritarian
regimes across the world where tech
companies have been enablers uh for
instance the kind of islamophobia that
Elon Musk is is kind of stoking right
now you know with Robinson and everybody
that is being cited as an example on
Indian Twitter you know Elon Musk has
become like the new hero right and and
there is so much misinformation that I
feel like the entire Indian election has
been fought around misinformation and
disinformation like one I'll give you
one classic example when when uh when
the head of the Nobel committee was in
India he said something and his
statement was twisted to say that Modi
is a top Contender for the Nobel Peace
Prize every News Channel played it right
including the ministers and the top
ministers pray that Modi is the top
Contender for the Nobel Peace Prize till
the till till till till the Till There
Was A clarification issue say no no such
statement was made but by then that
statement had become the truth the fact
Checkers who are in India right now uh
it's a very Niche Community right uh and
they are under attack right now the fact
checking websites are under attack there
are cases against alt news and um
journalists who are doing the fact
checking journalists like us have their
tweets being removed and TW Elon Musk
who a free spee you know he calls
himself like Oh I'm a I'm somebody who
supports free speech is absolutely fine
with the Indian government removing
content of Twitter which is criticizing
him he's absolutely fine with Indian
government taking down tweets which are
critical of the Modi government during
the farmers protest or during all sorts
of protest in India so the the you know
the so I think we are looking at a
problem because Elon Musk has publicly
You Know spoken about his love for
Narendra Modi government about you know
the rightwing in India is obsessed with
the Elon Musk kind of um you know strong
man kind of a personality who's out here
to end the voke culture which is out
here to destroy us um they identify with
him and you know this is I think the
fact that I'll give you a personal
example you know that um I was doxed two
months ago all my details were out on
social media there's an AI generated
porn image right there on the internet
my Visa my passport my Gmail passwords
my bank account passwords were all put
out on the internet till today it has
not been removed and Twitter says it
does not violate its privacy policy
that's what Twitter says right and the
people who who have given me explicit
rape and death threat these are people
followed by the prime minister of India
the guy who put my AI generated foreign
image is followed by the prime minister
of India and after I point him out that
this guy has doxed me he says okay go
ahead and see what you can do with it i
t i tack Twitter nothing happens so this
is the future as mariaa rightly pointed
out this is the future we are looking at
when the institutions meant to protect
us are looking the other way that's what
happens in authoritarian vaj right in
India we have seen the elections are
like it's not a Level Playing Field the
various the various institutions that
are meant to safeguard the world's
largest democracy have collapsed and
with technology companies tech companies
now completely frustrating before these
authoritarian leaders we are looking at
a very very Bleak future
ahead thanks R so as if I want to go to
you now because this film is a long time
in the planning and it's a sort of
extraordinary um accident of timing
isn't it that it's coming out just now
and you actually chose to put these Tech
Bros the bigars as we I'm trying to call
them anyway in the film so you've got
Elon Musk is in there Peter teal is in
there Jeff Bezos is in there and can you
talk about how this came about and how
you sort of brought these strands
together and and you know and talk about
about some of the difficulty I know that
you've had in terms of making this film
and and and why it's felt so important
to you first of all like amazing to be
here with you all as part of this to
kind of for the film kind of comes full
circle where I did a series of
interviews with each of you started in
lockdown you know this film has been in
my head a long time I started it around
2020 spoke to Rana and Carol both of you
you know we're all at home or in
apartments or in hotel rooms or
somewhere I met Maria in Paris I came
out to meet Maria in Paris um and so the
idea of all of you coming together and
talking is like a dream come true in
away um and that's why I wanted to make
the film though I wanted to make the
film because of my own experience of
just existing okay my family are from
India I was aware of what was happening
goodat that's where my family are from
so I was aware of Modi for a long time
and yet all I kept reading was the
world's greatest democracy is going to
elections and I never saw anything in
the UK talking about but what's
happening in India what happens
constantly no one looked into like the
latest kind of communal riots and
violence that was happening and and what
was happening to people including
friends of mine who are actors who were
very much afraid who a lot of them are
KS were told you know you got to know
your place okay you may well be the
biggest movie stars in Bollywood but you
know your place and there was a lot of
things that were not being talked about
I've worked in Brazil I was aware of
what was happening in Brazil before
bolsonaro came to power where young
people wanted a strong man to come into
power to clean up all the mess right and
older people who' Liv with a military
dictatorship who I worked with were
saying no my dad was locked up by the
military this is not a good thing you
don't want a strong person to come along
who just gets rid of laws and just says
do what I say bring in the military I
was in the US during the election in
2016 and really your writing Carol on
brexit was like the first time where
someone had put something down and I
thought I'm not
crazy you know what I was feeling and
seeing you wrote about because you said
something's going on with Facebook and
our data has been used and I immediately
stopped using Facebook um and so for me
the film starts with like all of these
things that I was seeing as I was
traveling and working around the world
came together through what happened in
the UK with brexit and seeing racists on
TV every week every night on the on the
BBC not being questioned for their views
and and somehow being Balan bed out by
the presenter and and and justifying
what they were saying and then seeing it
happen in the US seeing it in Brazil
seeing it in Europe and just thinking is
it me or is it happening everywhere at
the same time and at the time when our
government particularly here in the UK
kept saying people are tired of experts
I like experts I think experts are great
let's talk to experts you are all
experts in your field and I basically
thought I'm going to make a film I don't
know what it is yet or how I'll pull it
off but I'll interview lots of experts
and listen to them and then I'll figure
out how to tell a story because I think
film making Works in a certain way it
can it can hit you emotionally visually
in a way that it's hard when it's an
article if you don't read that
particular newspaper or if you don't sub
subscribe to that particular website or
you're not going to read an entire novel
so I was like my job was how can I put
this all together and frame it in a way
that I can get an audience that is
different and also globally because it's
all connected that's what I was feeling
and all of our conversations showed me
and and confirmed that you have to
understand something happening in Asia
is coming your way you can't just say
it's not my problem and and that was
really where the movie came from but I
also feel my job as a filmmaker is how
can I sell this to an audience and genre
is a classic way people like horror
films they like action movies they like
sci-fi I'll give you a
Sci-Fi but it's all based on fact that
was the thing so I also wanted to do it
by playing with the form of film making
so I've got drama I've got documentaries
the the you know people think it's a
horror film when they watch it but it's
all based on truth it's a horror we are
living and we came up with this kind of
term that came out of um one of the
people I interviewed Douglas rashkov the
event we're in the event this changing
of time from what we used to know to
where we're heading we're in the middle
of it and it's happening gradually but
also really fast and so that was the
idea I I my my job was to kind of bring
all of you together into a movie and
people may know Maria or they may know
ra but they may not know someone Carol
or they may not know all of you and and
my job is how can I use you all in a way
to kind of spread the word so more
people are aware of what's going on and
to see the links between us
all thank you asiv and that's for me
what I love about the film is this you
know we we're sort of writing these dry
journalistic pieces we're trying to sort
of get this across to an audience but
it's really hard and it's so complicated
and you know what I love about the film
is the what fact that you do take us on
this emotional Journey and Samantha
 her face is just so emotional and
the music is so emotional and and that
does feel like something different that
nobody's done before um can I go to you
know actually one thing which some
people have said to me in the last few
days is that watching the LA
fires has been a sort of moment of like
oh this I didn't I just see this in 2073
and Maria I mean I mean maybe you can
talk about this because what's been so
fasc ating just watching it you know at
a distance I'm not watching it closely
or attentively but you can see this
collapse of Truth in real time and the
idea of any kind of like established
facts um just isn't that you know that
that has now gone and the way that in
particular we're seeing Elon Musk
amplify that and the conspiracy theories
take hold even while you know the city
is still burning it you know you
couldn't have a more dramatic
illustration really of what's Happening
could you and literally for power and
money right like the disinformation
narratives or
misinformation L is is seeded precisely
to give someone power look um let me
take what aif said aif was quoting Doug
rushkoff saying we're 50% in I'd say
we're 80% in this is something that we
are living through and I would say you
know the the manipulation began as early
as 2014 there was immediate Global
impact because it was the annexation of
Crimea the same meta narrative that was
used eight years later to actually
invade Ukraine itself right here in the
Philippines we watched sorry in the
Philippines we watched um history change
in front of our eyes Carol you broke the
Cambridge analytica story and and even
at that point if you remember Chris Wy
said when they when they created
Cambridge analytica by the time 2016
elections were ready in the US they had
a Facebook page in every single County
in
America that was targeting young men
fast forward that to the results of the
of the 2024 elections so let's go to the
LA fires I mean
look people's lives this is something
we've lived through in the Philippines
because we have an average of 20
typhoons every year people lose their
homes it is a disaster people lose their
lives right but what we're seeing is
that there are now in those critical
moments when you need your information
to be 100% accurate Impossible on social
media the way it's designed today right
um you still have the the tech companies
big Tech literally saying this is
opportunistically a way I can make money
these platforms have moved from being a
tool of connection into Weapons of Mass
behavioral engineering and that's partly
what you see in the film but they're not
neutral they're sophisticated systems
that are designed to exploit our deepest
psychological vulnerabilities they
monetize outrage and hate they amplify
divisions and systematically erode our
capacity for nuanced thinking and
empathy which is what you need in a
disaster right and the irony of course
is that fires the LA fires are connected
climate change which is one of the facts
that isn't a fact um and then you go
right back to this the business model of
of of tech big Tech surveillance
capitalism again we know this from
shashana zuboff is built on this
fundamental betrayal of human dignity
data privacy is a myth Ai and algorithms
have cloned and manipulated us and I
think you know as we look at these fires
and you look at how the firefighters and
the California governor Gavin Newsome it
was
exacerbated and made worse significantly
worse by influencers and I'm going to
put rabbit ears and farri influencers
that were using it to attack those who
literally have to get the work done um
and yet have to spend time which in
moments like that can mean the
difference between life and death
dealing with disinformation right this
is only one of those anyway not to be so
Bleak about it but that is this moment
that shows you everything wrong and of
course when did that what happened right
in time for that was Mark Zuckerberg's
announcement that he would throw facts
out the window uh that profit would win
and the a new kind of content moderation
will never use those words anymore now
because it could be
politically um but now you can these
harmful practices that we what you live
through ra what Carol lived through what
I live through where free speech is used
to pound you to silence I've been told
to chill out a little bit I'm chilling
out you know literally can pound you to
silence and make you believe um things
you shouldn't believe here's the last
part there's a great book you know I'm
I'm teaching this information at
Columbia University this semester and um
a great book by Dan arieli it's called
misbelief he doesn't come at it from
Tech or information he comes at it from
the way you feel from people from
sociology and he says anything that is a
stressful instance something that's
unplanned stress that you cannot explain
that you then become far more vulnerable
to believing conspiracy theories um than
at any other time we're living through
these stressful moments and of course
there's no better moment than the
pandemic that sets the stage for where
we are
today thanks Maria um just a little
reminder if you've got questions do put
them in the chat and we're going to try
and get to them um Ron I want to come to
you there's um somebody else who's in
the film and apple b who you know
recently published this book autocracy
Inc which is such a clear sort of
explanation of the way that these
autocrats and authoritarians across the
world are all networked together are
supporting each other are copying each
other are sort of supplying resource and
I was really struck Ron because when I
spoke to you after the Trump election
you said that it had already got worse
it had already made Modi and his
supporters had given them permission
it felt like to act even more
aggressively and I just wondered if you
could talk about that this sort of the
idea this Playbook is something which is
copied and leap frogs from place to
place and as it goes sort of It's Always
exponentially getting worse really
absolutely it's not that Joe Biden was
any better when it comes to when it came
to kind of criticizing nendra Modi I
mean he he he gave the state he he made
him the state guest he gave State honors
to nendra Modi
but the thing is that with with Joe
Biden the the Modi LED dispensation so
uh feared that the Committees in the US
which was sping about democracy which
spoke about protecting the rights of
religious minorities at least there were
reports like that that would come out of
the US right um the US also came out
with a report on the targeted killing of
civilians transnational killing of
Indian critics in Canada I mean there
reports by the doj the US also came out
with multiple reports on uh the farmers
protest on and the attack on the Muslim
minorities in India so the Modi
government had been looking forward to a
trump
Administration simply because there's
this major Trump you know Bon homi
between Trump and Modi Modi has gone to
Houston said vote for Trump trump has
come to Gujarat the home state of
Narendra Modi uh with Millennia and
Jared kashner in in the front row and
and saying that this is the man these
are two men who believe that um they
truly believe uh that the democracy is
is is not the right thing that
majoritarianism is the right thing and
two leaders who are stroking victimhood
uh in the majority Community who are
stoking the fear of the other right like
like the way Trump Stokes the fear of of
the migrants of people who are coming
into United States Modi despite the
Hindu majority being in clear power is
stalking the fear of the Muslim Invader
I mean I'm in Mumbai which is the
financial capital of the country right
which is where we have Bollywood the big
business houses and yesterday I was in a
c and there is massive Holdings that
said the land is our the schools are our
what are The Outsiders doing here what
are the ringas doing here what are the
bangladeshis doing here ringas and
Bangladeshi are a dog whistle for
Muslims right and and now how do we get
in Tech this kind of message also goes
on social media on Facebook for instance
in India we have mob lynching on the
acquisition of eating beef that mob
lynching is now being live streamed on
Facebook and the guy who is like
literally the top vigilante or cow
terrorist as we call them has got this
gold me I don't think they get a gold
membership from Facebook I don't know
gold button right this got gold button
on Facebook and and and there's a report
that says that Facebook is monetizing
these videos promoting this videos in
which a Muslim man is being moined live
on camera on Facebook with no checks and
balances the the the entire arst against
Indian Muslims so to say I think one of
the major factors has been Facebook
WhatsApp Instagram these are these are
the places where hatred is to where fake
news is weaponized against the Muslim
minorities they're taking over your
Schools they're taking over your
resources they're taking over your
education they're taking over the money
they're taking over your religious sites
right every day you hear a fake news
about oh this mosque has a temple
beneath it these are people and
well-meaning people are believing this
because the thing as Maria often points
out has pointed out in the past that
when you when you repeat a lie a
thousand times right you it ends up
becoming Truth for people you know the
there is you you're being bombarded with
it so uh I think with Trump coming to
power I think you know everybody thought
that Modi receiving um a reduced
majority would kind of you know Dent his
popularity I don't see that I'm very
cynical I I think we are ready for I
don't think IND India should think of a
future where we are going to have a free
and fair election free and fair oper
operational democracy and with Trump in
power there are a lot of
Indian dissidents Indian critics who
said possibly the powerful countries in
the world could keep a check and balance
but with Trump in power what kind of
check and balance are we really looking
at you know we are looking at a bon
homie of a bromance between all the
dictators with tech imperialism also so
I think uh I think I think at the
receiving end will be those people uh
critics journalist and the minorities
and I think journalists are already
think that some of the best journalists
in India are either independent
journalists or are behind bars or are
being killed there was one journalist
who was killed two weeks ago in India so
I think again I I really think that
asf's film has come at at probably it's
it's realistic it's not been dystopian
that future that he talks about in 2073
is almost here upon us Trump is just
it's just right it just feels so sudden
as what is right here can I can I jump
in there because I think this thing
which is so this is one of the
communalities we see in in in several
different countries in India it's in
Britain it's in America but the
targeting of Muslims as the out group
who become the hate group who and and
very much I think this is it this is
where often the first attacks land and
the thing which interests me and as if
I'd like to go to you here because this
actually having this personal experience
of Technology being used to surveil you
personally being personally profiled and
targeted it does give you a really
different visceral understanding of this
world and the way that this technology
which can be great but can also be
weaponized against individuals and you
you have got this background you know of
you've actually lived with this
experience haven't you for more than a
decade now can can you just sort of talk
about that and how
that experience LED you also into your
understanding of this subject yeah sure
I mean I can talk about it because you
know it happened and most people you
know you think you're just being
paranoid but what happened in my case is
it was confirmed to me I um was in the
US I was in New York I was working on a
film um I was there for
meetings because it was a film project I
had a driver you know I had an itinerary
so I'm I'm I'm being driven to JFK tell
the year tell us the year it's post 911
so you know a lot of everything sort of
changes there's two key things from
everyone I spoke to like the financial
crisis which leads to austerity which
means you need to have someone else to
blame and you always look punched
downwards and then 911 was like a key
point so yeah it was after 911 I'm in
New York a few a year or two after I'm
working there as I'm leaving Manhattan
I'm in a limo it's the most gorgeous
sunset over Manhattan I'm on the
Brooklyn bridge and I'm taking photos
looking out the window of Manhattan with
a
sunset the driver is watching me in his
rearview mirror going you look
suspicious don't like the look of you
why are you taking a photograph of New
York and reports me to Homeland Security
so when I arrive at the airport I'm in
the lounge and my name is called out in
the whole of JFK like not just like one
the whole of JFK make yourself known so
I make myself known thinking I've left a
bag that looks suspicious or something
think but then five people turn up in
the lounge of the other in business
class and in front of everyone they
unload my bag they take out everything
they take my cameras they take
everything I've got ask me what I'm
doing why I'm there and it's quite scary
it's quite awward um you know there were
people there ready to deport me and do
various things in the end I could show
who I was and why I was there I'm a film
director I mean you know I have a lot of
backup to say who I am I don't have a
big beard I can speak English you know
if I had a certain way I sounded a
certain way I was wearing religious
clothes maybe in a whole different
experience but I explain it I'm trying
to make gags saying you know which um
cop movies do you guys all like because
I'm trying to figure out what is going
on here and then they pretty much I
asked them what happened what have I
done and they told me you know someone
said you look suspicious and I remember
the look of the driver watching me all
the way through that drive and I
remember you know when someone's
watching you a funny way they're not
just driving and so they told me there
was no problem I fly home but for the
next 10 15 years after that every time I
went to the US I would be stopped two or
three times before I got on a plane I'd
be stopped after I got off the plane if
I was on a shoot or on a film I had to
get a letter from the head of the studio
kind of saying I'm the director of this
feature film or I'm directing this shoot
and everyone else would go through and
I'd always be held back and and some of
those moments were quite scary when I
got stopped in Houston and I was
changing flights and you know I'm
putting a room for a few hours and a guy
of a machine gun would come by every now
and again and look at me and I'd look at
him saying can I go and say have you got
a problem and I go no I've not got a
problem he goes you look a bit sad you
sure you haven't got a problem I go no
I'm absolutely fine you know and it was
like he's got a gun and he's watching me
and trying to egg me on and that was
normal for a while to a point where I
stopped going to the US for quite a long
time so it happened right and then when
you wrote the article in the guardian
where we I told this story the number of
Asian people that I know who got in
touch saying happened to me happened to
me exactly the same strip search at an
airport in front of all my friends you
know that isn't unusual it happened to a
lot of people and so that all is how
things and surveillance have changed
post 911 is that everyone's on a watch
list unless you can prove you're not a
terrorist and so yeah that that is
something that a lot of people have
lived with and then when you see it
happening more and more and getting
closer and closer you recognize it you
know what's going on you know what it's
like you know how it can be used against
you and of course everyone says well if
you haven't done anything wrong no one
would have stopped you well actually I
didn't do anything wrong you know I took
a photograph of New York um but it That
Could set you off for the next
decade and you wouldn't even know that's
the other thing isn't it is that if
you're get if you get profiled in some
way if the algorithm says no you're not
necessarily going to know why you're on
the list and actually that's what comes
across so well in the film isn't it that
the that Samantha Morton in this case is
the one who is targeted but did that I
mean
it's want to use all of this in a film
in a way decide if you don't know what
you've done that's illegal you know or
it can be backdated as many of you will
have experience of right you know and it
can be did you sign a particular
petition or you know was it a particular
book that you read or was it because you
went on that March and people
photographed everyone on that particular
March and now that's it's illegal to do
that which we witnessed a lot happening
in this country as well where people
were saying certain marches you know
you're not allowed to do that other
marches are fine but you can't be
protesting about that but you can
protest about that and this is all a
part of this strange world that we're
living in which
day by day becomes more and more kind of
dystopian and confusing and and you you
are aware that our your freedom is being
lost day by day and just to just to jump
in there so the questions which Samantha
Morton has asked in fact you saw a bit
in the trailer there of like where you
come from that you know these questions
and as if you said to me that those were
actually taken from interrogations of
weager people in China is that right
they their re-education questions of the
Wagers in China yeah so we actually have
the list and they're kind of well known
and we use them as as kind of questions
that you hear during the film and then
she herself ends up being interrogated
yeah so I think listen one of the key
things about what we wanted to try and
do here is that it's it's not just
enough to warn people of like is
coming down the line people are going to
get targeted this is going to be really
bad the the whole point is is that Maria
and Rana you two have shown incredible
resilience in still stand in still
surviving still fighting onwards and you
know there must be so much so much that
you've learned through that experience
and so knowledge that you hold actually
and you Carol don't leave yourself out
you've been through all this absolutely
than assive but the but thing is I've
done it in a country in which we have
rule of law and we have in and that's
the difference and and that frankly is
the terrifying thing about America now
that a weaponized Department of Justice
is a completely different Paradigm which
is what R and Maria both have
experienced so that that thing you know
so go to you first Maria which is Maria
just to to tell anybody on this panel
Maria is the most ridiculously cheerful
optimistic upbeat enthusiastic Energizer
Bunny and it is unbelievable like I do
not know how you do it Maria so I think
can you
just I mean this is just your
personality I can't think we can
actually learn too much from this but
can you give us some of your sort of
practical sort of bits of wisdom that
you have learned along the way so so
like let me be with aif in just pointing
out Carol you also came under intense
attack and the attack isn't just online
it's also in the real world right that's
the one thing online violence is real
world violence it has a psychological
impact on you and when you say the UK
has rule of law well let's talk about
Russia and you know kleptocracy right we
can so what I've learned in this whole
thing is that um if The Gatekeepers
that's the journalists in terms of our
public information ecosystem now the
tech companies and then the countries
and rule of law the people in charge of
actually implementing it if they do not
implement it you don't have it if it's
random then you do not have rule of law
and I think that's what we're seeing all
around the world I think three quick
responses right the first is that do we
have individual agency with social media
with big Tech with generative AI the
large language models we do not have
agency right that is if you put it
together with the discipline of
psychology behavioral economics and
sociology um it is an attack at the
cellular level of democracy that's the
first the second is that as people where
we have a you know the devil and the
angel on our shoulders we can be good we
can be bad evil
um the system we are swimming in forces
evil forces the worst of who we are as
Humanity it the incentive structure that
used to be to push us towards the good
right this concept of name and shame you
do not want to be named as a misogynist
oh no that doesn't work anymore right
like there are really only two fracture
lines in every country around the world
that have been pounded open they are
gender and race and we have seen these
pop up in different ways right
immigration inflation this is race um
anyway so so that's the first the worst
of humanity so let me answer your
question which is you know what do I do
hope comes from action and I guess
that's the first part right we literally
I have given up on on begging these tech
companies to put safety measures in
place because we walked into a building
that is falling down around us it is not
safe to be there right so what we've
done in Raper and this is a few years
ago we began building Tech I think
around the time I began talking to aif
right we need to have a public Tech
stack one where you are not manipulated
you are not attacked where it is safe to
speak right it is no longer safe to
speak and and what we have now is we
rolled this out it's we built a matrix
protocol chat app and we rolled it out a
year ago and we are getting ready for
elections in the Philippines this year
in May right because you cannot have
integrity of Elections if you don't have
integrity of facts if you don't have
people who can choose without being
insidiously manipulated what a long
response right so so really it's not
just our individual agency that's at
risk now it's also it is our I mean you
can look at the how how these tech
companies have killed democracy move
fast break things say Mark Zuckerberg
right and you we've watched his
evolution in front of our eyes in many
ways the mask has fallen off and uh he's
just decided profit is more important
politics power in politics um I've seen
uh Business Leaders in the Philippines
bow to president duterte when he took
off it we're seeing the same things
happen in the United States but the
ripple effect of the United States is
far larger than the
Philippines so actually it's kind of
interesting because your your your
answer has touched on what's a few
people have asked in the chats which is
so I like this the way this question has
been worded though which is that what
does the what does the panel think is
the best way to resist the brover Lords
on our platform so thank you ever coin
that word some are leaving platforms
some are leaving social media apps do we
stay do we risk do we leave the
platforms and R what's your view I
noticed today R actually because I did a
I put out a notice about the event and I
was like oh R isn't on Blue Sky I
couldn't find your handle but you are on
Twitter what's your yeah where are you
on this whole question of leaving or
staying on Twitter yeah leaving on
staying I me I know as has left Twitter
we know that but I think you know I
personally believe that as independent
journalists you know we have very little
space left in democracies where the
mainstream media has completely the
Legacy Media has completely frustrated
before the Modi government so we have
very little spaces to offer independent
voices and the truth and unfortunately
for us while Twitter is a platform which
is censoring sensible voices and
amplifying Aid it is also a platform
which is giving access to Independent
journalists to post news items and
Snippets of blinch and stories I don't
want to seed space to the to these
bigots for them to take over the entire
narrative I don't think I don't know if
I'm doing the right thing or the wrong
but I feel like I need to stay and do my
bit in in just putting out this stories
that I report because there are very
very few platforms left how many Indians
would go to the Washington Post to read
my story they go to Instagram or Twitter
or they they want to know where am I
publishing even something as basic as uh
yesterday I saw something about a Muslim
man being you know beaten on the streets
right I don't there no spaces so I just
tweeted about it that a Muslim man was
beaten on the street on the on the
suspicion of being Bangladeshi you want
these spaces to amplify these stories
and get them help and also to kind of
for the world to know what is happening
in India right because there is no way
for the world to understand what is
happening in the world's largest
democracy because outside of India we
still think oh this is Gandhi's land
they don't know what has happened to
Gandhi's land and we have to use the
social media to that you know to kind of
amplify the real truth about India and
especially in a country where with so
much Independent Media in India has been
captured hasn't it this sort of
oligarchy absolutely absolutely I mean
we are just a handful of independent
journalists and we can't just leave
social media to those people who are
only spreading thisinformation
as if there's an interesting question
hear from somebody in the audience and
is saying they're asking you about
whether you explored the psychological
dynamics of authoritarianism so child
this is an interesting question how do
individuals justify their complicity or
resistance and and the questions to the
panel as well how do you what are the
suggestions to change compliance to
resist from from compliance to
resistance which is a very interesting
question because I think one of the you
know um you're probably all aware of the
Tim Snider book on tyranny we've all
been that's been re-upped and this his
first you know advice is this one which
keeps on coming up cuz we keep on seeing
in action do not obey in advance what's
so as if I don't know to go to you tough
question but I think you just answered
it that's why I wanted to talk to The
Experts
car how do you not obey in ADV you've
not obeyed in advance you've disobeyed
you've disobeyed Hollywood which you
should be making some Blockbuster and
like why are you making so you you you
decided not I've always disobeyed in my
own way I've always been I come from a
sort of background of Hackney boy
working class not from private school
didn't go to
Oxbridge didn't come from the Arts and
so any film is like fighting a sort of
establishment or a structure um and so
I've always been interested in stories
about Outsiders in a way or people
fighting a system so for me making the
film is my attempt okay and then really
the idea for making the film genuine but
genuinely was to get people together to
have these disc discussions to talk
about it and here here we are talking
kind of to a global audience about the
issues and until we talk about the
issues and understand them we w we won't
come up with a solution and trying to
kind of let people know these are some
of the people see there some of amazing
people that I think we should you should
know about and read up about in terms of
that specific one I don't even know
where to start on that Carol I'm gonna
hand that one back to you you tell me
the answer I'm gonna go to Maria
actually because I think this question
okay because the question so there's
there there are roles for certain people
to do certain things you know journalist
can journalist right in this and there
there's things that people but what
about ordinary people like so in the
Philippines when duerte came to power
and it became very terrifying you saw
people getting targeted the institutions
were crumbling what is the role of
citizens here of Ordinary People what
can they do what should they be doing
standing up right because the battle is
now in your court I think I think in the
old world you can say the journalists
are going to do it you know there's this
funny um that quote of um oh my gosh I
can't remember his name but in the
Philippines they came for the
journalists we don't know what happened
next right um
but in on social media in the virtual
world you are specifically targeted so
the question
is what are you going to do and I think
we journalists certainly the people in
this in this Zoom I feel like Copus and
Cassandra combined I think I've been
jumping up and down since 2016 when I
saw it it was like that Joseph Conrad
Heart of Darkness saw it and aif had his
moment Carol had and R had their moments
we live through it and we're still doing
our best I think that's the key part
right in each of your area in each of
our areas of influence how can we
prevent what this this train wreck from
hap from happening we still have a small
wind of opportunity but we can't do this
alone it is every single person on
social media if you talk Facebook 3.2
billion accounts on Facebook if each one
of those accounts realizes they're being
manipulated they've been cloned and then
leaves or or or organizes in the real
world right this concept of there are
different laws for the virtual world I.E
none cuz nothing except for the eu's
digital servic act digital markets act
which only kicked in right it's the
least regulated industry globally um and
yet here we are there's only one person
living in the physical world and in the
virtual world we're being manipulated in
the virtual world to change the way we
act in the real world so get your agency
back reclaim your rights organize in the
real world that's what we've seen
succeed Poland that's where the women
and the youth came together and kicked
out a sitting government right other
countries like that I'm going to go to
you briefly R and then because I'm
conscious of the time so but can we R
how you know you've got you've come
under such attack and I know it's been
really really tough at times and you've
felt very sort of isolated and targeted
are there were there ways that people
were able to help you during this and
are there ways that you can see people
in India reclaiming that space and
reclaiming that agency that Maria talks
about so I think people in India did try
to reclaim their space when we had this
citizenship protest in 2020 just before
the covid um covid wck Havoc havoc in
India but the government of India used
the pandemic to arrest all those people
who who were dissenting and who were
organizing these protests and it was a
big sign to the rest of the country and
some of India's best student activist
and some of India's best academic and
some of India's best social activists
right now are behind bars for the last
four years and they have not and they
have not been given bail despite no case
against him the common public a lot of
them I mean Maria was saying I mean we
talking about galvanizing I I feel I
feel it's this it's very unjust on all
of us that there's so much burden placed
on our shoulder that you need to do this
and you need to do that despite all the
cases against you despite everything
against you the common public wants to
stay apolitical in India one because
they want to steer clear of any
controversy because you know you have a
government which is looking for the
smallest sign of rebellion to kind of
throw you behind bars or act against you
uh I don't think that consolidating
consolidation is happening anytime soon
in India because of the the Draconian
measures being used by the Indian
government but it is the need of the
hour you cannot you have to push back
and that's the only solution we have
right
now I've got a problem because I'm in
sitting in Parliament at the moment
because I'm running off to another panel
and this is The Division Bell going
which is to call the MPS in but then
maybe you know this is going to be the
backdrop from my last question which is
this you know the whole point about 2073
is it's almost too late but it's not too
late so can I just go around and do your
like what's your one thing what's your
one takeaway that you're going to tell
people Maria get off these platforms
that's hard to do join the Matrix
protocol and let us create the world we
want to live
in and
R um the the only way to kind of I don't
know you have to disinformation and
misinformation is not just the job to to
kind of uh you know solve this problem
is not just the job of a handywork of
journalist and activist you need to do
that actively yourself within your
family within your you know Clos friends
and circuits on your WhatsApp groups I
think you to start from there fight
thisinformation and misinformation
before it engulfs you in the alternate
Truth uh world without
facts brilliant and and as if what about
I know you hate telling people what to
do but what should they do come on but I
concur with everyone's just said but
also the key thing for me from every
screening I've done is we're the
grown-ups we have to do something about
it I really don't like it when I keep
hearing the Next Generation they're
great they'll sort it out it's like no
we should sort it out we have to do
something we have to stand up we have to
speak up we shouldn't be afraid to speak
up and if we do then we might leave
something better behind us for the Next
Generation but don't leave it to them do
something now and it is as simple as
removing an appp and then starting by
talking to your parents talking to your
kids talking to your family start with
your own home and your own friends and
then you can widen in it out to a
community and the key thing about making
Cinema is I love the idea there's a
bunch of people who don't know each
other in a dark room experiencing
something together and when a film ends
they talk to each other and what I want
to do is create that Community with what
we've got to do and not be us alone on
an app because that's what they want
that's what a technology guys want they
want you arguing with someone that may
not even exist rather than dealing with
real people oh thank you thank you ASF
that's that is actually a great way to
end it and so and on that so there's if
if you go to the website it's film 2073
2073 film I always get the wrong way
around if you sign up for the newsletter
there it's not just a newsletter we're
trying to create a community here
because I think you know listening to R
listening to Maria is that this sort of
collective action and solidarity and
networks of support sharing ideas
sharing best practice this is actually
what is going to be required you know
the the the sort of Top Model top down
model that we have been used to is gone
we are going to have to rebuild from the
ground up and um thank you everybody for
coming thank you for the citizens for
organizing for Ben whiske and claraa
Maguire and Manassa nanan for organizing
this event and for you three for showing
up it's been really great and we we need
more we need to come together more to to
start with Maria and ra we work on a
Citizens project called the real
Facebook oversight board and it's really
thinking about that came out of how do
we hold the tech platforms to account
you know we're in a far wor position
than we were when we started that
project in 2020 so we need to regroup as
well don't we anyway and thank you k for
all that you're doing in the fighting
the good fight ra all right so thank you
everybody for coming and more soon
hopefully and we fight
on thank you everyone bye
