in this episode for me materialism
ultimately does have to posit nature uh
as ontological ground zero so really not
just a materialism but a naturalism um a
naturalist metaphysics that argues that
you know indeed you know at least for us
given our epistemological constraints
the ultimate ontological Ground Zero is
you know pre or non-human nature in and
of itself and that this nature
gives rise to is is responsible for the
very Genesis of among other things
ourselves as subjects um and of course
here one of my historical sources of
inspiration is the shelling of the late
1790s and early 1800s he starts you know
trying to develop after Kant what he and
Hegel uh called nat philosophy
philosophy of Nature and that the
shelling of a text like 1800 system of
transcendental idealism
argues that well on the one hand
epistemologically speaking we have to
start like Kant does with this you know
framework of transcendental subjectivity
um that you know determines the
possibility of of knowledge for us of
what you know can be rendered
intelligible what we are able to grasp
Etc with our Concepts categories in the
light um and so if you you know are
talking about knowledge or thinking you
have to you know have start at the level
of the transcendental subject and then
from there you move towards the domain
of objectivity but an objectivity whose
intelligibility is conditioned by our
own subjectivity but then of course
shelling insists though that that by
itself is one-sided and that this needs
to be supplemented by if you start
instead from the level of not
epistemology but ontology then you have
to account for how this very knowing
subject how transcendental subjectivity
itself somehow erose out of nature
um and that that task of thinking the
you know the imminent natural Genesis of
transcendental
subjectivity um is in a way kind of the
key task that an issue that I think is
bequeathed to Philosophy by postan and
German idealism especially alaf uh
shelling and Hegel and that is you know
really the big problem that I am working
on myself under the heading of of of
transcendental materialist or I even
sometimes speak of dialectical
naturalism the idea that nature in a
sense denaturalizes itself or generate
something that you know can act uh in in
defiance of how the rest of nature
operates um and that we are precisely
self- denaturalized nature relating to
itself and accounting for that Genesis
for the imminent material natural
Genesis of a of a form of subjectivity
that itself cannot simply be reduced to
its natural material Origins and that
moreover can achieve at least a certain
degree of Freedom wiggle room or
autonomy Visa its material natural
ground he everyone welcome to my
conversation with the philosopher
Professor Adrien Johnston firstly to get
out of the way let me start off by
apologizing uh apologizing for if I
didn't do the best job as an interview
are I felt like in the podcast I was a
little bit nervous uh and didn't really
do the best job at extracting um the
best one could from uh talking to a p
Colac Professor Johnston uh and I've got
to admit the reason for that is because
I was nervous in fact I I I don't I
rarely do get nervous with podcasts I
generally find them to be a just another
conversation uh
but at the risk of uh embarrassing
Professor Johnston if I may say
I have considered him to be a a
philosophical hero of mine um I started
reading him probably four or five years
ago uh with his book
um J's ontology and I was immediately
hooked onto his his style of writing his
his M Mo when it comes to philosophy and
just the way that he Bridges U Myriad
fields in both continental and analytic
philosophy and brings in um the
cognitive neuroscience
um and many other disciplines along with
of course the discourse around
psychoanalysis and Marxism um and I've
learned so much from him and I've read
so much of his work quite carefully if
I'm being frank and I felt that I was
kind of overwhelmed with the amount of
questions I wanted to ask him and and
sort of all of the numerous thoughts
I've had in my head while reading him
and I felt in this moment I had to
synthesize it all and and ask him clear
coach
questions and that I felt like I put a
lot of UND pressure on myself and in no
way it was this professor Johnson's
fault in fact uh he was very cordial and
congenial and um and I I felt like he
just truly engaged with my questions in
a deep and perspicacious manner uh and I
hope I I did a good job as an
interlocutor but be that as it may it's
just a bit of a caveat for you the
listener if I didn't really do a good
job um but what I primarily discussed
through this conversation was the theory
of
materialism that Professor Johnson
advocates for uh the transcendental
materialist Theory which um to put it
simply is a way of TR to understand um
how the subject emerges from the objects
but also the fact that the subject can
be reduced to the object on emergence um
and then the question would be what is
nature like that it can give rise to
subjects to conscious beings um and
certainly this is heavily influenced by
Hegel and shelling for myself the reason
I was particularly drawn towards
Professor Johnston's work is that he
would still clearly delineate the
subject and the object not particularly
in a dualistic cartisian way it was a
bit more complicated than that however
perhaps in a more dialectical way where
he would still say that there is a
difference between subjects and objects
between us conscious beings and then the
objective non-conscious World um um
whereas as we discuss in the podcast
people like pan sists or analytic
idealists uh tend to prescribe
subjectivity or Consciousness to all of
being all of existence and personally
for myself I always was kind of turned
off by that kind of thinking because I
felt there wasn't um many productive
dialogue that can emerge from or come
out of uh such um all encompassing
ontologies whereas the uh transcendental
on the transcendental materialist
ontology for myself at least is deeply
heelan and deeply dialectical which is
perhaps important uh when we when we
theorize uh as as a philosopher U or as
a lay philosopher like myself so it's
with this intent that I approach this
conversation where I really try to bring
forward Professor Johnston's theory of
materialism uh transcendental
materialism which is where we went into
you know quantum mechanics his uh
critique of jeek J's use of quantum
mechanics which is very interesting I
mean he's spoken about this in a couple
of episodes and a couple of podcasts uh
I should say uh but I still find it's
quite productive whenever he does
critique J and I was happy to hear that
uh he is writing or collaborating on a
book with uh
slav uh to discuss these matters a bit
more deeply um and on that note I want
to mention this too that he's done some
great work with Katherine malabu um I
haven't studied Katherine Mal's work
much but I'm really hoping to next year
to read uh more of her work especially
uh in the cognitive
neurosciences uh with uh neuroplasticity
and then her connection how she connects
that to more of hegelian philosophy uh
so I'm I'm really Keen to look into that
and in fact even read the book that
Professor Johnston wrote wrote with u
Professor kather malabu uh I I ordered
the book but it just didn't arrive in
time but I certainly am hoping to read
it when it arrives uh one small thing to
mention perhaps if this if this really
matters for for you more the listeners
of this podcast would be uh I did
mention Professor Johnson that um I I'm
hoping to start a book club uh next year
um I've already been in contact with the
few listeners but eventually we will
open it up to the public and one book uh
we are hoping to study deeply is
Professor Johnson's book uh adventures
in transcendental
materialism which uh I haven't read the
whole book I've skim through it but
after having read you know JX onology uh
a new German idealism and then even um
Professor Johnson's essay in this book
uh this collection uh J response I I
can't wait to get into um especially
because he did mention that he just
flesh out his disagreement with J Appo
quantum mechanics I don't want to
prolong this introduction too much but
my overall point being primarily in this
podcast I wanted to focus on Professor
Johnston's ontology his materialist
ontology that he puts forward uh and not
particularly on Mor scholarly work on
laon and psychoanalysis but that
certainly is a whole other area which
he's written on extensively um now for a
bit of a formal introduction as I tend
to do Professor Adrian Johnson is a
distinguished professor in the
department of philosophy at the
University of New Mexico at Albuquerque
and a faculty member at the Emory
psychoanalytic Institute in Atlanta he's
the author of numerous books including J
anology new German idealism the POA to
any future materialism Trilogy and
recently infinite greed Professor
Johnson is in continuous dialogue with
his fellow Travelers slavo alanka zanik
Katherine malabu Tom McGavin and others
in the Contemporary hegelian lenan the
scene while also bringing into the
discourse the developments within
analytic philosophy and the Natural
Sciences that being said without further
Ado here's my conversation with
Professor Aran Johnston as I said before
uh before we start our recording thank
you very much for your time it's truly
an honor um I I guess I'd start off with
a very broad question which you probably
have been asked uh in previous
interviews before uh in in a
conversation you had with Daniel tot who
is also another think I deeply admire uh
he he he said this and I think even
Katherine malabu I've seen her say this
too that you've been you've been vital
and or pivotal in Bridging the Gap
between soall uh analytic and carnal
philosophy and you know as a neop
reading your work I've always felt this
too um and I'm wondering if you could if
you firstly do you agree with this this
is Claim about yourself but also if you
do uh how do you think you've done uh in
your work this this this bridging
between um analytic and carnal
philosopher philosophy and then what has
your Mo been in in doing
so so I should start by saying I'm very
comfortable with being characterized
thusly um this is in part reflective of
the fact that uh you know my my father
was actually trained as an analytic
philosopher and so you know from
childhood onward I had uh regular
conversations with someone about these
issues who was coming out of uh a a you
know a strictly analytic background my
father's dissertation was on Quin you
know specifically quin's two dogmas of
empiricism and its implications for
practical Philosophy for ethics Etc um
and you know my interest in things like
the Mind Body problem
materialism uh you know theories of
subjectivity Etc uh definitely have some
of their Origins uh in you know that
aspect of my upbringing so that's you
know one factor and funnily enough when
I was originally hired by the University
of New Mexico uh and it's been gosh it's
been longer than I realized this was uh
in 2006 when I joined the Department the
job description uh for the position I
ended up getting here was a somebody who
is a continental philosopher but
nonetheless very comfortable talking to
analytic types um and that was in fact
just part of the job description and so
you know it ended up working out that I
you know got the position um but apart
from that in terms of you know how I see
myself bridging this divide and I'm
certainly not alone in this there are
you know various you know efforts being
made I think to um you know get these
two philosophical traditions seriously
engaging with each other nowadays but
you know for me there's both a style and
a Content component um at the stylistic
level uh you know I I I try my best to
to write in a way that involves uh you
know Clarity that involves argumentative
rigor you know various of these things
that analytic philosophers place a
premium on and you know my hope is
always that the things that I write even
if I'm writing about very Continental
figures such as Hegel or Lon that I'm
still able to write about authors like
that in a fashion that opens up their
ideas to those who don't come from
Continental backgrounds and aren't
necessarily you know versed in the
particular technical vocabularies of
these you know specific European figures
um so that's a stylistic aspect and I
think that again the analytic
philosophical premium on um you know
Clarity rigor lack of Reliance on
obscure jargon Etc you know those things
you know I also tried to take to heart
you know in terms of my own writing but
content wise I mean many of
the um metaphysical and philosophy of
Mind issues that I'm most concerned with
things having to do with materialism the
Mind Body relationship Etc you know
these are readily recognizable Central
philosophical questions for just about
any philosopher including any analytic
philosopher um you I use a different
toolkit than you're standard analytic
philosopher to deal with questions in
metaphysics or philosophy of mind um but
many of the questions and concerns um
are very much the same and my hope is uh
is that approaching
um things that are of concern to
analytic philosophical types but again
with with figures orientations resources
Etc that usually analytic philosophers
are are not trained in are not you know
uh inclined to reach for themselves when
wrestling with certain issues you know
things like psychoanalysis
Marxism um postan and German idealism I
mean these are orientations that I think
are of great use for these big
philosophical questions that even the
analytics readily recognize are the big
philosophical questions still um but you
know most analytics their education in
the history of philosophy stops with a
certain version of Kant um they then
generally tend to think after Kant the
Europeans went insane you know that the
postcontent idealist just went off the
speculative deep end um and it was just
a big intellectual mess or catastrophe
for most of the 19th century um and then
you know at the start of the 20th
century um you know sanity has recovered
with you know Fraga Russell Vicken Stein
and Company um and I think that so much
of what occurs in that 19th century Gap
um between Kant and Russell and Company
uh that tends to be overlooked in
analytic philosophy is actually it
contains much that I think uh can be
demonstrated even to analytic
philosophers much that is useful for
dealing with issues in metaphysics and
philosophy of mind that they're dealing
with excellent Professor uh in fact
maybe perhaps as an example since we
were just talking about your recent book
infinite greed um maybe if you could
like so for B of context I'll a lot of
the uh listeners of this podcast still
tend to be more from the analytic Camp
more from the the cognitive science
background and and some of them um are
actively averse to let's say a
psychoanalysis or they would be they
would be more like let's say agnostic
about it they would know what what it's
all about so if you could use your you
know recent book infinite GRE as an
example and then perhaps uh kind of try
to
elucidate why why is
it what would you say are the the what's
the value in in fields in discourses
such as psychoanalysis to a field uh
more from the analytic tradition like
something like cognitive science or more
like the analytic philosophy of
mind yes well I would say that you know
in terms of psychoanalysis both
traditional psychoanalysis uh figures
such as Freud and laan but also of
course some of my work looks at um
contemporary psychoanalysis VV the
current state of play in the
neurosciences and there's a whole field
known as neuros psychoanalysis that you
know I'm also very much engaged with and
you know it's mainly non- leanian anal
psychoanalysis but there are a few
leanians such as myself who also have
interests in in neuros psychoanalysis
but I would say that at the biggest of
big picture levels um if you take
psychoanalysis as as the point of
reference here um you know to begin with
I think that Freud very much like Mars
and N before him that it is not without
very good reason that the French
hermeneutic philosopher Paul rur
famously describes Marx nche and Freud
as quote unquote the three great hermene
newes of Suspicion
um and you know in Freud's case of
course that suspicion has everything to
do with the specifically psychoanalytic
conception of the
unconscious um and that of course uh
Freud when advancing his analytic
conception of the unconscious from very
early on in his career was aware of
having to fight against a deeply
entrenched bias that you also see very
much reflected in the western
philosophical tradition that tends to
equate the mental with the conscious and
to view those two things as coextensive
or synonymous um and of course one of
Freud's revolutionary gestures is to
insist that no that uh it is not always
the case that when we think we think
that we think or that when we know we
know that we know that there isn't that
guarantee of accompanying self-aware
reflexivity such that all that is mental
as conscious um that in fact con you
know the conscious portion of mental
life is just the tip of a vast Iceberg
and that moreover for Freud it's not
that what is you know below the
threshold of our explicit selfawareness
is just a chaotic primitive
animalistic uh you know seething
cauldron of impulses and urges all you
know kind of a depth psychological
romantic conception of the Freudian ID
is that the unconscious involves very
complex cognitive processes but that
transpire without accomp
firsters conscious cognizance or
self-awareness right and at the time
Freud was proposing this it was very
controversial and went against um the
grain of certain traditional intuitions
about mental life um but now what what's
surprising is that despite Freud
repeatedly being pronounced dead and
buried you know intellectually obsolete
bankrupt Etc one of the things that is
is a lasting Legacy of his is that even
anti freudians like hardnose El limited
materialist Neuroscience types um it's
really at this point uncontroversial
that much of mental life is
non-conscious you know whether
unconscious in Freud sense that might be
more debatable but really there's no
serious um empirical scientific
disagreement that no in fact the mental
and the conscious are far from
synonymous or coextensive and that
indeed
the mental vastly uh exceeds in scope
the relatively narrow and restricted
parameters of the field of our conscious
awareness and so you know that's
something which you know Freud had to
argue for that now has been accepted dis
and has been accepted even by those who
have no truck with Freud who are
allergic or averse to him etc etc and
when you take seriously the idea that
the mental and the conscious are not
coextensive and that most of mental is
is it transpires below the threshold of
explicit self-awareness standard
philosophical models of the you know
libertarian free willed you know
reflective deliberating agent that acts
rationally on the basis of an accurate
assessment of its own self-interests Etc
something crucial for so much not just
of philosophy but you know for you know
you might say World Views outlooks Etc
that shap our laws our institutions our
social practices Etc and one of the
things that psychoanalysis and it's
aftermath in you know in our models of
the mind up through the present that
indicates is that that entire you know
basically early modern picture of the
self as agent of the rational individual
who reflectively deliberates about their
interests and may is able to know you
know what will for instance satisfy them
make them happy Etc and then setting
about doing that in the most practical
way possible blah blah blah all of that
just seems like frankly a wishful
thinking fiction right a a a distorted
picture of ourselves that H that has
long ago has been demolished by not just
Freud I mean you know again before and
Marx and N do quite a bit of damage to
that idea of the self or or of the you
know rational agent and you know and and
then you know up through the present you
have all of this you know frankly
empirical experimental natural
scientific
corroboration that aspects of what is is
detrimental to this you know picture of
of you know the the free willed you know
choosing rational agent that's Central
to you know liberalism to capitalism to
you know the entire social order we
inhabit is again a a basically a myth a
fiction a falsehood um and so you know
part of what I try to do in my work in
various ways is to draw attention to
that now the other thing is is with
cognitivist types like so one one issue
when we're talking especially about uh
the neurosciences is that we have to
remember that cognitivism is also not
coextensive with all the neurosciences
sometimes people get the impression that
research programs that come out of a
cognitivist
orientation um in the Sciences of the
brain are the only game intent town when
in fact um there since the 1990s
especially there's been enormous amount
of work done in an area now known as
affective Neuroscience with some of the
pioneering figures here being Yak PP
Antonio deasio Joseph Leo um uh you know
there's a range of authors working in
that orientation where what one looks at
is not um you know so much the brain's
manner of processing you know let's say
you know symbols Concepts Etc uh you
know making inferences so on and so
forth but that what's actually of
concern to affective neurosciences of
course looking at how emotional and
feeling states are very decisive for who
and what we are as the peculiar beings
that we human beings are and um you know
the the whole you know research set of
research programs that are ongoing in
aect of Neuroscience are proving to be
particularly genial to uh those
interested in neuros psychoanalysis and
in bringing um you know Freudian and
other analytic metap psychologies into a
kind of Cooperative relationship with uh
neurobiology and its findings um and
that you know in fact you know the
person here who I think has done you
know the most in this regard who's often
considered the founder of anglo-american
neuros pycho analysis is Mark SS and in
his recent big book uh the Hidden Spring
from 2021 I think he does a marvelous
job showing how a combination of
psychoanalysis and affective
Neuroscience enables addressing like one
of the things he focuses on in that book
is David chambers's famous hard problem
of Consciousness and tackling that with
this different toolbox drawn from this
combination of Freudian psychoanalysis
with affective rather than cognitive
Neuroscience um as just like a nice
example of of what an effort along these
lines looks like that's you know and
this book is quite recent from 2021 and
you know highly recommended really well
worth reading to kind of flesh out some
of this perfect perfect yeah I also
particularly liked what you said about
the fact that the the unconscious it's
not this sort of chaotic Abyss it's
rather it's got own logic because I'd
say uh like a lot of uh you know
nonexperts NE fights who get into
psychoanalysis it tends to be through
generally by by by yungi and depth
psychology and then you see the ego and
then the the iceberg metaphor where
behind the scenes it's like this chaotic
mess of like of of the ID whereas with M
of the lenan tradition it's like it's
got its own logic and I think it's it's
important to understand that uh in fact
Professor I wasn't going to ask you this
but since you mentioned it I think it's
it's an apt Point um you know Todd
McGavin one of your fellow Travelers he
he beautifully articulates this idea of
the the politics of the death Drive the
fian Death Drive uh I'm curious just to
hear your thoughts on this this idea of
the the politics of the Dead dve
whenever I speak to anyone from a
psychoanalytic background I do I'd like
to ask that question given I think it's
something important for the discourse um
so yeah what are your what are your
thoughts on this idea of the the
politics of the death
drive my tendency is to want to say that
well there can be various ways of
politically
a appropriating and deploying the
psychoanalytic notion of the death Drive
um but of course you know even there
it's already complicated in terms of you
know if you look at the later Freud
starting in 1920 with beyond the
Pleasure Principle the text in which
Freud first introduces what at that
moment he presents as a highly
speculative hypothesis and you know he's
extremely hesitant and and kg in that
work uh but he puts forward this this
idea of the totus tlee of the death
drive and then if you
carefully uh examine the elaborations on
this notion that Freud engages in from
1920 you know to the end of his life in
the late
1930s honestly I think one would be
hardpressed to say that there is a
single enduring coherent welldefined
concept there instead you have a
shifting series of proposals some of
which hang together others I don't think
hang together too well and that in the
later Freud Death Drive almost names a
set of unresolved problems or
difficulties that Freud is focused on
orbiting around Etc but I don't think
ever manages to fully you know nail down
or tie up to his satisfaction um and you
know then you have of course certain
interpretations what the Death Drive is
in the leanian campus Etc and you know
to begin with for me it's very difficult
because I don't think there's any
interpretive consensus on exactly what
the correct account of the death Drive
is in Freud Andor Lan um but regardless
of those interpretive difficulties for
me the death drive like you know or any
other of Freud's fundamental
metapsychological
concepts can I think be you know
appropriated deployed Etc politically
but I don't think there's any kind of
inherent there's no politics inherent to
the metapsychology itself that's just
there to be directly read off of it um
that you know if you take for instance
any number of the characteristics
associated with the Death Drive well we
could talk about for instance you know
aggression indifference to the Pleasure
Principle Etc as operative in various
political phenomena situated anywhere
across the Spectrum um you know whether
on the right or the left Etc um and so
so um you know I I do tend to be myself
um a little hesitant to talk about you
know the the politics of the death Drive
well which politics um you know again I
don't think that I think that instead
something like Freudian Drive Theory or
leanian drive theory for that matter as
a metapsychological framework can be
productively utilized to
explain um and and account for certain
political phenomena that that we observe
I mean in my recent book infinite greed
you know looking at linian accounts of
drive and desire as relevant to
understanding what Marx talks about as
the logic of capital in terms of the
fundamental um kind of motivational
structure of the capitalist mode of
production at a trans individual uh you
know social level um but uh you know the
death you know and there something like
the Death Drive is helpful for
understanding aspects of the logic of
capital but it also of course can be
helpful for understanding instances that
might involve radical left revolutionary
sequences at different in different
times and places in history Etc so you
know my my position has always been that
you know metapsychology and politics are
two different things that you know you
can map them on to each other but um I I
always resist efforts to talk about any
kind of inherent
political upshot uh you know message or
conclusion built into the structure of
psychoanalytic metapsychology I don't
think that metapsychology itself is
inherently political I think it can be
used in political analysis but that's to
me something different I'm not sure if
that answers the question or not but
well I claim that it's not normative in
the sense that you you don't want to
prescribe any kind of yeah perfect
perfect yeah yeah that's right it's
purely descriptive and given its pure
descriptive nature there's a neutrality
to it at the prescriptive level I mean
there's no yeah you can't just read off
anything normative or prescriptive
directly from it I see perfect perfect
thank you for clarifying that Professor
all right uh I want to talk about uh
transcendental materialism in fact uh I
am hoping to do your book uh adventures
in transcendal materialism in a small
book club that I run and we hoping uh
starting next year maybe on Jan Feb to
do a book study on that but however I
came across uh the term in uh your your
book JX onology um in the first book I
read by you um in fact a couple of years
ago so I've kind of Forgotten most of it
uh nonetheless if you could Prof I have
two oh yes you oh you have two there you
go it's a good thing you've written it
down then you you have some record of
that's right that's
right uh well uh in any case um yeah if
you could so uh you know this for me it
it really when when you introduce your
theory of materialism it I I felt like
this is it this is exactly what I've
always thought about this idea of you
subject object divide and especially I
don't know if you've been following
again from the analytic tradition
there's a lot of talk you know discourse
around there's like a Resurgence of pan
psychism or or yes you know the kind of
idealism where everything is
consciousness orot lot of discourse but
I realize that there it's always
something that that misses where I feel
like I feel like that captures feel like
uh transcendal materialism does capture
that bit that it misses within this you
know So-Cal object subject divide but uh
yeah if you could just uh explicate to a
person who has no idea what uh
transcendental materialism is and we
we'll go from there because I kind of
want to explore uh once you flush it out
I kind of want to discuss how it differs
from let's say kind of reject ontology
or if it differs at all
yes well I should say that to begin with
the origin of the very phrase
transcendental materialism traces back
to that 2008 book xiet anology that you
just mentioned right um and um it uh I I
ended up uh uh resorting to this
particular phrase to at the time try and
characterize
X's own
core philosophical position with with
this l
uh you know given that you know on the
one hand xek repeatedly from you know
some of his earliest work onward makes
clear that he is interested in
establishing a materialist ontology and
that more in in the past 10 to 15 years
you know he's tended to even associate
that with you know despite the
problematic stalinist connotations with
the phrase dialectical materialism and
to you know appeal to that tradition um
so on the one hand he is interested in
arguing for a materialist ontology but
one that contains within itself a theory
of subjectivity where the subject is
seen as irreducible to this material
basis of being that you know he is
ontologically committed to as
fundamental and that moreover um very
much resembles the sort of subjectivity
that we often think of as associated
with anti materialist idealisms for
example the cartisian
Kito you know or something like for for
instance in the German idealist context
FAS self-positing eye Etc um that you
know gek wants on the one hand uh as I
portray him in in that 2008 book a
theory of kogito like subjectivity of um
you know an irreducible autonomous you
know not itself just physical not one
object among others uh uh subject that
nonetheless um is somehow accounted for
within the parameters of an overarching
materialist
ontology oh hold on my one of my Apple
uh devices thought that I was talking to
it and started speaking to me and
distracted me all right don't worry
about that
so but um and and so uh to cut uh at
this point a very long story very short
um you know I so I have ended up in
certain ways taking over this label um
but developing on under the banner of
transcendental materialism a position
which now I mean gek and I have been
back and forth in recent years debating
about some of these issues um and one
thing I'm going to be working on in the
next couple of years is he and I have
decided to do a co-author debate book
together about some of these matters um
but you know for me basically the what I
am now trying to work out uh Under The
Heading of transal materialism however
useful or not that label is um what I'm
trying to work out is a model where you
can account for not don't uh and really
for me a materialism ultimately does
have to posit nature uh as ontological
ground zero so really not just a
materialism but a naturalism um a
naturalist metaphysic
that argues that you know indeed you
know at least for us given our
epistemological constraints the ultimate
ontological Ground Zero is you know pre
or non-human nature in and of itself and
that this nature gives rise to is is
responsible for the very Genesis of
among other things ourselves as subjects
um and of course here one of my
historical sources of inspiration is the
shelling of the late 1790s and early
1800s he starts you know trying to
develop after Kant what he and Hegel uh
uh called NATA philosophy philosophy of
Nature and that the shelling of a text
like 1800 system of transcendental
idealism argues that well on the one
hand epistemologically speaking we have
to start like Kant does with this you
know framework of transcendental
subjectivity um that you know determines
the possibility of of knowledge for us
of what you know can be rendered
intelligible what we are able to grasp
Etc with our Concepts categories in the
light um and so if you you know we
talking about knowledge or thinking you
have to you know have start at the level
of the transcendental subject and then
from there you move towards the domain
of objectivity but an objectivity whose
intelligibility is conditioned by our
own subjectivity but then of course
shelling insists though that that by
itself is one-sided and that this needs
to be supplemented by if you start
instead from the level of not
epistemology but ontology then you have
to account for how this very knowing
subject how transcendental subjectivity
itself somehow erose out of nature um
and that that task of thinking the you
know the imminent natural Genesis of
transcendental
subjectivity um is in a way kind of the
key task that an issue that I think is
bequeathed to philosophy
by Poston and German idealism especially
Olaf shelling and Hegel and that is you
know really the big problem that I am
working on myself under the heading of
of of transcendental materialism or I
even sometimes speak of dialectical
naturalism the idea that nature in a
sense denaturalizes itself or generate
something that you know can act uh in in
defiance of how the rest of nature
operates um and that we are precisely
self- denaturalized nature relating to
itself and accounting for that Genesis
for the imminent material natural
Genesis of a of a form of subjectivity
that itself cannot simply be reduced to
its natural material Origins and that
moreover can achieve at least a certain
degree of Freedom wiggle room or
autonomy Visa its material natural
ground you know that's that's really the
the you might say the biggest
philosophical preoccupation of what you
know I'm pursuing and I think xek is
after that in his own way too but he has
a very at this point I think a very
different way of doing it from me um so
you could say that what he and I share
is more a problem or a concern um and we
also of course
share you know very similar tools for
dealing with it this combination of
German idealism Marxism and
psychoanalysis with some other
philosophical resources but I think that
the different picturers that we we come
to you know champion each of us at this
point um you know are very distinct
options from each other and so that's
some of what we're hoping to you know to
be able to lay out more clearly in this
in this book that we'll both be
tinkering on for the next couple of
years well perfect I'd certainly be
pre-ordering that whenever it's out
Professor um that's so beautifully
escalated um although although before I
I would like to flesh out a bit more
your differences between je and how
you're tackling this problem uh but if
he could let's say Devil's Advocate a
bit um so a lot of people recently have
been buying into the idea of panarchism
so in many ways what I see is because
from the objects the subject emerges and
the subject can't be reduced to the
object on emergence they tend to
prescribe to this object some kind of
properties of a of a subject so they say
uh every every entity in the universe in
some way is conscious um so how will you
respond to a psychist uh through your uh
theory of uh transcendental materialism
or or dialectical naturalism and where
do you think uh that that theory that
ontology of panarchism is
lacking yeah I what's interesting is
I've also been thinking about some of
this recently in part thanks to a few of
my doctoral students for example um I
had one who recently defended a
dissertation on shelling the early
shellings philosophy of Nature and the
way David Charmers talks about Pan
psychism um in in his work on philosophy
of mind um and you know with using
Charmers here as a as a a convenient
reference and you know someone whose
work you know especially if you have a a
good number of analytic listeners you
know most of them would be at least
passingly familiar with um what I'm to
say is high you know just like with
Freud and Beyond the Pleasure Principle
highly tentative but I've become
increasingly tempted by an aspect of
chambers's approach which I
think expresses con you know the same
sort of concerns that motivate some
people now to turn to pan psychism but
doesn't require actually buying into
full-blown Pan psychism um so you know I
should to begin by saying I don't find
full-blown pan psychism at all
persuasive I mean you can start just at
a very naive common sensical level which
is that you know in terms of what
prompts any of us to attribute
mindedness to something uh that that
that we come across you know that you
know why I for instance ascribe
mindedness to you while talking to you
right now despite just being limited to
having this image on my computer screen
you know and all of this sensory
perceptual content that I could just
attribute to my own mind if I were say a
solipsist um that you know of course
when we when we posit the existence
however explicitly or implicitly of
other Minds we do so because we're
prompted by what we take to be evidence
expressive of you know some mindedness
on that side you know that you react to
me in certain ways that you engage in
particular behaviors that seem to be
purposive and direct towards a specific
aim Ander goal that you know you you you
have reactions that seem to indicate
feeling states that I'm familiar with in
myself Etc and so that leads me to you
know attribute a mind to you and of
course you know the you know when it
comes to what we experience as inanimate
nature r large um you know it doesn't
seem like we have very good reason for
thinking that you know the desk on which
my computer sits right now is at self-
minded I don't think even at a common
sensical level but then um you know when
you start getting into more
scientifically informed empirical
details right um you know that there
does and here's where for me it is
always important to keep of the natural
scientific references biology and
especially neurobiology in mind that the
kinds of you know the forms of of
experience of mindedness of subjectivity
that we have as far as we know does
require a highly complex type of object
object the kind of peculiar entity that
is the human central nervous system in
all of its mindboggling you know
astronomical complexity right and you
know that does seem to be you know you
know it's I I certainly am open to the
idea of multiple realizability I think
that there are various physical systems
that you know could potentially or
actually instantiate something that we
might be willing to qualify as
mindedness um but I certainly don't
think that you know any old bu of atoms
you know molecules Etc you know are
going to generate that so I think that
mindedness is not universally
distributed across all of material
reality across the entire physical
Universe I don't really see any
compelling reason to accept that and in
fact you know I see a lot of both common
sensical and scientific reasons to
believe that no um there are only you
know these very small isolated instances
of material configurations and nature
that support mindedness for instance you
know the central nervous systems of
various organisms that we know of right
um but what I like about uh uh you know
chers in dealing with the hard problem
of Consciousness in this vein is that
his work allows for the possibility of
saying well the thing is is that you
know qualitative Consciousness right
this this experience of qualia as as
Charmers you know highlights in his in
his account of hard problem of
Consciousness that chamers speculation
that you know perhaps you know the what
it is like of various qualia are you
know fundament are just you know brute
fundamental facts of nature along with
other things um you know and that
um and but that of course these facts of
nature that are qualia and unlike with
pan psychism are not just universally
equ equitably distributed across the
entire expanse of the of the physical
universe or of all of material natural
reality um that you have you know these
discreet small localized Pockets where
qualia arise and that qualia although
they emerge from certain physical
systems that um you know at least as far
as our understanding can get that maybe
there is this Spade turning quality to
them in terms of well you know why is it
that you know a certain you know
wavelength of light has it the qu you
know the
qualitative quality to us I'm sorry qual
you know is a qualer has this sort of
feel to it what it is like to see A
Certain Shade of red right and that you
know it may be that there isn't any
further explanation that can be offered
there we just have to take it as it's
just a brute stupid fact of nature like
any other fact of nature that it just so
happens that in a physical being with a
central nervous system configured like
ours that you know the the visual
apparatus encountering this wav light of
wavelength of light will generate this
corresponding qualitative State of
Consciousness that is the quality of
that shade of red right and that that is
there's just a certain ultimate um you
know just brute facticity of the matter
to it um that we're perfectly
comfortable accepting about various
inary laws of nature Etc and that I
think Cher's proposal that you know
there might just be these brute
factual uh uh relationships between say
certain wavelengths on the light
spectrum and certain you know visual
qualitative experiences that's just
another one of those brute facts of
nature uh and that you know at that
point um you know we can of course draw
the parallels in terms of you know
certain aspects of how our central
nervous system functions and those
corresponding qualitative states of
conscious awareness um but that you know
at that point perhaps our job is more or
less done um that again there is that
Spade turning quality it's just well it
is what it is I mean in the same way
that any other aspect of nature is what
it is um and you know so I think that
that's you know not when chers you know
ex is willing to speculate about
full-blown psychism but rather when you
know he's willing to say that like the
panchas Consciousness might just be
something fundamental Al to to Nature or
a fundamental aspect of nature but then
there's the option of you don't have to
if you accept that you don't have to end
up as a panus where you just evenly
distribute that across the entire
expanse of what exists at the physical
level but just say only certain a
certain set of physical
configurations are able to have you know
corresponding with them these also
primitive natural states that are qualia
excellent excellent and I think I can
see your your ponchon towards that sort
of thinking because especially when you
when you POS it as a brute fact of
reality that's also very n naturalist
it's it's yeah there's no further
explanation requiring say it is it is
what it is as you said uh yes right
right uh well Prof so now to kind of
flesh out your differences and kind of
this ongoing debate with J now of course
um kind of kind of puts forward this
idea of ontological incompleteness which
is also something that I'm fully fully
drawn towards um so I I I was trying to
prepare for this conversation and I I
Read's book on freedom uh a couple of
months then I I there's one one part
here if you don't mind if I could just
read it out he he says in the book uh
Freedom a disase without kill uh being
involved in a decades long debate with
Adan Johnston I gladly accept his
designation of difference as one between
layer cake and donut in your ontology
yes and then you also did write a write
a little have a bit of a debate with him
in this H book J response which is an
excellent yes read uh read
to this debate between uh cake and
donut so if you could take as as as much
time as you need for this because I find
it fascinating and kind of try to
outline these ontological differences
between the dut model and the the cake
layer cake model between yourself and Ja
yes well I should say that with with
with xek so starting in 1996 in that
year he he brings out um his book The
indivisible remainder an essay on
shelling and related matters and one of
the you know striking and novel features
of that particular work from the mid1
1990s is that this was the first time
the initial occasion when um when xek uh
uh attempted to uh use his at that point
primarily his combination of German
idealism with lukan and in this case
more more precisely uh sort of lanan
eyes shelling to engage with quantum
physics um and so this this gesture of
taking recourse to Quantum Physics for
fleshing out a particular particular
sort of materialism that would involve
this this idea of ontological
incompleteness Etc um this is really the
first place where you see X do that um
and then more recently um it's as though
that project from the indivisible
remainder has over the course of the
past I'd
say probably about 15 years of returned
with a Vengeance in his uh in his you
know more recent work where you know he
Now talks about his his version
dialectical materialism as essentially
involving this particular hybrid German
idealist leanian manner of engaging with
quantum physics for instance you know
his 2020 book sex in the failed absolute
um is his I think most recent sustained
presentation of that and in fact right
now he's back to working on quantum
physics again and has been in
conversation with a number of you know
eminent figures in that field and it's
very yeah yes that's right and
so yeah he's in the middle of working on
all of that right now um but uh one
aspect of of the cake versus donut model
that you're talking about have to do
with how in debating with him about some
of these issues one of the things that I
did is go back to shelling himself um
and you know looking at uh you know
shellings philosophy of Nature and and
related aspects of shellings
larger for lack of a better word
metaphysics um that you know it became
very clear to me that with shelling
shing's account of of autonomous
subjectivity of of you know the subject
in its fullest Freedom um as concerns
xek that shelling makes clear that for
him what this is a matter of is so
shelling and this is you know this is
material crucial to X's version of
shelling the middle period shelling
starting with shing's 1809 fly height
schift his essay on human freedom and
running through the ages of the world up
to around 1815 or thereabouts that this
middle period shelling especially is
dear to xek and this shelling has this
distinction that xek uses again and
again between ground GL and existence
existence um and this ground existence
distinction you know for shelling the
ideas is that what we ordinarily take to
be reality is what he calls existence
which is this tamed and
domesticated um you know field of
constituted entities and events um that
is organized in a lawful fashion that is
intelligible for us you know as knowing
subjects um that we are able to
cognitively map you know get our
bearings in relation to Etc but that
this entire domain that we inhabit of
this intelligible reality that shelling
calls existence um arises from and sit
the top this more foundational
underlying ontological basis that
shelling calls ground and that this
ground for the middle and late period
shelling is not a you know calm
organized lawful rule
governed um uh uh you know second
reality it is Instead This unruly
conflict ridden anarchic it's kind of
like this primordial chaos almost um and
then for
what you know we take to be instances of
effective human freedom in our
constituted reality of existence are for
shelling returns of the repressed ground
it's as though the impersonal Anonymous
uh unruly basis of all being um returns
in this you know uh uh you know a
localized fashion in and through human
subjects and that my own subjectivity in
terms of when I am free and in those
instances in which I am I can be said to
be acting autonomously that what is
happening is is in and through me this
ground is in a sense intruding into the
domain of existence it's a moment at
which that underlying ontological
unruliness breaks through the congealed
crust of existence and and makes itself
felt again um and perturbs that field of
existence now from within um but of
course you know in my view I don't you
know there's it almost seems a bit like
shelling is cheating and I call this a
donut model because although Hegel is
usually seen as being guilty of of uh of
privileging you know the idea of
circularity or this you know this notion
of you know coming back to where you
started uh uh Etc that it's really with
shelling that you get this model where
it's that all right ground gives rise to
the various emergent levels and layers
of existence and then at the kind of
highest level of emergence uh at the
level of existence namely our subjective
autonomy that that you know highest
point is just the return of the of the
lowest you know uh basis um so it's as
though we in fact just go through you
know a series of layers arranged in a
donut shape and then when we get to the
highest emergent layer we've closed the
circle and rejoined you know the lowest
point so you know the highest point of
the emergent levels of existence is the
return of the ultimate underlying ground
and so it's this you know layered
circular you know donut shape kind of
that you get with shelling um you know
whereas you know I argue with Hegel if
you look especially at hegel's
philosophy of Nature and then his
account of the emergence of human-
mindedness out of nature in you know the
volumes two and three of his
encyclopedia um that you you know it's
not that for him you know the various
aspects of what we associate with Guist
you know you know Spirit mind you know
in in its various you know forms
associated with our subjectivity that
for heel is not just you know in a sense
the Resurgence of something you know
from the most primitive you know
metaphysical basis of existence that
then
reints within an a constituted field of
natural and human reality and its you
know in all of its particular features
um that no that there's you know
something rubly distinct and new about
human Freedom rather than it being just
in a sense tapping back into what is
oldest and most archaic and then xek
when he you know engages with quantum
physics um in a way that's influenced by
shelling um it's no accident that you
know xak flirts with this idea that in a
way it that you know his idea of the aut
you know the the negativity of
autonomous subjectivity Alek is
sometimes that this is in a way like
with shelling but now in updated
terminology that this is a kind of
return in in ordinary non-quantum
reality of certain unruly aspects of the
quantum Universe right that it's as
though you have quantum physics is this
shadowy schellingian ground and then you
have the classical Universe we inhabit
of course resulting from things like the
collapse of the wave function as like
shing's existence and that when human
Freedom comes into play for xek I think
he sometimes tempted to take this
shellian shortcut and to say that well
that's in a sense something like Quantum
indeterminacy Etc um returning within
the constituted field of classical
non-quantum reality um and it to me one
of the ironies is is that for someone
who also of course in part thanks to his
Fidelity to things like German idealism
and dialectical
materialism for somebody who wants a
non-reductive account of subject ity um
you know this seems to be a remarkably
reductive move is to say essentially
that you know solving the problem of
human- mindedness or subjectivity um is
just simply a matter of you know we
could really say that the ultim the
smallest ultimate constituents of
physical reality are you know a sense
where we are to go looking for the basis
of what we call subjectivity I mean
that's you know of course you know a
hard-nosed you know physical
reductionist or eliminativist I don't
think ultimately we'd have too much of a
problem with that um but efforts to do
this I mean like you go back to
something like Roger penrose's work like
the emperor's new mind um you know to
the best of my knowledge nobody has
really gotten very far actually trying
to flesh out okay if you're going to
assert that there's some type of direct
connection between the quantum level and
then our subjectivity or mindedness well
there's it would seem you would need to
have the ability um to flesh that out at
the level of the relevant sciences and
as far as I know nobody is even remotely
close to being able to do that and so
you know maybe in the long run you know
decades centuries down the road assuming
we last that long as a species we'll get
around to you know we might be able to
flesh out those details and vindicate
something like the Shian speculative
hypothesis that would have it that you
know subjective freedom is is a kind of
return within the field of classical
reality of certain aspects of quantum
reality um you know that to me is
something that will require a very
patient wait and see Outlook and in the
meantime you know this is why I also say
well look if you're going to spend time
diving into the Natural Sciences in
relation specifically to a non-reductive
yet still compatible with materialism or
naturalism account of subjectivity
there's plenty of work to be done you
know starting at the level of
neurobiology which would seem to be the
natural scientific level closest to you
know what we're concerned with when
talking about mindedness and to work
those problems out um and again whether
or not there's going to be any
possibility of vindicating a speculative
hypothesis about a direct link between
you know our subjectivity and quantum
mechanics I just think that um there's
much that we can do for the time being
except wait and see you know how much uh
progress is made thanks to a huge amount
of collective scientific labor in
different fields over the decades and
you know further to you know and beyond
that uh to see whether or not that can
end up getting substantiated in any way
excellent Professor um in fact I'm not
going to ask you because you've
discussed this in many podcast as to why
you so prefer to stick to the uh the
cognitive neurosciences over you know
quantum mechanics in the Natural
Sciences uh I I think I think people can
find you commenting on that on on many
other podcasts however if if it's okay
Professor if you could just outline uh
some of the work you're doing um oh
sorry before that perhaps one one thing
I should mention is that um from what
you said something I got was that I put
put put it put itly for you uh
subjectivity is still something new that
emerges so you're a lot more that sense
in your L model whereas it's not
something that where something that
exists in this primordial Abyss that
that returns to our classical reality um
yes and and and I think I think that
that for me goes well with the idea of
transcendental materialism too because
there is that again that irreducibility
of the of the subject in in any way of
what already existed and I think that's
where the uh
interesting dialogue continues um
interesting questions lie um
unfortunately I couldn't read your book
with Katherine Malibu uh because too
long to arrive so but I I do want to ask
you why you so prefer to stick to the um
the cognitive neurosciences over quantum
mechanics and perhaps while answering
that if you could just comment on the
work you've been doing with uh Catherine
malabu within that field please yes so I
should and in terms that I think also
will be helpful for you know again uh
especially listeners of yours who have
more of an analytic
background um you could say that my
ultimately my reasons for preferring
neurobiology over quantum mechanics in
terms of this uh you know longer running
debate with xek you know this this
disagreement between the two of us part
of it has to do with my commitment to um
a very strong form of emergentism um and
you know given strong
emergentism that uh you know there is
going to be something new with each you
know if we're going to identify
something as as genuinely constituting
an emergent level or layer a set a
phenomena you know that can be you know
seen as generated by something but that
level below that gives rise to what
emerges nonetheless you know starting
from that level one cannot come up with
uh a satisfactory account of the
structures and Dynamics in play at the
next level that is Arisen on that basis
um that you know for me the kinds of
structures and dynamics that emerge at
the level of what we would call
subjectivity have a distinctness even
you know that where you can't account
for all of it even in terms of just uh
uh Neuroscience that of course you know
one of the things uh and this is and
this is where the link to Malibu comes
into play is that not only am I
committed to a strong emergentism that
along with it would also allow for what
is known as top down causation but in
addition we have to me Malibu's big
breakthrough here more than anything
else um goes back to you'll find her
already pointing to this in the closing
paragraphs of her 1996 dissertation on
Hegel that you know she wrote Under Dar
Do's Direction but really first comes
fully into play in her 20 4 book it
appeared in French at least in 2004 what
should we do with our brain and I think
Malibu to our great credit um is really
the first at least Continental
philosopher that I know of
who registered the significance of the
development of Notions having to do with
neuroplasticity and epigenetics in the
Life Sciences and those things really
start you know coming to the for in the
1990s
um and that what Malibu recognized um
and recognized I think in part thanks to
her work on Hegel and along with that
also on certain postag Alan developments
like dialectical materialism is that
Malibu realized that well if the human
central nervous system is very plastic
and is subject to a lot of environmental
contextual mediation at the level of
epigenetics Etc um that you know one of
the consequences of this is that you
know when we look at the brain it's not
as though the brain by itself as a simp
as simply as a biological entity and
where all of the relevant explanations
for why it is the way it is would
somehow be developed at the biological
level or you know at the chemical or
even physical level no that you know
given given neuroplasticity and
epigenetics that the very shape
structure functioning Etc of the central
nervous system is is what it is thanks
to the more than biological including
things like social political economic
Etc factors that sculpt are very
biological being from the get-go and
that the constitution of our our bodies
and especially of the central nervous
system is itself the outcome of the
interaction between the organism and the
environment with plasticity and
epigenetics being the biological
explanation of what aspects of organic
Constitution opens the organism up to
extra organic mediation that nonetheless
has absolutely you know palpable
concrete not literally material
consequences for the
very
configuration of in this case you know
the brain of the central nervous system
um and you know of course in analytic
philosophy this also links up with you
know you do have you know certain
analytic philosophers of Mind who are
interested in the topic of what they
call Extended mind um you know Andy
Clark aloi Etc and you know I think that
here again there's this opportunity for
bridging between analytic and
Continental that if you take the kind of
work someone like Malibu has done in
connection with issues having to do with
neuroplasticity and epigenetics and put
this into dialogue with what more
analytically trained philosophers of
mind working on extended mind have been
doing one will see you know a
remarkable you know I think uh uh you
know Confluence of concerns that and
that you know really calls out for labor
to be done in terms of working out and
weaving these these these you know two
sorts of research programs together and
so yeah I think that um you know there's
even neurobiological Vindication of
something like the extended mind model
um and of course lurking in the
background behind something like the
extended mind model of of analytic
philosophy of mind you have many various
precursors of that including ones that I
think you would find in Hegel um even
though of course most analytic
philosophers wouldn't think there's much
of any value to be found in Hegel but
there it is um but yeah and for me like
what what the first book of Malibus that
I read that re um and it's you know I I
read it shortly before I had the
opportunity to meet her was that book
what should we do with our brain and um
you know it hit me that you know this
this was really kind of a crucial what
Malibu was doing there made possible a
whole set of developments that you know
some of which I've attempted to work out
myself but uh yeah yeah perfect I mean
again you don't have to go too deeply
into this because you've discussed this
in many other podcasts one one one
conversation that comes to mind is the
conversation you had with the Kel last
on philosophy
portal as to why you so prefer to you
know use the the cognitive neurosciences
over quantum mechanics and and I'd say
one thing correct me if I'm wrong here
Professor is that one thing you would
argue is that there's still a lot of
productive philosophical developments to
be made just on the brain as such and
what we're learning through the
neurosciences yes absolutely absolutely
and again you know it's um you know with
with gak recourse to quantum physics I
mean in the end perhaps there is you
know some sort of detailed compelling
account
at some point that could be worked out
um to substantiate the idea that certain
aspects of our subjectivity uh you know
indeed are made possible by what
ultimately are quantum level structures
and Dynamics but um you know that that
does seem a long way off and moreover
for me one of the ironies too um with
xek is
that um you know he in terms in terms of
things associated with this motif of
ontological incompleteness you know Etc
that um what you actually would get you
know in terms of you know a fleshing out
of some sort of direct connection
between the physics of the extremely
small and you know midscale being such
as ourselves I mean if you could carry
out that sort of explanatory reduction
of the quantum level of aspects of our
mindedness that would seem to point in a
direction that she doesn't want to go in
ontologically which would be something
much more like a kind of physicalist
monism right that you know Al I mean or
a standard kind of reductionistic
picture right that
ultimately everything that exists is
really just I mean here you don't even
have to have it the predates quantum
physics I mean you can go back to
Newton's era and you can look at you
know certain materialist philosophers
who were enthused by Newton's work and
for whom okay what this shows is that
ultimately everything can be explained
using um you know the mechanical
principle of motion in relation to the
smallest constituent bits of matter so
you just have matter and mechanical
motion um and everything ultimately can
be explained in this way um and I think
that uh you know if you know the idea of
reducing the mental to the quantum um it
would seem to be much much more uh uh
compatible with a sort of radical monism
of A physicalist Sort which should just
say that yeah whatever our phys of the
ultimate building blocks of reality are
so the physics of the extremely small
whether it's Quantum Mech mechanic
String Theory whatever whatever we end
up deciding are the you know tiniest
Elementary constituents of physical
being everything ultimately is is to be
explained at that level and it seems
though G's gesture weirdly is in line
with that sort of sensibility despite
the fact that by contrast what he seems
to want is you you know a
a an ontology that certainly would not
be an ontology of an ultimately
homogeneous you know undifferentiated
unified field of matter and motion um
where it that's the sole Ultimate
Reality it's just this flat expanse of
physical stuff and the efficient causal
mechanisms for the interactions between
those physical things um but that's at
the same time what it seems as though
you know the kind of picture that would
just be further supported were his
hypotheses about you know the you know
essentially the quantum nature of our
midscale you know subjectivity or at
least the aspects that interest him if
that ends up being substantiated then I
think we're much closer to vindicating
an ontology that is in a way weirdly at
odds with I think what xek wants at that
level yep I mean this is perhaps
Blasphemous for me to say but it seems
that you're more hegelian than even J
well yeah I mean part of my part of my
complaint is that I'm like look if
anything I think that slavo you are much
more of a kind of crypto shenian yes
than a hegelian at least when it comes
to these issues right and that's you
know and that's also you know why you
know I do think there yeah there is
tension in terms of you know G saying
that you know really
ultimately when push comes to shove I'm
really more heelan than anything else
even more than than a leanian you know
starting from around the time you know
that less than nothing came out in 2012
it really seemed as though he had
decided he was going to double down on
you know that ultimately for him you
know Hegel was really the most
foundational figure um but you know at
the same time you know you have uh you
know in recent years as I mentioned
earlier today um him going back to this
project that he first introduced in 1996
in the indivisible remainder this you
know philosophical psychoanalytic
engagement with quantum physics um where
it's very clear I mean and I think there
are good reasons why when doing that
work xiet tends to favor shelling over
Hegel um and if this you know sort of
dialectical materialism that X claims
results from you know his philosophical
psychoanalytic appropriation of quantum
physics um if this is kind of the core
of his system as he sometimes seems to
to indicate nowadays well then I think
really it's shelling more than any other
figure who is sort of the ultimate
underlying you know Authority or
reference for what xek is doing where
yes I mean I see myself in this case as
definitely uh much more hegelian I think
for Hegel no it's not as though you know
various forms of Guist um are just the
return of some sort of pre
subjective um you know say you know
nature philosophical or even
logical uh uh X that then you know
somehow manag of reality is having
developed these other natural and you
know sociohistorical Dimensions um
instead no that there's that that the
you know for for you know Hegel the
structures and Dynamics operative at the
level of Guist although they arise from
n um are really you know irreducible to
it um that there's a strong
irreducibility there that would forbid
you know the closing of the circle in
the donut style model that you get with
something like uh you know the shelling
whose philosophy of nature uh you know
then comes to be colored by some of his
more spinos istic commitments and you
know then you get this middle period
shelling that xek relies on who is a
clear champion of this Return of the
repressed you know uh sort of circular
dut model uh as distinct from the heelan
one where the end does not rejoin the
beginning in that way Perfect all right
this is a great seg Prof because I want
to kind of discuss uh your other great
book a new German idealism uh this book
is kind of becoming like my Bible I've
been reading very
carefully um what what I firstly want
well I think we already did uh touch on
a lot of these points uh kind of what
you covered in this book there's this
beautiful line which I've uh annoyingly
read out to most of my most of my
friends uh and and and and I I can't get
over the fact that for some reason for
me it captures what what German idealism
is is trying is struggling with let's
say philosophically it's in page 138 and
if you don't mind I'm just going to read
it out here goe you say um the subject
is the immense absolute power of
negativity the power of introducing a
gap or cut into the given immediate
substantial Unity the power of
differentiating of abstracting of
tearing apart and treating as
self-standing what in reality is part of
an organic unity and for me this
this is this sounds absolutely hegelian
this kind of almost the subject is
almost like a trauma a trauma in reality
this appears uh so Professor if you
could just perhaps give your thoughts on
on that ex I read and as to why you
think uh understanding the subject in
this way is important uh for the ongoing
philosophical discourse around German
idealism right so what one of the things
that uh you alerts in the background of
of that passage you just read is
something that you know here again since
you know that that book too involved a
continuation of some of the debates that
already at that point had been engaged
in with xek for a while but um you know
xek uh in in in certain places very
helpfully draws readers attention to a
one of many differences between Kant and
Hegel um and uh xek uses uh as an
example here the two different ways that
Kant and Hegel have of talking about
this topic of the imagination in German
idealism um and without getting bogged
down in the technical details for German
idealist Scholars of you know exactly
what is involved in terms of the notion
of the imaginations that features in
this tradition um that of course for
Kant um one of the functions of what
Kant designates his imagination is its
responsibility for synthesizing for
integrating um the contributions of the
two faculties of intuition and
understanding and that you know for for
Kant the
imagination um is it does work in terms
of blending together integrating making
you know cooperate to generate
experience the perceptual contributions
of intuition and the conceptual
contributions of the understanding and
so you know this this uh you know you
might say uh mental faculty power
capacity of synthesis um that somehow
manages to hold together the perceptual
and conceptual sides of experience in a
single coherent integrated whole that
this is a cardinal feature of the conine
account of the imagination um and so
Kant emphasizes synthesis there but then
when you look at how Hegel talks about
the imagination and you know here again
I think G should should be credited with
really nicely bringing this out um and
the place that xek references is hegel's
um 1805 philosophy of spirit where Hegel
first talks about this this notion of
the night of you know the night of the
world and the association of minded
subjectivity with this with this
nocturnal Abyss but um you know when
Hegel describes you know when you look
into the eyes of another and you see in
the black of their pupils this window
onto this abyss of unknowable otherness
um and then Hegel talk you know he he
uses this very gory language and he's
like you know there you know shoot you
know a severed limb you know they're cut
off head you know here like these mem
disjecta you get a sense of you know in
of another um that there's this Abyss in
which you know the world is torn apart
and you know things don't hang together
in the way that you're used to Etc um
that you know for for Hegel you know an
aspect of the imagination Contra con's
emphasis on synthesis is precisely doing
violence to the given right reality is
given to us in certain ways but through
our various cognitive capacities to
engage in forms of abstraction
conceptualization categorization Etc
that what the what you know the human
mind does is actually a kind of violence
to reality where it carves it up uh into
these you know bits and pieces where it
you know essentially butchers it um into
these separate components and and you
know then it you know manipulates them
you know uh you know resynthesize them
in different forms sometimes monstrous
ones uh Etc this idea then of of of you
know something integral to you might say
human experience at large for Hegel is
precisely the opposite of this emphasis
on on you know synthesis organization
the holding together and rendering
coherent of things and kind um that very
much part of what makes our experience
what it is and that enables us to get a
grip on reality is precisely this
capacity for dissociating for carving up
for breaking apart for separating for
you know cut you know basically cutting
into with our abstract C Concepts and
categories and that violent
dismemberment of reality as for Hegel an
absolutely essential moment that we
always have to pass through even if
we're not aware of doing so that enables
us to nonetheless you know have some
sort of an intelligible grip or handle
on things um and you know so there's
there there there's you know this this
contrast there between the two of them
and that you know is part of what you
know was lurking in the background there
of those lines that you read aloud right
this description of the abstract you
know conceptual violence done to Reality
by the human mind is a cardinal Fe
nature of you know hegel's account of
things and and for Hegel I mean often
times what we think is that you know
there's a very CR textbook misreading of
him that Hegel has his own version of
the distinction between understanding
and reason right Kant has his you know
Hegel takes the language from Kant but
but reworks it in certain ways and that
you know we often think that oh well the
understanding Allah Hegel is this um you
know black and white dualistic
dichotomizing style of cognition um that
seeks to impose you know these rigid
black and white distinctions upon a
reality that is of course much more
subtle and sophisticated than these
simplistic schemas and that when we move
from understanding to reason in Hegel
reason is where yes we dispense with the
the crude Simplicity of the black and
white dichotomies and divisions of the
understanding and all of that um is is
jettisoned in favor of somehow
registering all of the subtle shades of
of a multi-hued reality and all of its
richness Etc um and that we really just
want to move to reason and in so doing
just leave the understanding behind no
for Hegel is that without first doing
violence to reality without first um
imposing upon it these artificially
clear-cut black and white distinctions
and divisions that if we don't do that
it's not as though we can just simply
bypass that and directly commune with
reality and all of its vibrancy and
multifacetedness no it's that um were we
to you know not Avail ourselves or were
we to try and avoid that violent
dismembering of reality through the
abstractions of the understanding
instead of having reality in all of its
fullness we would be empty-handed right
we would just have nothing that the only
way to get to you know a richer reality
is by passing through its deliberate
impoverishment in terms of how we
categorize and conceptualize it and that
only after passing through that and
problematizing our categorizations and
conceptualizations of it will we get
closer to it but if we don't pass
through that dismembering violence of
the understanding we're not going to get
anywhere yeah perfect perfect I mean I'd
say again more of the analytic types
here's where I'd say you're you're a
carrying Bonafide heelan because it
seems a subject never fits into the
order of things where whereas a lot of
the the analytic philosophy they try to
bring the subject into the order of
things and fit it in whereas hegel's
point is that no the subject do violence
reality um and I should probably also
mention just for the for the listener uh
just uh between WFT and verse 10 this
this book you beautifully uh outline the
differences and you kind of demarcate
how it it differs to Hegel over Kant uh
sorry were you going to say something
Professor or oh I was also going to say
with that idea of not fitting into
reality the leanian idea of the subject
too as you know what forever finds
itself out of joint with or experiences
itself as alienated Visa reality right
and that part of what makes me a subject
is precisely that I never actually can
fully identify with or collapse myself
into any of my you know
determined identity categories in terms
of what I
as an organism as a social being as a
member of a particular you know
institution or group Etc that any
positive identification and of course we
inevitably have many of them that
nonetheless what my subjectivity is is
in part for a lanan that part of me that
never feels at ease in any of those that
uh you know is is that Restless sense of
of at least minimal alienation Visa any
of those positive identities that I
nonetheless also do identify with at the
same time but I I'm sorry for
interrupting I just oh not all perfect
that that was excellent point in fact
Professor can I ask have you been this
is not not a deeply theoretical text but
Todd mcgavin's embracing alienation have
you been have you have you read this res
I haven't had a chance to read it yet
I've Obed it but exactly the point he
makes uh in this book that uh for the
lenan subject in some sense the purpose
of uh analysis is to create hysterics of
us old and for us to not not to fully to
for us into the whatever the the social
structure or culture but rather to kind
of embrace this alienation we all feel
as subjects and and I think that's very
upt to point and I think that's where
Lon differs more from let's say the ego
pych driven kind of therapy where it's
rather getting you to fit back into
society uh yes something very manatory
in that way of
thinking and also I think just in terms
of certain cultural and political issues
um you know what Todd is doing there uh
you know involves this important Insight
which is that if we are going to have
some form of especially political
universalism you know some sort of idea
of you know a a a shared common struggle
that really does cut across all of our
identitarian differences well of course
you know older more traditional forms of
universalism say like Enlightenment
style universalism of course we've come
to realize was just disguised European
ethnocentrism it was you know taking you
a particular positive model of human
nature that uh you know that you know
these partisans of this Enlightenment
model mistook for the universal you know
In the Flesh um and falsely generalizing
it to all of humanity but it seems as
though we're often left with the idea
that well if you want universalism you
would have to have something like that
and that would just involve um a false
generalization of what is always
a sociohistorically culturally Etc local
you know particular vision of of of you
know who we are and you know falsely
generalizing it it's either that or oh
you just get you just say well it's a
relativistic free-for-all there is no
possibility of true political
universalism you know different cultures
different groups Etc you know have these
irreducible differences that just simply
have to be respected and that's it and I
think that this linian approach allows
the idea that well you can have the
possibility of of a political
universality but not based on some
falsely generalized positive content but
based on what we universally share is
our inability to fully identify with for
instance our own groups Etc that we all
are minimally out of joint with our
context and various versions of that out
of jointedness are something that we do
share and that if that is the universal
it doesn't bring with it the same kind
of problems of you know cultural
imposition ethnocentrism Etc that a
traditional kind of let's find a PO a a
positive Identity or a vision of human
nature that can be universalized no I
mean instead it's our inability to ever
be feel fully at ease with you know the
second skins of our various uh uh
positive identities that's the level on
which perhaps true solidarity could be
established and I think that you know
that and so yeah I'm looking forward to
Todd's newest book um but he writes
quite a bit too so it's hard to always
keep up um oh is the uh the yourself and
Tom McGavin I don't know how you guys do
it it's uh it's constantly putting books
out there I can't I mean as readers we
can't even keep up but you guys are
writing so much uh and and just on that
point I'd say that's a very anti-h
hiigaran Point even and Tom mavin points
that out in the book where you know hi
whole point is kind of getting back to
the home the dwelling and whereas the
the the more emancipatory point is to
embrace one's Universal alienation in
some sense um that's beautifully put
Professor I want to be cognizant of your
time so just uh perhaps the penultimate
question is it okay if if you go for
about 10 more minutes yes that should
work perfect thank you so much um sure I
just you know again that that we could
probably have a whole podcast on this
topic but just if you could maybe
superficially comment on H Graham
Harmon's objectoriented ontology uh the
reason being I I I really want to you
know focus on your the materialism you
put put put forward um and just
generally what are your what are your
intimations on Triple O and that sort of
thinking well I haven't in recent years
been keeping up with what has been going
on you know in terms of objectoriented
ontology but um you know one thing that
in recent years did occur to me based on
past exchanges I've had directly with
Harmon himself um you know but also of
course reading certain things that he
and you know some of his fellow
Travelers have published although again
my I would say my knowledge of their
work at this point is a good few years
out of date um I'm you know when Harmon
for instance cautions against what he
call you know undermining and overmining
right and the idea of you know reduction
in either direction of uh you know and
insisting that you know there are these
you know each of these ontological
levels or layers has its own IR ible
specificity and integrity um and that uh
you know attempts to you know collapse
everything down to the extremely small
or to you know account for things with
appeal to higher order entities or
categories um that you know that that
sort of um anti-reductionist sensibility
that is part of Harmon's Outlook I share
with him but I still think that there is
something to the idea of subjectivity
that cannot be accounted for using any
and all language available to us in
terms of the sorts of discourses that we
have for talking about objects um and
that I think that um you know in terms
of uh you know whether you think of it
as as you know our capacity for you know
reflexivity or recursion in relation to
our own cognitive contents um you know
when you you know when you examine the
manner in which you know we we operate
when we oper operate with what we take
to be our autonomy or our freedom um I
think that you do see you know uh
structures and Dynamics phenomena
manifest at that level that I think are
distinctive enough to make it such that
it still to me makes perfectly good
sense to say well this this is
indicative of something called
subjectivity which is um you know not
universally present it isn't it doesn't
just inhere in any and all objects
whatsoever only very peculiar certain
sorts of objects seem give rise to you
know what what we associate with
subjectivity um although subjectivity
for various reasons can't be reduced to
an object like the brain that
nonetheless is a crucial material
condition of possibility for it um you
know all of that you know so I think
that you know I just I don't see much to
be gained by you know the general Spirit
of there's nothing exceptional or
distinctive about human beings relative
to the rest of reality let's just say as
a fundamental philosophical intuition I
disagree with that I do think that we
are very strange and peculiar um and
starting from that type of of very
specific sort of Aristotelian Wonder at
the weirdness of human beings that I
think my work develops whereas I think
Harmon's at this level his most
fundamental intuition is that no there's
nothing
extraordinary peculiar unique about us
and let's stop privileging ourselves and
just flatten things out and put
ourselves on the ex exact same level as
you know all other sorts of things that
we could identify here as quote unquote
objects um and so I think that's a very
fundamental difference in terms of just
basic philosophical intuition but then
also I'd say methodologically I mean one
of the things Harmon complains about
about my work is oh I just you know he
in in a way that I sometimes think is
not entirely fair I mean he's a friend
but you know this I definitely disagree
with he tends to think that I just that
I am some sort
of natural scientific reductionist um
you know it seems like he doesn't he
can't see the distinction between the
sort of position I stake out and say if
you want to talk in analytic terms the
eliminative materialism of Paul and
Patricia Church went um you know and you
know to me like there's a world of
difference between you know a naturalist
materialism all the church lens in terms
of limited materialism and anything
along the lines of what I'm trying to do
um and it seems as though Harmon does
have you know and it to me it's no
accident coming out of the kind of
phenomenological background that he
comes out of including heiger that
there's a kind of anti-naturalistic
science phobia uh to you know to object
Ori ontology and whereas for me it's odd
it's like well if you want to talk about
things as objects it seems as though we
already have apart from philosophy a
whole set of discourses and explanatory
Frameworks for that many of those we
call the Natural Science
right why would I prefer an
objectoriented
ontologist account of an object as an
object uh why would I necessarily want
to privilege that over say how a
physicist you know Etc would describe it
um you know to me it's that the Natural
Sciences provide us with an adequate
discourse for talking about objects that
also is much more
epistemologically found and plausible
versus what strikes is kind of armchair
speculation about objects that then also
has the added disadvantage of it seems
to me riding rough shot over what to
from my philosophical vantage point is
still a hard to entirely dispose of
distinction between subjectivity and
objectivity but yeah yeah y I mean
leaving aside the methodology for me it
was always again back to the the the the
trauma of the subject and what I read
this except where you know the the the
immense power of negativity
that's what this kind of flat ontology
of Triple O just just in capture I'm
okay to be fair only read two books by
Hammond but uh I think that that's
perfectly Professor excellent uh well I
I I got to say this has been the one one
of the biggest honors of my life thank
you so much for your time Professor I
truly truly am grateful um if I could
ask I know you said sorry go ahead yeah
I was just going to say I'm very
grateful for you having me on it's been
a wonderful conversation these are
fantastic questions so thank you very
much thank you thank you Professor yeah
I've learned so much from you and I hope
to keep reading your work and hopefully
uh uh you know I can give you an update
on how the book study goes uh we we do
it online I could even if you want send
you a a zoom recording um of of how it
went oh that'd be cool yeah I will also
tell you that um that book adventures
and Transit on materialism the chapters
in it on xek are where that's the
starting point for the debates that he
and I have had about quantum physics
versus neurobiology and that was sort of
the opening
Salvo you know and then things kind of
developed from there so but there's of
course beautiful thank you thank you I I
didn't know that that's that's a great
Insight um but just want to know
Professor so what what other projects
are I know you said you're writing on
this book which reject this ongoing
debate but what other projects are you
working on what do you think are the
ongoing developments uh within the kind
of the German idealist uh linian or
psych analytic space uh that you're a
part of
so in terms of what I'm working on at
the moment um I have a book in
production with Bloomsbury that I
co-authored with a leanian friend of
mine Lorenzo Kiza um and it's a a book
entitled God is Undead psychoanalysis
for unbelievers and right it is it
involves looking at both agnosticism and
Atheism from Freudian and leanian
psychoanalytic perspectives um and
attempting to develop
versions of what we call unbelief uh you
know with with real contemporary
viability um on the basis of how the two
of us uh uh work with both Freud and Lan
but there the the core bone of
contention between myself and Lorenzo
Lorenzo wants to argue that Lan's
atheism is qualified by certain agnostic
sensibilities you know various
reservations or hesitations that Lan
arguably has that prevent him from just
you know a full-blown assertion of
atheism without you know any sort of
accompanying qualifications or caveats
whereas essentially I want to argue that
no Lan is ultimately a very consequent
convinced atheist um and in fact is not
agnostically hesitant about that in any
way um and so Lorenzo and I kind of
fight that out with each other and
that's coming out at the end of this
year uh bloomsberry is projecting a
November or December release for that
book but that's already written it's now
just dealing with copy editing and all
of that uh part of the production
process um you know my biggest task is
to finish the third and final volume of
my three volume pramin yes and that that
that volume is going to involve a lot of
analytic philosophy and a lot of
scientific material and really um it
will involve bringing to Bear resources
drawn
from emergentism work on epigenetics
um you know uh discussions of top- down
causation the hard problem of
Consciousness all of that is going to be
part of this project and so I've got you
know stacks of analytic philosophy and
natural science literature that you know
I need to be making my way through to
pull this off you know over the course
of the next couple of years um and you
know in addition to that um I'm starting
to toy with the idea partly this is due
to some of the teaching I was doing
research recently um of writing a book
on Lan that involves focusing on the
classic middle period Lan of the 1950s
the Lan of the
sorian return to Freud so really
seminars one through six and you know
certain of the of the better known
chapters of the a from that same period
um and my idea is going back and looking
at that
Lon after what has in the past 30 plus
years of amongst
leanians um preoccupation mainly with
the later Lon of the 60s and after um
and that you see this you know with
various figures um and of course someone
who was integral in emphasizing the
importance of Shifting Focus to the
later Lan who supposedly prioritizes the
real um and moves Beyond his mid1 1950s
privileging of the symbolic under the
influence of structuralism Etc um you
know this story about like this turn
that happens at the end of the 50s
beginning of the 60s with Lan um and
that you get the late Lan looking at the
middle period of Lan after this like
three decades of focus on the later Lan
um and in ways that would involve
undermining this kind of periodization
of his work that you know that so many
have come to accept as just you know as
almost self-evidence um and you know
people like meair Badu but also you know
Bruce F xek Etc um there's been this
long-standing consensus now on the
superiority of the later Lan to the
middle perod Lan and not only do I think
that there's not such an Abrupt break or
discontinuity I also think that there
are very interesting aspects of that
middle period Lan that have not yet been
done Justice to because you know in the
US that middle period stuff was some of
the first things that got translated
into English and you had like in the 7s
' 80s Etc people reading Lan in English
um you know really not having access to
the later Lan reading the middle period
Lan and doing so in a climate in which
he's viewed as just one of many of these
like post-war you know French
structuralists or post-st structuralist
and it's kind of lumped together with
dared da Fuko Etc um and so you get this
sort of language and literature
Department version of the middle period
Lan and of course you know since
language and literature folks are the
ones doing this they latch on to his
emphasis on language uh Allah you know
the familiar soran references Etc
but there's you know between that and
then the later letra shift attention to
Lan who comes after that starting in
semr 7 that's left this middle period
Lan I think left underexplored
and I think misunderstood and I'm with
the idea further down the road of doing
this you know sort of you know more
scholarly technical Deep dive into you
know that middle period Lan and showing
that he is not so much the
straightforward sorian structural
Linguistics person who he's often
portrayed as being in that time and that
there's a lot that we have yet to
realize is continuous with what he does
in his later work or perhaps even
Superior in terms of how he tackled
certain problems in that middle period
and to sort of you know ReDiscover and
and and you
know compel people to revisit that
earlier Lon after all of this attention
paid to his later work and so you know
that would be further down the road but
I think that's something eventually I'll
get around to doing amazing amazing
thank you thank you for that uh almost P
let's say well to use a linian term you
certainly seem to be making good use of
your lack and uh making good use of it
um actually excellent well uh professor
as I said thanks again this has been
truly an honor yeah it's really been
great I look forward to it just send me
the uh the link when when you have the
content up I look forward to look
forward to seeing it and would you mind
if um I've been doing you know I'm doing
a series of podcast interviews in fact
two days from now I am being interviewed
by cadel last again but about infinite
greed um in terms of these recent
podcasts columia has a web page for
infinite greed and they like to link to
the podcast would you be okay with them
putting a link to this up there on on
that fact that would be fantastic I'll
I'll edit it up and I'll I'll send it
across uh but for sure I'll I'll I'll
I'll keep you updated on how it goes I I
generally edit these side apart from
just cutting out the awkward U you know
lagging and whatnot but just making it a
bit more listenable but uh hopefully
hopefully it comes out well but uh it
it's been it's truly been great I I
learned so much thank you well thank you
it's been great talking to you and I
look forward to uh you know to being in
touch with you again for sure sure all
right take care bye take care
