dear friends welcome to the first
episode of my new podcast the
aftermath I Envision it as a podcast
book a sequel to my book love and math
which was published in 2013 and is now
available in 19 languages I see it like
an audio book but released in
installments with each episode being
like a chapter in a book so they are all
connected to each other of course we
will also have a visual component and
most importantly I'm inviting all of you
to comment and to ask questions your
feedback will be very much appreciate it
will make this podcast so much more
interactive as it unfolds in real time
so what are we going to talk about well
my passion my big passion is mathematics
so naturally it's going to be a big part
of this podcast also since I was a kid
I've been fascinated with quantum
physics and in fact a lot of my research
has been on the interface between math
and Quantum field Theory so that's
naturally another topic of interest I'm
also interested in philosophy
specifically the fundamental questions
on the nature of reality well who isn't
right and also in Psychology
specifically yungan psychology which I
have been studying for the last 10 years
through the works of Carl Jung and Mari
Luis Von France who was arguably his
favorite student you see in my mind all
these subjects are deeply connected to
each other and in fact the the main
motivation for me to do this podcast is
to share my knowledge with you and in
particular to show you how these pieces
fit together from my perspective I will
start by talking about some important
aspects of mathematics which are rarely
if ever discussed these days one could
say that mathematics creates a kind of a
bridge between matter and mind and this
provides some very important insights on
the nature of reality but also insights
on our lives so to me this is not just
some AB abstract stuff that we
discussing just out of curiosity in fact
they touch upon the most fundamental
questions of Our Lives who am I what is
this all about you know what is life
what is death how do we relate to one
another these are the type of sub
questions that I want to talk about and
most importantly what I will argue is
that mathematics shows us that we are
all connected to each other you see and
when I say connected to each other I
mean it at a much de level than it is
ordinarily understood because it's well
known today that our bodies are
connected to each other through the
environment because you know the skin is
a kind of a membrane through which the
the inside of the body interacts with
the environment and so through the
environment our bodies are connected
fine but what I'm going to talk about is
a connection at the level of our minds
our minds are not isolated from each
other my mind is not locked in my skull
your mind mind is not locked in your Sky
we are capable of communicating with
each other
somehow and Mathematics gives us the
clearest evidence of this connection you
see so it kind of becomes a portal to
this hidden reality what is mathematics
after all so to me it is it is this fast
reservoir of Timeless persistent and
objective knowledge which is accessible
to all of us even though even though we
don't perceive mathematical objects
through our five senses think about it
it's a very important point which is
usually missed and I'm going to explain
this in in more detail shortly but
roughly
speaking that's because the objects we
study in math actually don't exist in
physical reality let me repeat this the
objects that we study in math if you
look at them more closely if you examine
them more closely you realize that they
do not exist in physical reality they
are not in space and time you see where
exactly they reside then if not in space
time
I don't know it's a big question it's a
big mystery we'll discuss it but the
first thing to understand is that they
are not in physical reality we do not
perceive them through our five senses
and yet we can talk about it we can
imagine them we can conjure up these
mathematical objects in our minds and we
can talk about them we can reason about
them and we understand each other we
understand what we're talking about you
see we can prove things theum about them
we can introduce new mathematical
objects and so on so it's really
fascinating and I believe that this
points us directly to our Unity to our
connection to each other moreover the
fact that mathematics has been so
successful in describing the physics of
the universe as a physicist Eugene
wigner put it is this unreasonable
almost unreasonable effectiveness of
mathematics in Natural Sciences that to
me points to our Unity with nature at a
deeper level than is ordinarily
understood and it is this Unity this
Unity between us between us and nature
that will be one of the main themes of
this podcast the
aftermath let's get right into it I want
to start by pointing out an important
difference between mathematics and
physics mathematical theorems stay the
same
they don't get updated new theorems get
proved but this does not change the
validity of the theorems that were
proved before but our physical theories
get updated for example Isaac Newton
formulated his laws of motion and his
theory of gravity both were used
successfully for more than 200 years but
in the 20th century both theories were
drastically
updated now this doesn't mean that
Newton's theories were completely
discarded they still used today because
they give us sufficiently good
approximate description in many
situations but physicist realized that
these theories don't give us a good
description in many other situations
roughly speaking at high speeds at small
scales or when the gravitational force
is very strong so other physical
theories were created in the 20th
century which gave us much more accurate
description in those cases namely
Einstein's special relativity Theory
quantum mechanics and Einstein's general
relativity Theory
however these theories still don't give
us a totally total and complete and
precise description in all cases Quantum
Mechanics for example is incompatible
with special relativity and so it needed
an update which we call Quantum field
Theory and now we have to reconcile
Quantum field Theory and Einstein's
general relativity Theory and we still
don't know how to do it to this day you
see in other words the best theories
that we currently have Quantum field
Theory and general relativity are
incompatible with each other and hence
they are incomplete the upshot of this
discussion is that physical theories are
always approximate a given Theory works
well in a in a certain range of cases
but not in all cases physics is always
working progress you could say now this
may sound discouraging to some of us but
I actually think this is not a bug it's
a feature what it means is that our
universe is so incredibly complex that
we shouldn't expect any Theory to
describe it completely completely as
Richard feeman put it the great Rich
Richard feeman Nature's imagination is
so much greater than men's it will never
let us relax it will never let us relax
so now let's contrast that with
mathematics consider the Pythagoras
Theorem which we all study in school
this theorem is about the right
triangles we're talking about the
triangle which has one angle is 90Â° so
then there three sides the longer one
which is opposite to the right angle is
called the hypotenuse and then there are
two shorter sides if we denote their
lengths by X and Y and the length of the
hypotenuse by Z Pythagoras Theorem says
that x^2 + y^2 equal z^2 now this was
discovered by Pythagoras and
pythagoreans about 2500 years ago in
fact it was also discovered around the
same time in other cultures so that was
a theory proved in those days and in
fact in uclean geometry
it is kind of codified in the framework
of a formal system a kind of atic system
that we will talk about in more detail
now fast forward 2500 years today
Pythagoras the is still valid it still
expresses the truth about the right
triangles any right triangle with the
sides XYZ gives rise to this
relationship X2 + y squ equals Z2 that
relation has not changed nor do we
expect it to change in the next 25 100
years so that's difference between
mathematics and physics that I was
talking about what's even more
fascinating is the fact that math and
physics actually describe different
things closely connected to each other
but different and I know this might
sound surprising and in fact it's very
easy to miss this feature it's one of
the most important aspects of the story
so let me explain what I mean and a good
illustration for this difference of math
and physics is provided by ukan
geometry so UK's idea was to establish
some fundamental relations between
different geometric figures on the plane
now what do I mean by a plane usually
when I teach this in a classroom so I
have a I have a Blackboard say and I
explain to my students I say imagine
this Blackboard extended in all
directions to Infinity okay but I don't
have a Blackboard so let me show you it
this on a on my iPad so here's here's a
a page on my iPad and so extending it in
all directions to infinity or likewise
you could imagine you know a flat
tabletop extended to Infinity in all
directions or a piece of paper again
extended in all directions that's what
mathematicians mean by a plane already
the first issue appears what do I mean
by saying extended to Infinity because
we don't have this type of infinity
available to us in the physical world
around us more on that later but let's
go back to this to this page so on this
page I can draw for example I can draw a
line or I can draw
points I can have intervals connecting
points I can have circles I can have
triangles right and so once I draw these
pictures so for example here is a a
right triangle that has one of the
angles 90 deges and let's suppose that I
arrange that one one of the sides is 3
cm and another side is four cm and I
want to find what the hypotenuse of this
triangle is right and so here is where I
can use the Pythagoras Theorem and to
say that well you have to take the
square 3^ squ + 4^ squar so the result
is 9 + 16 which is 25 which means that
uh that the the hypotenuse squar is
25 that is to say that the hypotenuse
the length of hypotenuse is equal to
five so it's what's called a three four
five triangle so it's a triangle in
which each of the sides is actually is
actually a natural number and they
satisfy the Pythagoras formula so now
one approach to doing that is to kind of
to draw the picture and then to make an
accurate measurement but UK's idea was
to deal with this kind of once and for
all with this relation for all right
triangles and think of it as a universal
relation and not just do it each time a
right triangle appears so how to do it
so his idea was to start with a certain
core
principles uh which are some statements
about these geometric figures that we
take for granted except without proof we
call them axioms or sometimes in the
past people use the term postulates okay
and so then the idea is that you start
with a small number of these core
principles of this axioms and then you
try to derive other statements which we
call theorems from this a
s and this way you try to establish some
Universal relations between the
geometric figures but by pure thought
without any experimentation you see
without actually going out in the field
and measuring things or throwing them on
a on an iPad or on a piece of paper and
measuring things so this is a brilliant
idea that you're just trying to do it by
pure thought by pure logic by pure
reason and in fact what ukl did was what
is what we now call a formal system it's
the first example of this approach which
has be been sort of a bread and butter
of modern mathematics that you produce
new statements new theorems by starting
with a carefully chosen collection of
axium statements that you take for
granted so for example one of the axioms
that uclid used was the following that
if you have two points on the plane
there is a unique line which passes
through them
reasonable and there was a few other ACs
of this nature but the question that I
want to ask is what do we mean by lines
points circles and so on because you see
whatever I draw on my iPad or you would
draw say on a on a piece of paper and so
on it's not going to be the same as what
is actually considered as a Bonafide
object in ukan Geometry a point in
uclean Geometry is not supposed to have
any size it's not supposed to have any
thickness likewise a line is supposed to
have zero width it has to be infinite
thin if you will and it should be
completely
straight but in the real world in the
physical world around us there are no
such things there are no points which
have no size there are no lines which
have no width and perhaps even more
importantly there are no lines which are
not wiggly all the all the lines in the
physical world they're Wiggly they may
look approximately straight from a
particular vantage point but as you zoom
in you will see the wiggliness the world
the physical world is wiggly but in
uclean Geometry we postulate the
existence of this absolute idealized
abstract objects points lines triangles
and so on and axioms and theorum are
about
them let me repeat this axioms and
theorems of ukan geometry are really
about this abstract pure forms abstract
idealized geometric figures they are not
strictly speaking applicable to the
objects
that we find around us in the physical
reality so you see what we learn is that
these mathematical geometric figures
that we are talking about in ukian
Geometry are not something that we can
find we can observe in the physical
world around us the objects in the
physical world are approximate lines
approximate points approximate triangles
but they're not exactly the objects of
ukian geometry those are idealized
abstract pure geometric figures which
are not have no place in in the physical
world but of course what we do is a kind
of a slight of hand that we conveniently
forget the difference between the two
and pretend these are the same objects
but what does it mean actually it means
that actually if if these are so
different it means that these abstract
geometric figures this points with no
size or lines that have no thickness uh
you know
that that that are absolutely straight
and so on they actually don't reside in
the physical world so where where do
they reside it's kind of clear they
reside in the mental World they reside
in our minds but what does this imply
the fact that we can talk about them
that you understand perfectly well what
I'm talking about you understand what
I'm talking about when I talk about this
idealized objects and it's not like you
are perceiving them with five with your
five senses in the physical world if if
this object object s were present in the
physical world then you looked at them
and I looked at them and they say okay
we understand each other because we
perceive them through our five senses
but as I have explained that is not the
case and yet nobody has ever told me you
know when I teach this this stuff
Professor I don't understand what you're
talking about what do you mean by a line
without thickness what do you mean by a
point that has no size everybody
understands that such things exist in
our minds they we can we have the innate
capacity to conjure them up in our
minds but then I would argue that our
minds must be connected how else could
we talk about them together how else can
we understand each other how else can we
reason about them without having seen
them without having perceived them in
the physical world around us you see
what is perhaps even more shocking is
that ukian geometry assumes the
existence of infinity because remember
how I talked about the plane as being a
page or a Blackboard extended to
Infinity in all directions every line on
this abstract plane is infinite it
doesn't have a finite length it doesn't
end anywhere you see but in our physical
Universe there are no such lines there
are no such planes for the simple reason
that the universe is 13.7 billion years
old give or take and the speed of light
is finite which means that The observed
Universe whatever we can observe within
our universe has finite size it simply
doesn't doesn't contain infinite lines
or infinite planes or any other objects
who is of infinite extension you see so
that show that shows you even more
clearly the difference between the
abstract MTH of ukan geometry and the
concrete sort of say applied math of
approximate forms approximate lines
approximate
um circles and points and and triangles
there is an important feature which is
missing in our physical Universe which
we have no trouble Conjuring up in our
minds and that is lines of infinite
length you see and in fact to continue
the story of ukian geometry I mentioned
that ukl came up with this axioms and
then try to derive various theorum such
as Pythagoras theorum from those axioms
I mentioned one of the axioms which is
about line passing through through two
different points so that axum does not
require you to to kind of see the entire
line in all of its infinite Glory there
are four more postulates that ukl came
up with and all but the last one which
became known as The Fifth postulate or
perhaps now we would say fifth axium
kind of have this finite nature so it's
something that you could experience just
by looking at the finite piece of a of a
plane but the last one is about parallel
lines the statement is the following
that if you have a line and you have a
point outside of this line I'm drawing
this again on my on my iPad then the AUM
says there will
be
um there will be a line passing through
this point which is parallel to the
original line parallel meaning that it
never intersects it but you see that
means that we are making a statement
about these two lines all the way to
Infinity in both directions but we have
no way of verifying this in our physical
world in our physical world I can only
draw make approximate renderings of um
of these lines as kind of finite
segments of those lines they will be
different from the abstract lines in
several aspects as we discussed first of
all they will have some thickness which
can icts the Assumption we make in
uclean Geometry second of
all they will not be exactly straight
which we assume to be the case for the
abstract mathematical objects in nulean
Geometry but perhaps what is even more
important is that we only have access to
finite pieces of those lines but in ukan
Geometry we are talking about those
lines in their entirety as the infinite
as the really genuinely
infinite geometric objects and this fifs
Axiom fif's postulate specifically talks
about what happens throughout this line
in you know all the way to Infinity no
wonder the
mathematicians uh uh for the next 2,000
years tried to get rid of this axum try
to prove it from other aums because I
think intuitively they felt
uncomfortable because it was a statement
that they were being told to take on
faith so to speak and that statement
dealt with something with a certain
feature
of of this uclean geometry which is very
hard to
imagine verifying in the physical world
so you see how interesting the natural
question at this point is where do this
these mathematical objects
reside and uh many mathematicians
believe that they reside in what's
called a platonic reality the kind of a
realm of pure forms which was theorized
by the Greek philosopher Plato who in
many ways actually followed in the
footsteps of Pythagoras and
pythagoreans so many mathematicians
believe that these abstract forms are
real they do not exist in physical world
as we have just discussed even in the
simplest possible example of ukian
geometry so they reside in the sort of
mental space that we all have access to
somehow right so the the great logician
cour gel one of the greatest
mathematicians of the 20
Century uh has actually has said that in
his view mathematical Concepts and ideas
form an objective reality of their own
which we cannot create or change but
only perceive and
describe now I'm not going to try to
resolve this question once and for all
and argue whether this platonic realm
really exists or not but the question
I'm asking is how can we possibly
understand each other when I talk about
points lines and triangles if our mind
were separate I would I can't imagine
how we could possibly understand what
we're talking about and yet we we don't
have to make any effort to understand
what kind of things we're talking about
you see and I don't believe it's just
because objects of similar kind similar
kind that approximate them can be found
in the physical world for one thing no
finite interval actually approximates an
infinite line and yet when I say
infinite line I don't think you have a
difficulty understanding me our mind has
the capacity to conjure it up and what
you conjure up in your mind what I
conjure up in my mind appears to be the
same even though we don't perceive this
objects with our five senses note one
more thing if we are looking at some
object in in the physical
world and perceive them with five senses
you and I will have slightly different
views slightly different perceptions
because we'll have different angles
different points of view but with
mathematical objects we all seem to have
the same point of view we don't have
different perspectives how interesting
huh so this reminds me actually of a a
very nice quote from Charles Darwin I'll
I'll read it from from my book love and
math um it's actually in the preface in
the preface to my book and uh Charles
Darwin
whose work at first did not rely on
mathematics later wrote in his
autobiography I have deeply regretted
that I did not proceed far enough at
least to understand something of the
great leading principles of mathematics
for men thus in doubt seem to have an
extra
sense in other words he's saying those
who understand mathematics have an extra
sense
and I would actually
say I kind of agree with it but I would
say more I I would say that all of us
have this extra sense all of us have
this ability not just mathematicians and
other everybody's a mathematician
somehow even if we don't really we don't
really notice this capacity that we have
and it's a great gift I think it's a
great gift that we have to appreciate
and celebrate the pass it shows you the
plasticity the the the ability of our
mind to go much further than we could
imagine by being confined just in space
and time so that means that some part of
us is beyond space and time and I think
that is an incredibly
important consequence or incredibly
important conclusion from this
discussion it opens up our
Horizons to go from feeling as as being
separate and enclosed and divided and
isolated from the rest from other people
from nature and so on to the idea that
there is a much deeper connection
between us than is ordinarily understood
and what gives us this sense this
evidence for this deep connection is
mathematics this is what I meant when I
said that mathematics is our portal to
Hidden
reality well you could say this example
with ukian geometry with uh points lines
triangles and so on the difference
between the idealized perfect
mathematical objects and the objects
that we actually find in in the physical
world around us it's not it's not it's
not that great you could say that sort
of to to a naked eye a slight a slightly
wig wiggly line um in space could
actually could look like a perfect
straight line so yes that's correct but
here we only talking about the most
Elementary objects of
mathematics as we progress and as we we
delve deeper into the subject we find
much more refined much more
sophisticated objects there are all
kinds of exotic numerical systems for
instance the so-called padic numbers
which can Google you can Google that p p
as a stands for Prime and uh p-h addic a
d i c p addic numbers they form a big
part of the mathematical universe but I
don't think anyone finds them in the
physical world around us we find real
numbers we find natural numbers we find
rational numbers and so on but not btic
numbers so where where where are they in
the physical world around us that's not
clear at all uh even with complex
numbers has been a big question uh up
until recently what I'm talking about is
numbers like square root of negative-1
uh the which we usually denote by I the
first ma mathematician to to write about
them was an Italian mathematician J
jalama cardano and he was speaking about
the mental tortures involved uh in
trying to understand and decipher the
meaning of those numbers this days they
are just U uh you know bread and butter
of of of mathematics we don't even think
twice about uh any kind of there's no
mystery about them anymore and moreover
our our best physical theories the
quantum mechanics Quantum field Theory
rely on complex numbers the Hilbert
space which appears in in quantum
mechanics uh or in Quantum field theory
is is a complex Vector space it's the
complex numbers are built sort of
hardwired are built into it and so okay
so you could say yes complex numbers in
some sense are connected to the physical
world but they're connected in a in a
rather non-trivial way so this actually
shows a very strange way in which some
mathematical Concepts that
initially appear to be purely abstract
and is a IC actually then kind of find
the back door into the physical world so
maybe pic numbers also will somehow in
later theories will make make an
appearance and we will say okay well
peric numbers actually are integrated
into the physical world around us this
hasn't happened yet and I would I would
say that it's probably safe to assume
that most of mathematics is perhaps
never will never find its way to the to
the physical world around us there's no
reason to believe that it will and even
those that do like points and lines and
triangles there is still a subtle but
important difference between them as I
explained you see so therefore we have
to be careful not to identify our mental
world with the physical world it seems
to be that the case that we can actually
imagine and conjure up things in our
minds which we cannot really observe in
the physical world around us so that's
the point I'm trying to make but you see
if if so then there is a big question
about how we can actually talk about
this because if all of those objects
actually did appear in the physical
world around us we would say okay yes
our minds could well be disconnected to
here's my mind here's your mind but we
are both observing the same thing in
physical reality so that's why we can
communicate about it but if we agree
that there are some objects in
mathematics which we do not find in
physical
reality then how can we possibly
understand what we're talking about you
see the same ways that I imagine a
straight line or I imagine pic numbers
or I imagine complex numbers or an infin
dimensional h space so can you you may
not have thought about it as deeply as I
have but all the information is
available and everybody can learn this
everybody can understand it and once you
do we kind of we are on the same page we
can reason about it we can discuss it we
can exchange ideas about it we can move
to the next Frontiers in our research
about the subjects which is how
mathematics has been developing actually
right so that is a very essential point
that it opens the possibilities the
possibility that our minds are actually
connected to each other because
otherwise it looks extremely impossible
that we would actually be able to you
would be able to understand what I'm
talking about you see
so I would say that's the biggest
takeway from this discussion this idea
of unity this idea of
non-separation you see so we go from
this sense of being in a sort of a
conflict with each other in disagreement
with each other being isolated alienated
from each other and from nature we go
from that to this realization of how
deeply connected we are and we are not
led to this by some magical thinking
some wodoo
we are led to this by mathematics the
most objective of all Sciences you know
so we have to pay attention to this and
in fact if you think about it this this
has been staring at us this whole time
because we all study Clan geometry as
kids but it's just that what I pointed
out today this very
subtle aspects of it which I not usually
emphasized and you see this is what
we're going to do in this podcast there
is there is lot more to discuss in the
next episode I'm planning to talk about
nonukan geometry about how in the 19th
century mathematicians also realized
that you can replace this fifth
postulate this axium of parallel lines
that I talked about earlier with this
negation and this way to come up with
much more interesting realizations of
geometry which lead us to this bigger
world uh the world which is not flat
just like Earth is not flat our
SpaceTime is not flat so this idea of
non nulean geometry eventually LED
Bernard reman the German mathematician
in the in the 1850s to his theory of
reman geometry which became the
Cornerstone of Einstein's general
relativity Theory and we learned from
Einstein from this theory that in fact
not only that surface of the Earth is
curved but in fact our SpaceTime is
curved array of light bends around a
star a massive star something that was
confirmed experimentally in 1919 by
Edington the great astronomer and his
expedition so there's so much more to
talk about but um also by the way uh
formal systems so I have to explain to
you the language of mathematics what is
this what are these axioms how do they
produce new theorum and so on what
happens when we replace one action with
another and so on so this this is called
formal systems so I will explain to you
this language and will also lead us to
another important aspect of mathematics
and that is infinity we have already
talked about it a little bit but we'll
also talk about the Infinity of natural
numbers for example and what does that
mean but let's wrap this up for today
before I go I want to tell you something
I'm not by far the only scientist who um
has suggested this possibility that our
minds are connected and in this respect
I want to talk about Irvin shinger the
Great great Austrian physicist the
schinger equation is a Cornerstone of
quantum mechanics he was an absolutely
brilliant
man and you know also famous for uh for
his cat the shinger cat is he dead or
alive I we don't know I guess one day
we'll find out one day but he was very
interested in these questions the
question of nature of reality nature of
Consciousness he wrote a book mind and
matter and in this book he writes about
what he calls the Paradox of
numbers that is to him the appearance of
many conscious egos from whose mental
experience the one world is concocted
that's to he consider that a paradox of
numbers the the seeming seeming
appearance of many conscious
Egos and the solution to this Paradox of
numbers according to him was the
unification of minds or consciousnesses
their multiplicity is only apparent he
writes in truth there is only one
mind in truth there is only one mind and
he adds also in the book that the
empirical fact that Consciousness
Consciousness is never experienced in
the
plural only in the singular he says
that's the empirical
fact not only has none of us ever
experienced more than one consciousness
there is also no trace of circumstantial
evidence of this ever happening anywhere
in the world so you see he was very much
sold on the idea of a unified
mind or the unification of our
minds and I also want to mention uh the
interview of a a mathematician Uh
Russian born mathematician Vladimir
vapnik who is one of the luminaries in
the subject of machine learning he's a
founder of the statistical learning
theory and many other important
advances in machine
learning so he was interviewed by Lex
fredman on his podcast and here's what
he
said I'm not sure that intelligence is
just inside of us it may also be outside
of us when we prove some difficult
theorum in a couple of years in several
places people prove the same theorem in
his his of science this happened many
times he gives us an example the
discovery of nonukan geometry which
we'll talk about next time in the second
episode of aftermath of this
podcast and Vladimir vapnik says there
are many examples like this and I
concur when mathematicians develop
something he said they are developing
something general which affects
everybody is isn't that what we
discovered today so maybe maybe he says
our model that intelligence exists on
the inside of us is
incorrect it might be that there exists
some connection with the world
intelligence the world intelligence I
really like this idea of a world
intelligence now interestingly enough
Vladimir vapnik was saying all this in
response to Lex Friedman's question can
machines think can machines be
intelligent so of course all this stuff
is very much connected to the current
debate about artificial intelligence
about what this computer systems can and
cannot do and I promise you we will
devote a lot of time to discussing this
uh in our in in the subsequent episodes
of this podcast and I will also talk
about yungen psychology which is very
much relevant to all of this so Yung had
this idea of archetypes which in some
ways are close to this platonic for
forms these pure platonic forms that we
talked about earlier when we discussed
the question where do mathematical
objects reside but Yung yungan idea of
archetypes I think is more advanced than
the idea of platonic forms I will
explain in what sense uh and uh Carl
Jung was actually very much attuned to
mathematics he believed that numbers
actually numbers represent the simplest
possible archetypes he called them
archetypes of
order and he actually expected that by
looking at mathematical objects such as
natural numbers as well as other
mathematical objects one could actually
gain a lot of interesting insights into
psychology and into kind of the
structure of our psyche the collective
unconscious and things like that so
we'll definitely talk about all of this
especially in connection with numbers in
connection with infinity and things like
that but that's all the time we have for
this first episode uh I'm super excited
about this project as you can tell and
uh if you enjoyed it if you like the
content uh please hit the like button
please subscribe please share with your
friends on social media and most
importantly please leave comments leave
questions I'll be happy to respond to
discuss these questions in the future
episodes also you can contact me on
social media I'm active on Twitter on
Facebook on LinkedIn Instagram uh you
can see in the
description in the description of this
video you can see my handles on on on
various platforms I I will also put in
the description a few links that are
relevant or related to the material that
we have discussed and I'm really looking
forward to seeing you next time on this
new podcast at the aftermath thank you
see you later bye-bye
oh
