longevity investment is a thing now and
is going to be the AGI that can figure
out how to solve how to solve aging what
about using quantum computers to model
you know the entire all the cells in the
human body once you have the first
breakthrough that the think the
floodgates open right then everyone
around the world is like holy maybe
I don't really have to die right today
I've got the pleasure of speaking with a
Visionary thinker and innovator in the
world of artificial intelligence and the
future of human health
Dr Ben Gerel is the founder and CEO of
Singularity net it's a decentralized AI
platform that aims to democratize access
to Advanced artificial intelligence he's
also the Mind behind opencog which is an
open- source project dedicated to
developing artificial general
intelligence and he was a key figure at
Hansen robotics where he helped create
the well-known AI robot sopia Beyond AI
Dr geril is deeply involved in exploring
how technology can enhance human
longevity contributing to initiatives
like rejuv which aims to leverage Ai and
blockchain to advance life extension
research with a career that spans
cognitive science AI development and
Innovative Health Tech he's shaping the
future in ways that are going to impact
all of us please enjoy this conversation
with Ben gzel how's it going pretty good
pretty good I saw on your LinkedIn you
have many interests many interests
besides uh AI including sure uh yeah
philosophy of Mind
Consciousness um improvisational music
which I thought was cool because you
know we're all gonna need something to
do when the agis take
over yeah what kind of music do you make
I guess somewhere the intersection of uh
jazz fusion uh progressive rock and
experimental so I been we have a band
now called Des Demon's dream where the
lead vocalist is is a humanoid robot de
Dona so I've been I've been uh playing a
bunch of keyboards uh sort of sharing
the lead vocals with that with the robot
and writing songs and such and been
experimenting a bit with AI generated
music and AI generated vocals but just
sort of sort of weaving that in little
by little because I mean the
ai ai can write whole songs now on the
other hand while that's interesting to
me as AI researcher it's not interesting
to me as a musician because I I like to
write write the songs and improvise the
songs so it's more interesting to make
the AI sort of interact with with with
with with with me and other other other
human musicians right and I think that
that as you say after after the Super AI
solves the problem of scarcity and
solves the problem of a short lifespans
and so forth yeah we need to do
something and playing music with and for
each other is probably one of those
things that those who choose to continue
in uh in in the human form will be doing
post Singularity that's right yeah and
you don't want the AIS like getting too
carried away with their hallucinations
there you're like listen human star of
the show over here well the the robot is
the star of our band actually we're
we're we're all we're all supporting the
the robot robot front woman but I mean
the thing is
even if an algorithm can come up with a
better hit song than than people can
which I isn't true yet I think what'll
be do in a few years like it doesn't
matter that's not why most people play
music right you just play because it's
it's fun to play w w w with with and and
and for each other and but if you can if
you can get some Rhythm or riff out of
the
AI that inspires you to play back
something interesting you can feed what
you played back to the AI for its own
response I mean this is this is fun
right just like yeah going back and
forth with another human musician is fun
but going back and forth with a musician
from another species is is also quite an
interesting thing to play with even now
when the technolog is quite primitive
right and I mean as it as it gets as it
gets more and more advanced it's going
to be even more
interesting I think that's interesting
that you said another species uh because
I I first uh learned about you through I
think through a lot of people the same
way through the Sophia robot yeah um and
um you know there was a lot going on at
the time when she was making a lot of
headlines about whether or not she's
alive you know she's getting she's
getting citizenship over here and you
know she's having interviews and um well
AI isn't G to be just one thing right so
you can have ai twins of individual
humans and there's a
one of the many AI projects I'm involved
with is something called twin protocol
where we're aiming to make a sort of
digital simulacrum of a particular human
you can try to make digital characters
like Sophia or Sophia's little sister
desdamona who sings in our band right I
mean and these these digital characters
these are supposed to be humanlike and
right now of course they're kind of
impersonating humans but I mean they're
supposed to be more and more humanlike
and they're Act
their perception their thinking and that
has its value to have a non-human mind
that however comes as close to humanity
as as as we can then we can get some
real sharing back and forth between the
demon and robot side but you know the
artificial Minds that are very similar
to human Minds The these occupy a very
small percentage of the overall space of
Minds right so I mean we'll be able to
create
and then these creations will be able to
create even more so you know all all
sorts of alternative mind architectures
and there will be it'll be a whole you
know virtual Galaxy of alien mind
species not not not just one and that I
mean that's hard to palpably understand
right now but it's pretty clear that if
we get through the next few years and
manage to create artificial
superintelligence which is beneficially
oriented toward people like if we can
get through all that I mean then there's
an amazing spectrum that that we can
explore so that's that is the topic of
my shiny new book The Consciousness
explosion co-authored with a Gabriel
axela Montes and we try to review sort
of the the coming Singularity and
intelligence explosion both from a
technical View and from a an
experiential view of like what what what
will it be like to go to go through all
that what could we do in our minds now
to prepare ourselves for for for for all
that right so there's yeah a lot of
interesting stuff there and of course
longevity which is a the main theme of
Lifes spend. iio from that broader
perspective is just a little tiny piece
of it right like we're talking about
this one you know biocybernetic
informational system the human body and
can we make it last longer and longer
whereas after Singularity there's going
to be so many different kinds of of
minds and bodies some of which can be
engineered to just replace their own
parts for forever anyway right so from
from that point of view the post
Singularity view keeping the human body
going is a very very special sort of
problem right how do you think your your
vision of what you just described do did
you have that Vision 20 years ago or 30
I don't know when you started in AI like
has it evolved I had that Vision in the
early 1970s when I was a young child
actually I mean I I grew up reading
science
fiction and and then I encountered in
the early 70s in the town library in
southern New Jersey I was I don't know
seven or eight years old something like
that counted a book called The
Prometheus project by the Princeton
physicist Gerald Feinberg and he said
within decades we're going to get
superhuman AI molecular nanotechnology
and indefinite life extension the
question is what do we use it for do we
use it for Consciousness expansion do we
use it for rampant mindless consumerism
and how do we decide what to use it for
is it done by a
centralized decision-making Elite or is
it done in a in a globally Democratic
way so I mean I read books on this stuff
in the early 70s written by serious
scientists the the ideas were out there
the technology was not as mature for
realizing these things and the culture
as a whole was not very amendable to
these ideas yeah it's interesting how
closely related uh like the advancement
of a super intelligence is is with it's
like in the same breath you talk about
you know longevity escape velocity it's
like they're they're so inextricably L I
think I think that
causality is more one way than the other
if you get a super intelligence or even
a human level AGI with a bent towards
science I mean this creature is going to
be able to solve Aging in death if it
wants to the reverse holds much less so
I mean you could make people immortal
certainly gives each individual more
time to think and work so it should it
should accelerate progress on AGI and
other things because you won't have
brilliant scientists get Alzheimer's and
forget what they learned but I mean it
doesn't it doesn't accelerate AI
progress that much to solve human
aging right yeah I guess uh so I guess
in that way if we're going to put our
resources toward something maybe it's
better to put it towards AI first in the
big in the big picture yes but I I think
it's important to realize that's not the
main resource allocation problem
Humanity faces now the problem we face
now is how much do we spend on really
important things which includes AI life
expansion narot technology and also
getting food and medicine to needy kids
in the developing world how much do we
spend on important things versus how
much do we spend on unimportant or
destructive things like you know blow
blowing each other up or or making you
know chaer and chaer flavors of
chocolate and so forth right so I mean
there right
now great majority of economic resources
in the planet are spent on things that
are not even that much toward the toward
the good of of humanity really they're
they're just helping some Elite to get
rich at the expense of of of of somebody
else or they're they're feeding some
addictive Loop in in somebody's mind so
after we solve that resource allocation
problem it would come down to okay AGI
versus nanotech versus life extension
versus giving food to Hungry kids but
we're we're not actually at at at that
point yet right longevity biology
longevity genomics is one of the key use
cases that I'm using in developing my AI
system opencog hyperons so we're we're
developing what I hope will be the
world's first AGI at least it's it's my
attempt to get there but in developing a
system like that even if ultimately it's
supposed to do everything you know in
the short run it has to do something
right and so one of the things that
we're choosing to apply are in progress
would be AGI system
to is longevity biology and so it
in that way you can sort of try to save
two birds with one stone or whatever
whatever metaphor you want to use tell
me a little bit more about this because
I'm curious how uh your your project may
be similar or dissimilar from a lot of
the stuff that we you know are becoming
very customed to nowadays with llms and
open Ai and you know uh are you using
well so llms are a really interesting
and valuable
technology but that they basically are
only able to
extrapolate a little ways from their
training data they can do a bit of
reasoning which is very interesting they
can Munch things together in
in somewhat novel ways they can't take
big leaps Beyond what's been fed into
them and this is sometimes obscured when
using them by the fact that so much has
been fed into them right like they
they've got more knowledge than any one
human so they can seem very very very
Broad and and and wide right but but but
actually AI music models based on llms
and other Technologies can create new
songs in given genres like you can make
a 12 Bar Blues song you can make a
Canada or something on the other hand if
you train an AI music model on music up
to the year
1900 it's never going to invent
neoclassical metal grind core not even
Duke Ellington right I mean if if you
ask it to mix up West African drumming
with Western classic music it it'll put
Beethoven to a West African beat or
something right so it can't take a big
leap like humans do in the invent a new
genre of of music and if you think about
science science at its best is about
making big leaps be Bey Beyond what's
known right and the kind of original
nonobvious iterated reasoning which
integrates logic and creativity that you
need to do really good science
this is quite remote from what llms can
can can do now and it happens that in
people being able to answer obscure
questions and solve math o Olympiad
problems stuff like that is correlated
with being able to do original science
because it means you're a smart smart
person right that's a shortcoming and
we're trying to overcome that
shortcoming in the opencog hyperon
project so opencog is an open source AGI
oriented project it's has been around a
while we're building a totally new
version of it called hyperon mostly
aimed at being able to scale up millions
of times relative to what we could do
with the with the older versions of
opencog we are using llms and other deep
neural networks we're putting them
together with logical reasoning engines
and then with evolutionary learning
systems that that emulate evolution by
natural selection to create radically
new things so we're trying to synthesize
llms with other kinds of AI systems that
are good at creating ity and and
reasoning wrap these all in an overall
cognitive architecture and then use it
to do a variety of interesting things in
the world controlling robots controlling
game characters controlling artificial
scientists and and and mathematicians
and and and and so forth right and
that's cool so let me see if I sort of
get this straight and and maybe uh frame
it in the way that I've been thinking
about it and you can tell me how close I
am um so you're using llms as a as a
piece of the puzzle to to kind of help
analyze and feed information to some
other pieces of the puzzle that all sort
of work together to create more
intelligence than than than they could
in in their single parts and I don't
know what these other pieces are B I'm
only really familiar with
llms um but is that am my right so far
yeah yeah and what the other pieces are
is not that hard to understand either I
mean I mean I mean I think among the
other
pieces so one of them is actually an
explicit logical reasoning engine so I
mean you you feed it a bunch of
knowledge and then you ask it a question
and it tries to come up with a proof or
disproof of that of that question by by
putting the pieces of knowledge of
knowledge together and I mean this this
sort of AI has been around since the 60s
evolutionary learning which is another
piece of it this is rooted in genetic
algorithms that again were invented in
in the
1970s the idea there is if you have a
you have a problem you want to solve
make up a bunch of random
Solutions see how which ones are better
which ones are worse take the ones that
were slightly better tweak them a bit
combine pieces of them with with pieces
of other ones that gives you new
candidate Solutions try those out see
how they did take the best ones mutate
and mix them up a bit take those best
ones combine them so you're emulating
natural selection where instead of a
human genome you have an artificial
genome in the computer and instead of
trying to survive in the world you've
imposed some engineered Fitness function
saying what's a good genome or not right
so these these ideas have been around in
the AI field a long time they haven't
ever been deployed at a huge scale so
what we're doing in the hyper arm
project we're trying to deploy some of
these other historical AI Methods at the
same amazing scale that has been used
with Transformer neural Nets and connect
them with with Transformers and we're
we're trying to fill in what are the
gaps in llms which I see the main ones
are sustained fact grounded logical
reasoning and then wild out there
creativity right and and by putting in
other algorithms that are good that are
good at those things what what llms are
good at is serving up knowledge if you
look at longevity biology you clearly
need all of these aspects right like
serving up all the
knowledge is very important because
there's a lot of biological knowledge
but you need to be able to take a big
creative leap beyond the hypothesis out
there and you need to do sustained fact
grounded reasoning to check if your
creative leaps make any sense or not
right so those two sort of go together
if you can make cre of leaps but not
reason you'll just spout a whole bunch
of even more than llms do now
right but if you can reason but can't
make creative leaps you won't know what
hypotheses to form to even to even re re
re reason about right so you you you
need all these pieces to make something
like a really humanlike generally
intelligent mind is there is there any
way to imbue these systems with like a
way to to want something cuz right now
like let's say with Chach BT you know if
I'm if I don't ask it anything it's it's
not doing anything it's just sitting
there you know silent so I I have to I
have to get the ball rolling there was a
paper
by the AI researcher and mathematician
and cognitive
architect Stan Franklin some decades ago
and the title
was is it an agent or or is it just a
program right and right what he was
pointing out is most AI programs in were
just programs designed to take an input
and produce an output right whereas an
agent embodied in the
world has some goals it's trying to
fulfill can be some explicit some
implicit but it's
perceiving it's acting iteratively in a
world trying to fulfill some goals and
there there's been a field of AI and
computer science called Agent systems
for quite a long time and I do think
that ties in importantly with reasoning
and creativity because to do reasoning
and to do creativity at the human level
you need to form abstractions you can't
just work at the level of The observed
data things that you can throw at an
animal to kill it because we need we
need to do that and so we get started
with choosing
abstractions based on which abstractions
are useful to us in doing things within
the limitations of of our bodies in
achieving our goals then based on these
practically drived abstractions we build
a sort of hierarchy more and more
abstract abstractions right and without
being an agent you could still derive a
hierarchy of
abstractions but it's less clear what
would drive it you'd have to make up
some sort of artificial metric for
what's a good abstraction it's not clear
how to do that so I think I think the
easiest way to get to a human level
AGI is to give it some sort of
embodiment in some sort of environment
and give it some goals to drive at least
part of it its its behaviors and but
this could be a lot of different things
like it so it could be a robot and we're
working on that in one of my projects
called Mind children could like a robot
to uh have a body to help uh
yeah I mean I mean there there's a lot
of detail in the physical world that we
interact with so that could like help
with Consciousness perhaps help it helps
I mean if you just look at linguistic
semantics like the complexity of a word
like on or over or to is is quite subtle
like in English why do we get on the bus
but but but in the car and you know you
can you can you can get over a physical
obstacle or you can get over a broken
relationship or you can you can get over
a limitation in in thinking you can be
in the pool if your head is sticking out
of the pool but if your foot is dipping
in the pool it's not clear if you're in
the pool right so so I mean our our
language our language itself embodies a
lot of subtly from our physical
engagement in the world and this drives
a lot of our creative and rational
thinking it's not to say that you have
to have a robotic body to be human like
general intelligence I don't think you
do but I think it's a it's a quite
convenient way to experiment with AGI
AGI algorithms but but not the only
thing I mean you can do a lot with video
game characters but you could also do a
lot with an agent whose goal is to make
scientific progress like cure human
aging or something right I mean that
that that that's that's also a goal to
create therapies that will prolong the
lives of of of of organisms right so
there there can be different AI agents
which have different goals that will
then cause their minds to be sculpted in
different ways but in indeed chat GPT is
not really an agent in that in that
sense it could have been architected
that way but you're the one open ey
chose not to architected that way right
right all is that uh so is that more the
direction that you're going in with uh
with your companies is certainly so I
have there's a cognitive archetyp Ure
called premise which I developed over
many decades
which explains how to combine different
types of learning reasoning and memory
to make an AI agent that can achieve
complex goals in in complex environments
and of course you can make an agent
whose goal is to amuse people with funny
conversations or to answer their
questions so it's not like you couldn't
make a chatbot with a more agent
oriented architecture but you can't just
wrap that around the chat bot and right
after chat GPT was launched you saw a
bunch of attempts
like baby AGI or Auto GPT or something
and yeah I think they they end up
straying largely from the from the
original goal they didn't work because
being an agent has to be incorporated in
the whole cognitive architecture of the
system you can't just make a chat Bop
and chatbot and wrap like agent this
around it like that which is obvious to
everyone in the cognative science field
but of course I can't blame random
Hackers from trying try try try trying
to create these things right so is hyper
Cog involved in any way with uh I know
because you have so many companies uh
with re.
a absolutely yeah yeah so to to review
the sort of architecture of my I would
be AGI business Empire I mean we
there's an open
source AGI project called opencog and
hyperon is the new product from
opencog and that's just an open- Source
software product sort of like L Linux is
it's not a company right then got it
yeah we have a project called
Singularity
net which is a foundation that issues a
utility token which is now the the ASI
token for artificial super intelligence
right and so so we have we have
Singularity net which we did a token
sale for in 2017 and that has built a
blockchainbased platform that lets you
run AI systems on large networks with no
Central owner or controller so that's
sort of the infrastructure level like
opencog hyperon is one of the many
things you could run on top
of the singularity net blockchainbased
decentralized architect interesting how
how does the how do people get access or
or is do they have to pay is it pay per
use pay pay with the coin like well
Singularity net is all open source code
anyone could put an agent online on
their computer and it could then
communicate with a singularity net
Network so just like anyone could put an
ethereum or Bitcoin note on their on
their on their computer but I mean then
they have to pay to run that run that
run that Hardware node right blockchain
is going to be in
the advancement of research for
longevity really depends
on what kind of data we end up needing
for making what are the most relevant
breakthroughs which which we don't know
right now this blockchain hopefully help
keep our data secure because I'm
thinking about this EEG data that's
coming from the neural links that are
being imp implanted in some of these
early people so you know you don't want
your your brain
data when you build your network on a
blockchain platform like every Network
transaction is is is is is is secured so
you're you're pursuing security by by by
Design rather than patching it on at the
end so yeah Ju Just as just as you can't
patch an agent interface on chat GPT and
have it be an agent you can't really
take an insecure Software System put a
firewall and antivirus on and have it be
secure right you really want to be doing
security by Design through the whole
system and blockchain networks are are
one way of doing that yeah it' be pretty
important especially with brain data
you'd want to if you're if you're
sending that up to the cloud you're
gonna not want it to be tracked or used
to uh I don't know manipulate you
somehow well what's happened now is
people put their data into 23 and me and
they sold it to GL Smith Klein
I
mean in the end GSK I mean I guess it's
supposed to help Advance science that's
that's why I I mean I no question and
they're
probably probably not selling that data
to too many intelligence agencies
although Al although who knows right I
mean yeah and yeah they're doing
research tradeoff if they can help me
live forever is more that only they are
doing right I mean why not aggregate
that data
scramble it using homomorphic encryption
so that people can't be identified and
then open it up for any any researcher
to use right like why why should only
that one big company get get get get
used to that data it's not that GSK
can't do something helpful it's that
they should be able to pursue it along
with everybody else in in trying to
discover something something helpful
right what about using quantum computers
to model you know the entire all the
cells in the human body think that's
possible yes but I don't think that
eventually I guess solves the same
problem you can I think you can make far
better systems biology simulation models
than we have now on classical computers
first well so not much attention has
gone into systems biology so you could
you could make a whole organism
simulation of these simulation models
you still will need a lot of data and
then you're back to the the same issue
either you are a Pharma company or a
Consortium thereof or you're getting
that data in more more of a crowd
sourced way right and right not okay not
that a blockchain network is the only
way to gather
crowdsourced data I mean you could you
could do it in a lot of other ways that
just is a way of incentivizing people to
to contribute data to a data comment
that doesn't require a large initial
Bank role but I mean you can you you you
can you can do it in other sorts of ways
it's
just very hard to get around Gatekeepers
like UK biobank for example is a very
interesting resource but as an
American working in a crypto project or
startup company I have no
straightforward way to get my hands on
the UK biobank data even if the
individual British people who
contributed there might like me to right
so I mean just not all ways of sort of
crowdsourcing data even if they're not
commercial end up being tremendously
open right so it's and you face that
problem for simulation modeling as well
as for for analytics because you need a
lot of data to to tweak to tweak the
simul simulations well hey uh we don't
have too much time left but I so I
wanted to get your uh your thoughts on
what you think is the most exciting new
technology or the most likely let's say
to uh make the biggest longevity impact
that that sort of exists today or or is
coming soon oh I I wouldn't say I know
the answer to that and I'm I'm open to
being very surprised but one thing I
would say from looking at the data from
ru biotech's long live flies that candy
and her team have been
Gathering so a fly has about 14,000
genes 2,000 plus sub potentially differ
in the Long live flies from the control
flies but we've done a bunch of work to
try to find a smaller set of genes like
say a few dozen genes which carry a lot
of causal impact in in making the long
flies live a long time now then how do
you target a few dozen genes right but
may maybe there's some sort of molecular
biology tricks that can be used to to
get get us those sooner by hacking
hacking viruses to transport things or
something right so I mean that's that's
one direction that very clearly comes
out of my own work because with machine
learning we can
identify sets of genes where it's pretty
clear if you could vary them in Vivo in
in a tissue in a coordinated way you
could restore that tissue to a state of
Youth but but then but then and we can
show that in flies in many cases
but then how do you
actually how do you actually do that we
we we we we don't have a way but see I'm
I'm not I'm not a biologist and this
delivery mechanism stuff is all about
the wet part right what what what what I
can do most easily now is figure out
what you need to tweak in the genome or
the proteome or the metabolome or the
epigenome what do you need to tweak to
make an organism live a long time and of
course
if an
AGI that was twice as smart as me
understood molecular biology and lab
equipment it may well figure out
delivery vectors you know for a hundred
genome variations one
time like that right well when is that
gonna happen let's get your prediction
on on that well we don't know when that
will happen I mean my buddy Ray kerswell
who has a nice new book out as well by
the way the
Singularity yeah gotta get it yeah yeah
Ray Ray has
hypothesized 2029 for the Breakthrough
to human level
AGI I mean I'm I'm trying to make it
happen
sooner but
uh I mean if it's not till 2029 I hope
we can we can both live that long and I
think that after you get to human level
AGI I think it'll only be be a few years
till you start seeing AIS that are
dramatically superhuman in in in in many
ways in other words I think race 2029
date for human level AGI is not bad
could be off by a couple years plus or
minus I think his date 2045 for the
singularity is too pessimistic because I
think after you get a human level AGI
it'll only take a few years for that
human level AGI to build a smarter one
and a smarter one and a smarter one and
get on to the singularity so somewhere
in there
between the human level AGI and vastly
super human super intelligence somewhere
in there is going to be the AGI that can
figure out how to solve how to solve
aging as soon as we get an AI That's as
smart as a human it's instantly going to
be way superum because it's going to be
it can think a zillion times faster than
us right so as soon as it's as smart as
our our Co us cognitively won't it be be
a thousand times faster well having the
individual processors
faster having the individual processors
faster doesn't necessarily make it
smarter it depends what it's doing with
those processors but I think a more
relevant point is once you have one
human level
AGI I mean modulo money to build
Hardware you can then have a thousand or
10,000 human level
agis and they will be able to link their
minds together in ways that humans can't
do do because because they're all
architectured on the same Compu until we
have
neuralink yeah but that's it won't be
the same that's going to be hard just
because again you could slap a link on
there and it will be really really
interesting but our brains are just not
architected for linking together right
and and we can't easily rearchitecturing
can morph itself for more optimal
linking together with other agis in a
very flexible way because its mind is
all in in software and this indicates
one of the many choices we'll face after
a singularity which is like how human do
we want to remain versus how many you
capabilities do we want to on board even
if they bring us far beyond you know
what we would now think of as being
human and I hope a broad spectrum of
choices in this regard are made by
different people people like I would I
would love to see some traditional
humans remain maybe get get get rid of
death and disease and mental illness and
and what that is this part of the
explosion in your book like I've been
talking about the human biological
Cambrian explosion for a long time yeah
yeah absolutely it's it's a
proliferation of different species of
Consciousness right okay yeah I mean
improved humans will be part of it
engineer neared AGI mins will be another
part of it but then yeah rapidly
uplifted and repeatedly self-improved
Minds will be another be wild world
should be do you think because uh
because having a healthy population and
a long liveed population uh increases a
country's GDP do you think it won't
won't it become like an arms race to
make a country their a country will want
their citizens to live long and to make
their themselves rich
I don't think so no no well how will we
pay social security for all of these so
many more old people right so they'll be
able to work right yeah no it's it's
it's clear to you it's clear to you and
me yeah on the other hand if AI is
taking all the jobs maybe you're just
making more mouths to feed with
universal basic income right so well or
maybe we we'll all be playing music uh
smooth jazz robot friends to me to me
it's very clear that human life is
good dying is unpleasant and we should
abolish the plague of involuntary death
just for basic ethical reasons well this
is my soapbox I'm trying to get the word
out there this should be an arms race
and it's good for the economies you know
this is this is my message yeah on the
other hand it shouldn't be an arms race
because we should have international
cooperation on this rather rather rather
than than silos compete competing with
each other which is how arms races even
though like it's it's amazing the world
is waking up that people living a long
time is both plausible and and is a good
thing and it's great that longevity
investment is a thing now and their
their VC's focused on it it's it's not
considered a joke anymore yeah we're
trying to get that message out we're
trying to stoke uh uh enthusiasm for
this type of research and funding what
do you think are any do you have any
advice for organizations like us to to
help uh speed this process investors
want an exit if you're talking about
regular business investors rather than
than donors or government agencies
anyway investors want an exit the likely
exit for a medical therapy startup is
selling to Big Pharma so then suddenly
everything becomes about the Limited
mindset of big Pharma and how can you
make something that that will that will
appeal to them which is just an an an
annoying way to H to have to think right
so I mean I mean I think uh we need to
be getting early stage startups in
longevity
Therapeutics far enough along that they
get through like early stage human
Trials of
therapies so that then Pharma will have
to partner with
them even if they're doing something
weird that's out outside the normal
mental scope because I mean Pharma guys
will ultimately look at data if it's
close enough to the money right but you
have to get further and further through
the through the pipeline you also have
to be willing to
invest ear earlier in the pipeline like
most longevity VCS only one who invest
something where you have a specific
therapy that's already already in
testing but and then what they say well
leave it to the NIH to fund things at an
earlier stage but NIH is very very
conservative also so I mean now there's
not really anyone who wants to fund the
earlier stages of of longevity research
I mean sense Foundation is and and there
there there's some Niche organizations
doing it I mean singular is helping out
with with Ru but we we we don't have
any adventurous minded open-minded
organization that's willing to fund
early stage research toward the
discovery of longevity Therapeutics
instead you have VCS who are willing to
jump in once you get to the stage of
having a therapy that's already being
tested and then mostly only if it's the
kind of therapy that Pharma clearly will
want to will want will want to acquire
and then at the level of even government
research
funding you still have a very blinkered
view of things like you don't have a
focus on systems biology and whole whole
systems thinking but clearly longevity
is a whole systems problem it's not just
about like find one pathway and and and
and poke it poke it to have an effect
right so there there there's a lot of
issues and yeah I mean education which
in a way is a lot of what you guys you
guys are doing is is
is is super important and very hard
because no one in the modern era has any
time to pay any attention to to yeah
that's why I try to make fundamentally
new way of thinking people want to
absorb factoids that they they don't
they don't want to absorb a new paradigm
but yet people kind of kind
of need a paradigm shift in the way that
they're thinking
about long longevity and it's it's
challenging to effect that that's why
I'm I'm sort of a fan of what uh Brian
Johnson is doing with his uh competition
for people to um you know compare all
their data and stuff I think that's uh
that's fun and it gets people excited
you need you need it you need it not to
be creepy looking rich white guys from
Silicon Valley right sure sure I mean I
mean I I I I I I love Brian I knew him
in D I knew him in DC right when he was
catching out brain tree but I mean yeah
you you need stuff like that but you
need it to be somehow broader based and
with a more inclusive inclusive feel to
it right well Ben I I don't want to uh
go too long I know we've already gone
over time so um I want to just thanks
for talking with me and giving me all
this information yeah yeah yeah well
thanks thanks for the interesting
questions and it's it's good to talk to
someone willing to follow the whole
thread from AGI to Super longevity to
business structure and culture and so
forth because really all all these
things are are of a of a piece right and
we need to think about them in a
coherent coordinated way
and who knows we may see in the next few
years a tremendous breakthrough either
just from a biolab or from from you know
Ru bio using using our our AI technology
and I do think once you have the
first breakthrough where the mainstream
medical establishment acknowledges like
take this therapy your life will likely
extend by five years and we now expect
the maximum lifespan of the species may
not be 123 anymore maybe it's 140 right
like yeah once you have the first
breakthrough that that gets to that
level the flood I think the floodgates
open right then everyone around the
world is like holy maybe I don't
really have to die right that's like a
chat GPT moment for longevity but but
but more so I think we'll probably be at
that moment within the next 10 years I'm
hoping it's within the next three three
to five years right but but after that
what we're seeing now will still seem
like the
the end of the prehistoric
era yeah well that's exciting that's
exciting stuff and I'm excited to read
your book it sounds like there's a bunch
of uh good visualizations for this crazy
future that you can't really see beyond
the singularity but it sounds like
you're trying to uh figure it out we try
to see beyond the singularity we also
try a lot
to understand how to optimize the path
toward the
singularity in terms of uh what should
we be doing now
scientifically culturally and in our own
minds to sort of sort of work toward
work toward a better and better
Singularity yeah so get give it give it
a read we got the the Consciousness
explosion right here lots lot lots of
pretty pictures
too nice yeah thanks a lot I'm G to pick
that up great thank you so much
appreciate it byebye
