you're watching the context it is time
for AI
decoded welcome to AI decoded the whole
purpose of this program is to lift the
lid on artificial intelligence to help
you understand what it's all about and
tonight we are going to go under the
hood none of this modern artificial
intelligence would be possible without
the highly specialized chips you will
have heard of Nvidia which alongside
apple and Amazon is now one of the
biggest companies in the world you might
not have heard of Gro they are the
upstarts in the market the Challenger
that so far has raised close to a
billion dollars in private Finance to
develop a new and alternative kind of
chip to the one Nvidia supplies AI chips
are essential if we are to expand AI at
scale but just as important are the data
centers that power and train them they
are the digital factories of the future
they need power and lots of it and Saudi
Arabia as the world's biggest oil
exporter has spotted an opportunity
suddenly they are building vast desert
data centers so big they might one day
be capable of reaching half the world's
population and this week in Riyad at the
AI Global Summit they signed a deal with
grock who will supply the chips for
their Advanced AI systems coming up we
have an exclusive interview with
Jonathan Ross Who is the CEO of glog who
will tell us about that deal that he
secured and alongside me here in the
studio the brains of the operation PR
Pria Lan he says that here anyway highly
artificially
intelligent CEO of AI education company
Century
Tech gets bigger and better that every
week I've noticed uh right um listen um
before we go any further I I I want to
play a little film for our viewers
because I want them to understand
the difference in the AI chips that the
big players like Nvidia are
manufacturing and this new type that's
being developed by Gro so have a look
this is what a standard AI chip looks
like it's a GPU you'll notice the
complex Crossing Lines this design is
responsible for the DraStic rise in
value for its producers who made the
right bet that gpus could be the engine
for AI now this is what a far from
standard AI chip looks like uniform
clean and really really fast like 18
times faster than its competition but is
this Underdog capable of taking a bite
out of the hot AI chip Market
computational needs were changing fast
as self-driving artificial intelligence
and more were being developed at a rapid
Pace a new architecture more
specifically specialist chip
would be needed to pull that off
something tailored deeply for its
specific task this is unlike anything on
the market the millisecond you hit enter
this thing is giving you the entirety of
its response to further put this speed
in perspective grock chips enable llms
to write a full book in about a 100
seconds goodness me um before we talk to
Jonathan tell me about the the chip
ecosystem what's going on here what's
the context of it so the reason why this
is really exciting and this new
technology that Jonathan and his team
have developed is really exciting is
because there are very few Global
players in this ecosystem right so you
have what we call foundaries which are
the big manufacturing facilities that
manufacture the chips right the biggest
Foundry for the advanced AI chips is in
Taiwan it's tsmc right and then and then
there are a couple of other foundaries
as well then you have what we call
fabulous companies The Fabulous
companies are Nvidia AMD so they design
the chips but they don't actually
manufacture the chips and then you get
companies like Samsung and Intel who
essentially have more of the endtoend
sort of ecosystem right they design the
chips and they manufacture them and as
you'll see they also start to provide
that that manufacturing facility to
other companies as well but there's very
few players the Market's absolutely
massive but what's interesting Christian
is NVIDIA has about 80% let's say of the
market right they also do data centers
and other things but they are the
dominant player in the market so grock
has come in with this technology they've
done this deal in s Arabia with aramco
and they are I'm sure Jonathan's going
to tell us vying for some of that market
share and what's going to be really
interesting is you know what's his
designer and manufacturer he's well he
he'll tell you they're the designers so
and actually they've picked Samsung and
he'll correct me if I'm wrong but
Samsung as their manufacturer which I do
think is really interesting you know why
did they choose Samsung and what was the
reason in the decision- making process
was there a geopolitical reason as to
why they didn't pick a Taiwanese company
tsmc and we'll talk about the
geopolitics of this later because it's
really complex and truly fascinating as
well at the same time um but that's the
ecosystem but there's huge and huge
amounts of money and investment here
startups can't just go and build a
factory it costs billions and billions
of dollars tsmc have just opened a
factory well they started a factory in
Arizona they haven't finished completed
it because it costs an enormous amount
of money and they're seeing some issues
while they're trying to build that so
it's going to be really interesting to
hear from Jonathan you know what's his
strategy and how's he actually going to
try and musle in on some of that Nvidia
market share well let's bring him in
Jonathan Ross CEO of Gro welcome to the
program I should say congratulations
because youve just signed this immense
deal with uh aramco tell us what it
is so we've signed a deal to deploy uh
starting this year 20,000 of our chips
in uh the
kingdom and um next year we have anou to
deploy up to
200,000 and Harrison that uh Nvidia
deployed about 500,000 their and gpus
last year now of course this year
they've increased it to 2 million but
that still makes us pretty sizable
player right um I'm I'm I'm guessing
that the new chips are not in this
communication that we have because your
picture is frozen but we'll press on
because we can hear you very well um
what is what is the your unique selling
point of this chip over the
others speed so uh the biggest selling
point is uh you remember dialup when you
used to have to wait a very long time
for your answer to arrive and you would
see it show up very slowly uh with this
chip you get an answer that's almost
instant it's almost like broadband and
it changes the experience and it makes
it much more
engaging and Jonathan what's your
strategy to carve out a share in this
space because you've got Nvidia that's
going to come out with a Blackwell
platform hopefully in Q4 of this year
and they're claiming claiming 25 times
less cost it's more energy efficient and
it's a lot
faster well the amazing thing is we
built this chip on what's considered
fairly old technology 14 nmet um and you
measure it in the size of the things
that are on the chip the the transistors
and the the components and nvidia's
latest chips are 4 nanometer and yet
we're actually still faster now you
mentioned the Samsung Fab that um we're
going to be building our next Generation
chip with we're actually going to be
going to 4 nanometer as well and it's
sort of like we get to skip three grades
in terms of our capabilities when we do
that so we're already the world's
fastest the other thing is we're much
less expensive a modern-day GPU has
expensive they also have a lot of other
very complex and expensive parts that go
in there that um they use to connect up
that memory and we don't have any of
that but also because we're using an
older process 14 nanometer for our
current generation and even by the time
our V2 comes around with uh for n
it's going to be pretty uh widely
available technology it's going to be
underutilized whereas right now
everyone's trying to use the latest
process and so it's really hard to ramp
up the
supply so just for someone who's not
deeply involved in this world as you and
priia are prer was explaining to me that
you are the these chips are going to be
looking primarily at text but but how
might they be used in industry in the
future I mean as we move to facial
recognition technology or to driving
robot technology how do you think your
your second or third versions of this
chip might
develop actually our current chip um we
just launched a what's called multimodal
Model last week where it takes both text
and images in and it outputs text about
the image so for example you could
upload this image and ask um you know
how many lights are in the image or how
many lamps and it will answer that this
is very useful for Commerce for example
you could upload the image of a product
and create a description for it and so
that's what some customers of ours are
going to be using it for we also do
speech to text so we're very general
really what's different about our chip
versus uh gpus in terms of what you can
use it for is that it's used for
something called inference as opposed to
training and the difference between
those two when comes to AI if you want
to become a heart surgeon uh you spend
many years training and what gpus are
really good at is training the models
what we're really good at is inference
which is sort of the heart surgeon doing
um actual heart surgeries the practice
and you spend a lot of money on the
training but you make your money on the
inference it's also much more cost
sensitive because every single time you
use one of these AIS whether it's a
chatbot or whether or something else you
actually are consuming
compute and so where we operate if you
want to think about AI in terms of the
way the Industrial Revolution happened
or
Transportation um you could think of the
model as the car but it has to run on
oil or
petrol and what we're providing is the
compute which is the new oil you can
have the best AI model in the world but
if you don't have enough compute you
can't run it and one of the astounding
things is um
in about the last uh couple of months
about four or five months uh we've gone
from fewer than 10 developers to as of
today we hit
450,000 developers on our platform it
took Nvidia about uh seven years to get
to 100,000 we got there in six weeks and
a large part of that is because what
Nvidia did they created some amazing
models that um people want to use uh but
because we run them so much faster and
because most of the applications are
built to use the AI there's been
incredible demand and so the reason that
we're here um in Saudi Arabia is because
we need to build out a lot more compute
and they have the financial resources
and they have the energy and Jonathan a
question about being in Saudi Arabia and
this this deal this mou I suppose the
memor of understanding that you've got
in Saudi Arabia with um aramco it's
intriguing because I know that the US
obviously wants its companies to have a
huge adressable Market they want you to
do business outside of the US with lots
of countries they want those countries
to be cozing up to certainly the US
rather than China when it comes to
building their AI capabilities but you
know I'm looking at a parallel example
of when Microsoft invested in g42 the
UAE company and Washington was very
clear that they needed to uh stop
working with huawe g42 um they needed to
sell the stock invested in their company
that was invested by Chinese investors
and so you've now done this got this mou
with aramco we know that in Saudi Arabia
that're they're quite close to the
Chinese you know they've had um deals
between uh the piff the Saudi public
investment funds um you know has has an
interest in Lenovo you've had an
investment from aramco's Prosperity 7 in
an llm uh in uh in China so has I mean
have us officials been in touch with you
do you expect them to be in touch with
you and dur ramco you know what do you
think about this tension that now exists
potentially with this deal that You'
struck so uh we've been in contact with
the Commerce department since before
this deal happened um and uh just be
clear we actually are Beyond theou stage
so the project is now budgeted for the
initial
20,000 uh
chips um the m for the remaining uh
200,000 or Chinese companies well in
advance of the change in posture from
the US government uh a big part of the
reason why was it was very difficult for
tech companies to be successful in China
um I
happened to start the Google TPU which
is the chip that Google uses for AI and
while I was there I saw that um Google
meta and many other companies that were
very strong companies had a lot of
trouble operating in China
um what would happen is as you started
to become more successful um things for
example if you were if you were doing
search your search engine would get slow
um and people wouldn't know why it was
the great firewall would just be slowed
down and it was very hard to compete not
for competitive reasons but um because
the government really didn't want you to
win and we as a small startup didn't
feel that we were going to be in a
position to compete in China we
voluntarily decideed not to for purely
commercial reasons yeah and maybe that's
part of why um we can do this deal we're
we're very on side Jonathan we'll have
to leave it there H we're up against a
break but uh thank you very much for
coming on and explaining it all to us
best of luck with uh the deal that you
signed out there we'll talk about the
geopolitics of all this after the break
we're going to speak to Gregory Allen
who used to work in the joint AI Center
at the US Department of Defense you're
watching AI decoded
welcome back during the Cold War the
United States would only supply
supercomputers to the Soviet Union if
they were used for weather forecasting
and not nuclear simulation and there
were permanent foreign monitors deployed
to Russia all data was open for analysis
by us intelligence like those
supercomputers the AI models of the
future have both civilian and Military
implications so what is are the subject
to the same controls we've just been
talking about that there is a blanket
ban on selling restricted chips to China
what does Washington think about all
this uh let's get into it with Gregory
Allen he's a director of the wani center
for AI and Advanced Technologies at the
center for strategic and International
Studies he was formerly with the US
Department of Defense so you'll have
heard that last conversation uh most of
it we got um about whether you know if
you're doing a deal with the Saudis
there's a back door to the Chinese how
will the US government see a deal like
that
well I think the first thing to begin
understanding is that leaders in the
United States leaders in Saudi Arabia
leaders in China all agree that
leadership and artificial intelligence
technology is foundational to the future
of military and economic power they are
all thinking about how they can increase
the competitiveness of their economy and
especially in the case of the United
States and China thinking about how they
can gain an edge over one another for
the United States which has the the most
advanced chip designing companies like
Nvidia like grock based in its Homeland
they are seeking to deny China access to
the most advanced chips that can be used
to train the most advanced AI models
there has been reviews of Chinese
military procurement documents and they
are looking for American GPU technology
and that can be used to train Hypersonic
missiles and run simulations of how they
can deliver nuclear weapons or can be
used for more commercial applications
such as large language models like chat
gbt which are used by hundreds of
millions of people around the world the
point is that this is a dual use
technology and the United States
government reviews exports of chips such
as grocs around the world under those
terms right Gregory and and there's
reports of um some of those chips being
smuggled into China right um and we also
had an arrest recently of a Samsung an
ex Samsung
executive yes uh understand China wants
access to these chips whether or not
it's legal to get access to these chips
and so China Chinese companies are now
engaging smuggling networks to acquire
illegally what they can't get legally
now that's true of the chip Hardware it
is also true of the critical expertise
around the semiconductor industry more
broadly and AI specifically in the case
of Samsung these are two former
Executives accused and at at real risk
of conviction of transferring critical
knowhow in advanced semiconductor
manufacturing techniques to Chinese
companies in violation of intellectual
property laws and also Economic Security
laws in South Korea it feels like a
nuclear arms race
yeah well you know nuclear technology is
very explicitly uh weapons focused
really you have nuclear technology in
the energy domain and the weapons domain
and a handful of Niche medical cases but
it really is first and foremost a
military techn ology artificial
intelligence is much closer to Computing
in general which is you know it's very
useful for running your Microsoft Word
application but it's also useful for
running you know military supercomputers
for code breaking that's the challenge
here I think the reason why why I'd
agree with Christian that that it feels
like that is because many years ago
nuclear power and you know the ability
um to to have nuclear capabilities
really was a way of asserting your
dominance on the global stage right and
it seems although that's obviously still
the case now ai is very very much you
know the other area where they're
focused on National Security and and and
cyber security Gregory and before we
finish with you I do want to ask you
because China is at the center of this
so you know what in your view is the
role of tsmc which we' just talked about
earlier being you know the lead provider
of these Advanced uh gpus they work with
Nvidia they work with AMD amongst many
other customers of theirs what's their
role in terms of China strategy about
whether or not there is a future
invasion of
Taiwan well you've heard previously in
the earlier conversation that Nvidia has
very very high market share north of 80%
for the AI chips that are used to train
these AI models but where are those
chips made they're made in Taiwan and
taiwan's market share for logic chips at
the most advanced manufacturing nodes is
essentially 100% it's the sole country
on Earth that can operate the most
advanced semiconductor manufacturing
processes and that is a critical
dependence not just of Nvidia but of the
entire global economy so China of course
stating that Taiwan is rightfully their
territory and stating repeatedly their
willingness to use military force if
necessary to retake Taiwan that is an
incredible hinge point of Global
Security and the global economy if a war
was to devastate taiwan's semiconductor
industry which I think is a very real
possibility in such a conflict scenario
that would be a global economic
catastrophe and no one would be spared
from the consequences of that they say
it estimated at about one trillion um
you know global economy damage per year
per year yeah fascinating isn't it we
talk about the what AI can do we never
talk about actually the chips and what
is going on around the world to get the
best chips uh and to to smuggle them
into countries like China it's
extraordinary stuff Jonathan thank you
very much indeed that is it for AI
decoded this week thanks to Jonathan
thanks also to Gregory and of course to
priia for her expertise as ever uh we
will do this same time next week just to
reminder that all the episodes that
we've done so far are on the AI decoded
playlist on YouTube uh we'll see you
next week thanks for watching
