if you've got open AI versus Google
versus China versus anthropic if there's
a step function interpreted or
intercepted by one of them it's game
over then again disagree for my former
reasons if I could know anything or if I
could predict anything how would it
impact my business Ai and the super
intelligence feels really powerful on
the doing stuff but the being is where
all the the future emanates from and
where power comes from people don't
realize the fact that we're living in a
time where the things we take for normal
and for granted are truly Godlike you
know decades ago or centuries ago
completely welcome to moonshots and
special episode of WTF is happening in
Tech this week myself and Sim Ismael Sim
good to see you buddy good to be back
for those of you who don't know selem uh
he is one of the most extraordinary Tech
thinkers on the planet uh was head of
innovation at Yahoo uh for their Bri
house Innovation Labs joined me at
Singularity University as our first
president there has gone on uh to write
a number of bestsellers including
exponential organizations I had the
pleasure of of uh of co-authoring
exponential organizations too with selem
you now heads open EXO uh s before we
jump in talking about AI Bitcoin
robotics all that stuff uh where can
people find you on social uh easiest
place is atmail which is my Twitter
handle or X handle and secondly open
open xo.com which is our Global
community of close to 40,000 enthusiasts
technologists entrepreneurs innovators
Etc so we think about how do you
organize for this crazy future that's
hurtling at us um in terms of
institutional change and organizational
change you know you said my ex handle
that was pretty good you almost said my
Twitter handle I know that you funny cuz
Elon put out a a a I going to say a
tweet put out a a what do you call it
you put out a it's a post a post okay he
put out a post and he said should I
still call it X or should I call it
Twitter and I I messaged back at him I
said I need a verb I need a verb and a
post is not a good verb I you know
tweeting is a great verb so it is youan
if you're listening we need a better
version of
Xing all right let's jump in uh we're
going to be talking on this episode on
what's been happening in the last few
weeks in the subjects of AI Bitcoin
Robotics and biotech and other cool
stuff let's start with AI um wow so uh
here we go the future of search is it
GPT search or Google I mean Google's had
an incredible you know Global dominance
for so long uh what do you think about
this Le you know uh there's there's
they've had massive dominance uh when
when Microsoft integrated Chachi PT into
Bing it didn't make a dent uh I think
it's incredible what Google has done um
and there there's an important Point
here the the the courts just ruled
Google a monopoly and there's some
rationale to that but uh Eric Schmidt
and others have said you it's just a
click away to use on other search
engines so it's really uh by sheer uh
focus on user experience that they
become this amazing um I think the the
way that Google is integrating uh GPT
into you know Gemini results right at
the top of the search bar as will keep
it ahead I think it's a hard thing to
break through that because they just
have so much data and AB testing around
what uh search results should look like
Etc you know this this reminds me of the
fact that the user interface is so
extraordinary uh critical right so when
Google you know I mean listen you were
at Yahoo and Yahoo was just like m
massively complex page and they were
worried about everything was going and
then Google came out with just like a
simple like box to type stuff into it's
it's really really hard it you know can
I give you a quick story from the Yahoo
days yeah sure um you had this mail
interface and Yahoo mail was like
predominant for for many many years and
it turned out by AB testing if you moved
the send button by just a few pixels one
way the other the usage dropped off
pretty dramatically because users got
habituated to that that layout and it
was really hard to change it so you need
a paradigm shift change like the Google
change to make a difference otherwise
you're stuck because you've trained your
users in operating one way the UI design
changes were unbelievably difficult in
incremental mode well we've seen the
same thing with you know frankly chat
GPT became this very simple user
interface right the functionality of
chat GPT um was there before but when
they made it like just you know type at
me
um all of a sudden it took off to a
million users and this is that comment
you always talk about the deceptive
right that when you make a technology
usable it goes from disrupt deceptive to
disruptive but let me ask you a question
when you need a piece of data do you
Google or do you go to chat GPT and ask
the question there I'm these days I'm
doing both uh just because the
triangulation of that uh becomes it's so
easy to ask in both environments but I
do think that GPT
uh search GPT 40 whatever's coming next
is taking a bite out of Google and we'll
we'll talk about that um in in just a
little bit let's go to the next uh story
for this week man this was a big one uh
why don't you kick this one off and I'll
play the video while we're while we're
talking over it yeah you know it's hard
to to gauge with this stuff we're
crossing The Uncanny Valley as they call
talk about it in this area and it's very
very difficult to deal with this um
because we just our human perceptions
can't cope with what the AIS can
generate now look at any of the modern
games and you see it you missed the
point there though this is a fake video
this is like fully generated and it's
like it's you could not tell the
difference between realistic and this
generated video so with Laura and gen 3
Alpha you know again this is just the
beginning important to know we been
predicting this for a long time right at
the what's the point at which a uh the
resolution of an AI generated image
exceeds the the pixelation of the human
eye and we've now crossed that Rubicon
and so how we navigate this future is
going to be really really crazy to tell
I love this one um here's again we're
using AI to bring anything to life uh
and let's take a look at at
this I mean
you know two years ago someone looking
at that would have assumed it was re oh
not two years ago but probably four or
five years ago that it was real and
being able to bring you know Mozart to
life here like this I mean the AI is
taking a lot of Liberty in in its
translation but holy cow that's
extraordinary i i i bucket this with the
the previous slide right like this the
the the what we're going to now be able
to do is so amazing I'm really looking
forward to having you know real fullon
conversations in video mode with at
Plato and Aristotle and you had that at
the abundance Summit uh I think that
that becomes it it actually uh opens up
our history in a really powerful way
unlike anything we've ever seen before
you know um one of the things that we're
beginning to see is people bringing
their loves one loved ones back right
those who have passed and uh I think
we've talked about this before and just
if you're if you're listening if your
mom and dad are still with you your
grandparents are still with you take a
moment to go and record them on your
iPhone uh record their voice um you know
sit them down for two or three hours
give them a glass of wine and get them
to talk you know uh whimsically about
their history and you can train up an AI
model that's going to be with you for
the next Century um you know I I've got
to give kudos here to Ray Criswell right
who 20 years ago has been doing this for
the last 30 40 years recording every
scrap of data he could about his father
yeah and and collecting it and
aggregating it because he predicted that
at some point we would be able to train
am models to do that and now we're there
uh my dad is just about 97 now um and
every time I see him he's still with it
meant fully right he's like living alone
driving around he shouldn't be doing any
of that um uh and the but the every time
I'm with him now I throw on a camera and
I just record everything that's aming
because it's going to be incredibly
powerful to bring back that the only
thing I haven't gotten to is how do you
bring back the the sheer wisdom that
comes with that level of Age and what
he's seen well I think the wisdom is
going to come back for for our grandkids
from us if we ever considered why I
don't know by the sheer volume of the
you know the X poost can't say the
tweets we put out there the all the
blogs we've written all of that becomes
sort of a compiled version of it does
but for the Elder generation we have
such you know think of the black and
white Stills we have of our great
grandparents right there's very little
can I can I tell you super funny little
story about my dad I did one of my
meeting of Life sessions right and
somebody the audience said hey I really
loved your talk fixing civilization this
tedex talk I did my dad's hand goes up
he goes can I Heckle and I'm like yeah
of course you can you know he goes
totally disagree with your talk I'm like
what do do you not think we need to fix
civilization he goes yeah of course we
do but it's not this fixing part it's
the civilization part he goes we've not
civilized the world we've materialized
the world now we have to do the work to
civilize the world I totally lost the
audience because like you wisdom bomb
from the elders boom and it was a
profound comment I've been sitting with
that for the last couple of years it's a
really powerful framing that we actually
we're Apes with tools operating in
tribal paradigms and this is a nightmare
for the future yeah uh you know the
other comment along those lines and I've
been you know I'm I'm working on on my
next book age of abundance with Steven
Cotler and our opening chapter is uh
titled our ancestors would see us as
Gods right and I mean I think people
don't realize the fact that we're living
in a time where the things we take for
normal and for granted are truly Godlike
you know decades ago or centuries ago
completely it's it's really incredible
that you can video with anybody anywhere
in the world pretty much for free yeah
speaking of about creating you know live
video imagery from conversation whatever
um artists win Key ruling in AI
copyright
case thoughts I have strong thoughts
about this this is the you know we talk
about the the transition from film
photography to digital photography right
when you go from a material substrate to
a digital substrate and all of a sudden
the domain explodes because we can take
billions of times more photographs from
free and we talk about reading to
digital biology is the same kind of
analogy our old IP laws entire our en
entire intellectual property framework
doesn't work in a digital age because if
you think about how a human being uh
looks at a copyrighted work they'll
watch a bunch of film clips a bunch of
music videos and then they'll create
something and subconsciously use those
same patterns all a is doing is
accelerating that dramatically into tax
that seems absurd it's insane because
you know an artist goes to the Lou and
is inspired by the by the work I mean
all they're doing is training their own
neural net in the same way that these
AIS are training their neural Nets and
so like you're going to say to somebody
I'm sorry you were inspired by Da Vinci
and you're coping him this is totally
the leite Revolt Etc now we don't know
what the actual answer is right yeah um
the the best answer may be what we've
seen in music where the dig the the the
music stuff becomes table stakes and the
live performances where people make all
their money and so something similar
like that has to emerge in in different
artistic domains well I'll give you an
example uh you know you know Bill gross
for the CEO of IDE lab uh bill has a new
company uh called
pr. that I think has just been announced
like this week and what they're doing is
they've built models that are able to go
and search the body of existing work and
then create statistic Le ties back to a
new generated piece of work and the idea
there is that if someone is making money
off of something and they have copied or
they've been using content out of EXO um
out of our book that there's some small
amount of uh Revenue that traces back to
us so it's it's very similar to uh the
search models that that have powered
Google for example anyway it's it's
definitely worthwhile Endeavor I don't
know how you fully apply it or enforce
it but it's worth doing let's see if it
works um you know I added this to our
stack uh Ai and weather forecasting
because I'm still Blown Away by the
power of massive data analytics that
these models can take on so the idea
that you know the most accurate 10day
forecast are now coming out of AI models
um and of course that's what that's what
AI does is it takes a seemingly massive
amount of uncorrelated data and is able
to make interpolations and
extrapolations and where this is going
for me is AI being able to predict
earthquakes being able to predict stock
markets being able to predict a whole
slew of different things all sorts of
stuff and this has massive real world
implications you may have heard me speak
about the car washes in BOS
Aris remember that a 20 50% drop in
revenues over a 20-year period just
because you were better able to model
when it's going to rain and when you
know it's going to rain you don't wash
your car and that's such a huge impact
on an industry and the key there is you
can be the smartest car wash owner in
the world and you'll just never see that
coming and this is I think the
orthogonal effect of technology on
domain after domain after domain better
or worse it's just going to change uh
everything well I I think this is where
as an entrepreneur you need to be
looking at uh you know if I could know
anything
or if I could predict anything how would
it impact my business right whether
you're in the fashion business or the
car wash business or the you know the
gardening business um uh if you're able
to that's the hard part is saying what
would I want to know and if I could know
that how would it give me different
economics a different business model
honestly as you're saying this a whole
Vector appears to me right which is you
get an AI sophisticated enough and say
you go look through the different
domains and figure out where you could
make a massive economic impact and come
back to me and we'll pick out the best
five I mean that's the that's the whole
idea of like you know the the billion
dollar T trillion dollar you know AI
startup with one one one guy or gal in
their dog and an AI uh is becoming a
unicorn I mean but that's that's
cheating to just say go make me money
well no I don't believe it is every
20-year-old is that they're doing
exactly that yeah but I think you should
have at least a you know you should say
go make me money in something I care
about or a big but this becomes key
right now when it comes back to you with
20 things how do you filter and you'll
have to filter according to your MTP
yeah I and that's where things become
really important I mean that's one of
the things that we that we pointed out
in the exponential or work is that you
have to begin with your massive
transformative purpose your MTP that
thing you care about I mean by the way
they just had the vcon conference um and
uh J Shetty on stage apparently shouted
it out and said the most important thing
you could have is a massive Transformer
to a purpose nice good getting out that
lexicon out there you know the times I
have failed in a business um have been
when and this is on two occasions I know
where I tried to go quick get money like
you know like that that will be a quick
you know getrich quick scheme and the
fact of the matter is if you don't care
about it every business is hard and
you're going to give up before you know
if looks easy from a distance the closer
you get you see all the all the uh the
pimples and wrinkles and problems yeah
and then you give up because you don't
actually give a about it we should
have a debate with Scott Galloway
because he just put out a book saying
your following your passion is full
utter you shouldn't do that
follow where your talent is um and I I
looked at I read this and I'm like I
totally wanted to debate this obviously
he's going for the attention there I
have a it turns out I had a great talent
for Designing large scale uh databases
Enterprise databases that is not where
any interest of mine ever fell and who
the hell wants to spend your life doing
that all right meta releases the largest
open uh model in history um you know
there's this ongoing debate of open
versus closed all right we've got
hugging face We've Got U meta you know
even grock even Elon said we're going to
make grock open source um you know I do
believe that this is important for a
whole slew of reasons the question is
you know we've got on the closed side of
the equation we've got Google and we've
got Microsoft slopen
aai um you know can the open source
models compete financially with closed
Source okay I've got a bunch of thoughts
here I think there's a clear future
coming out um it's the open- source
models are are are overtaking the close
Source models over time so I think there
will be an arms race where a close
Source model gets to say gp4 right you
get to chat gp4 and and they have a lead
for a bit but then the open source
models catch up very quickly and you
just the whole domain just moves forward
that much more quickly because of it in
the end open always beats closed yeah
that was one of Google's principles
which is why I'm kind of surprised
they've gone closed and not open here I
think the they've got so much under the
hood and we'll talk a little bit more
about that in a few slides that that
they don't know how to open it up um I
think oh meta has done it just to be
catchup and I I got to give huge Kudos
here to Mark and the entire team at meta
for doing this they've gone really
they've done some amazing work at open
sourcing AI models it's pushing the
boundaries for everybody he's forcing
the closed guys to really push forward
more quickly and open themselves up also
for
sure um your buddy vitalic on on super
intelligence um should I play the video
then we'll chat about it yeah
yeah he says here uh he argues that uh
if one AI pulls out ahead uh during this
period of super exponential growth uh
that it's game over that AI wins all
right let's play the video If you
imagine you know like every AI growing
exponentially then like whatever the
existing different like ratios of Power
are get preserved but if you imagine it
growing super exponentially right then
what happens is that if you're a little
bit ahead then like the the ratio of the
lead actually starts increasing and then
the worst case is if you have a step
function right then whoever first
discovers like some magic leap which
could be discovery of nanotchnology
could be discovery of like something
that increases compute by factor of 100
could be some algorithmic improvement
would be able to just like immediately
turn on that Improvement and then uh
they'd know quickly expand they'd
quickly be able to find all of the other
possible improvements before anyone else
and then they'd take over everything
right in in environment as kind of like
unknown in predictable as that like are
you really actually going to get of a
bunch of courses that like roughly stay
you know within sight of each other in
the race so it's game over at that point
um first of all uh is he an alien or
what well you can see his brain
literally trying to break out of his
head right um uh vitalic is is just the
one of the most magnificent extraord
intelligence is around um I have a huge
beef with this you do okay
I actually agree with him and I like it
what your can okay let me go on my
little rant here yeah um this happens
typ across the board with folks in this
like moat Ray cwell Etc when you think
about intelligence my beef is what the
hell do you mean by intelligence because
there's about a dozen facets of
intelligence the IQ test as we know it
only measures two of them the the speed
of thought processing and the ability to
match a concept across multiple
Frameworks we don't talk about emotional
intelligence or the Eastern concept or
presence or awareness we don't talk
about Linguistics intelligence music
intelligence spatial intelligence
there's a whole bunch of factors and
when you make a decision or a choice as
a leader you're bringing a lot of that
thinking a lot of those different facets
to Bear emotional intelligence for
example so the beef I have here is
please for God's sakes before you go
talking about intelligence Define what
you mean by it and have the courage to
define the term clearly okay well I'm
going to define it all of those things
I'm going to Define it as you know when
I'm speaking to someone who is
intelligent their ability to uh to drive
arguments to be able to uh to speak um
in a in a f compelling fashion in a
knowledgeable fashion about a subject
and win an argument or on another side
being able to go bring a body of
knowledge to drive and extrapolate into
new breakthrough any of these things I
mean human intelligence and all of its
richness I you know I agree with these
guys that we're going to reach that with
uh with digital
intelligence if not next year in the
next three or four years now the
question becomes super intelligence is
you know as you know Elon was saying it
on stage at the abundance Summit this
year you know his prediction is by 2029
2030 AI is of equal intelligence the
entire human race now I mean we've
talked about this since days of
Singularity University where you know
exponential growth you know what happens
when AI is a billion times more
intelligent across all Dimensions but
hold on like think about I'll give you
this this simple framing right okay
you're looking to hire somebody and they
uh your gut is saying don't something's
wrong don't hire them okay okay and
there's some signal to noise Ratio or
some pattern or detection pheromones God
knows what where some something is not
clicking and you kind of go with your
gut and we know what the value is of
that that choic making you know Google
did a study looking at video clips of an
interviewee and the interviewer and they
they built a model to predict whether
the person would get hired of course and
and how much time did they require of
the video interview to make the decision
of we're going to hire or not hire do
you remember that number yeah it was
like a few seconds yeah it was like
under 30 seconds the first 30 second
determines everything so there's a lot
there's a lot of of data that's not but
do you think an AI can't pick that data
up don't they could the pro the the
problem comes in replicating that core
function now also let's also note that
um a simple AI uh uh hiring algorithm
beats a human hiring manager by 25%
right that's again coming from from
Google because if I'm interviewing
people subconsciously I'm going to
interview and hire a middle-aged Indian
ball guy because I think that's the best
people in the world not necessarily true
yeah our cognitive biases really suck
right so so you don't know what but but
there's so many different levels at
which were were I did a Tom Bilu podcast
a few weeks ago and I talked about this
we have our soul intelligence we have
our emotional and subconscious
intelligence then we have our cognitive
uh and rational intelligence right and
we use all of that to make deep choices
and and decisions about the world um AI
right now are coming from the top down
we still have no understanding of how we
make choices at all evolutionary uh um
uh survival bias is the only way we've
gotten to where we are and we have no
idea how we've gotten here so I think
there's a big big uh beef around this
and remember at the abundance Summit I
asked Ray specifically what do you mean
by intelligence and he goes oh my phone
makes me smarter therefore that's what
we mean by it and that's valid but a
complete sidestep of the question have a
deeper like I'd like to get all these
guys together and challenge them with
this Framing and say guys let's talk
about what do we mean by this because
your emotional intelligence has a huge
bearing on your success as a leader in
the future that's not mimicked or
modeled at all anywhere mhm all right we
missed we sidestep the entire point
balic was making though which is in a
super intelligence race right if you've
got open AI versus Google versus China
versus anthropic whatever if one of them
if there's a step function interpreted
or intercepted by one of them it's game
over then it it tips instantly in favor
of that other individual again disagree
for my former reasons um
uh look let me let me take another tack
at this we for a long time you know
there's I I'll a human being can operate
in two modalities doing versus being
okay and doing is like getting out there
and getting stuff done and being is just
sitting with your s and being in both
are needed for success as a human being
and AIS and the super intelligence feels
really powerful on the doing stuff but
the being is where all the the future
emanates from and where power comes from
and again I'm going to like Eastern
metaphysics we don't get into that but
there's a lot more to talk about than
just that all right well let's talk
about this one so we've been hearing
about project strawberry for some time
it is uh you know Sam Alman starts
tweeting pictures of Strawberry Fields
And so we're expecting a release of uh
of uh strawberry by the way which had
previously been called qar and if you
remember when when Sam was fired by uh
uh the board and and just a small
factoid one of the board members who
fired Sam I wouldn't say the name but
was a su graduate from our first our
first class anyway uh so qar was like oh
my God they have AGI you know there was
all these rumors floating around uh but
project strawberry um thoughts Seline uh
okay cter to my previous point I'm
incredibly excited about this right why
because machine learning just basic
machine learning finds signal from noise
that a human being can't possibly see so
when you take all of the in uh research
papers thousands and thousands of
millions of them published and pass it
through an AI the ability to see
something and detect and figure out the
future is going to be unbelievably
powerful I think for me as a form of a
physicist um I'm think we'll find
entirely new physics that we couldn't
discover as human beings and solve the
entanglement problem andic Theory and
stuff once a physicist always a
physicist are you really a former
physicist do you not think about things
I'm just a bad physicist in the classic
term call it
former just like you with the with the
MD MD yeah yeah they never come to me
for anything you I do a two for one
appendix removal I'll take your both
your appendices
out so you know I think the idea of
Agents being able you know when you ask
a question uh of uh Google for or
whatever becomes I'm sorry Google for
great GPT 40 whatever is next and it can
spin up a multitude of Agents go do a
bunch of research in a bunch of
different areas and then come back with
Consolidated answer um that's a that is
a big deal it's a big deal and and Eric
Schmidt talked about this and I think
we're going to cover that the there it's
unbelievable I hate the term agentic AI
I just why I think that was pretty cool
I mean it sounds like a drug I to look I
had to look it up the first
time yeah why not just say agent based
um you know uh anyway that's just that's
just my biases or whatever real quick
I've been getting the most unusual
compliments on my skin truth is I use a
lotion every morning and every night
religiously called one skin it was
developed by for PhD women who
determined a 10 amino acid sequence that
is a cytic that kills scile cells in
your skin and this literally reverses
the age of your skin and I think it's
one of the most incredible products I
use it all the time uh if you're
interested check out the show notes I've
asked my team to link to it below all
right let's get back to the episode so
this is uh from the the co-founder of
zapier says AI language models have
stalled in the progress of AGI an
increasing scale will not help what is
inherently limited technology I'm not
going to play the video here but there
is a lot of conversation around will we
get to AGI right this is almost all
these things become religious in one
standpoint um there's a group of folks
who say no we're not going to get there
we don't have you know listen uh the the
uh Nvidia chips the the gpus the and the
current um uh the current large language
models generative Ai and the amount of
data just isn't enough and others like
are you kidding me we're we're already
there um I have a I have a little
insight that we that we did um that I'd
love to talk about here okay I'd love to
so I did a little short conversation
with hod Lipson who's an AI researcher
um um does has a lab at Colombia where
they build self- assembling robots with
recursive algorithms to figure out um
how um um robots can self-improve and
survive and and build in survival bias
Etc into the robots and he did something
really profound and he has an angle to
this that I think really is the more
most uh in-depth and clear that I've
ever seen around the question of AGI and
he basically said the self extent of
self-awareness of any being is the
ability to view it itself s in the
future like you and I are pretty good at
knowing thinking what we might look like
in 5 years or what life might be like in
5 years and we can contemplate that a
mosquito can't do that right a dog can
do it for like a few hours type of thing
so me like a dog can do it because it's
anticipating a walk or dinner or yeah it
can it has some concept of what modeling
itself into the future in the near
future in the near future in that case
we can look out
years basically use vector and he went
to Gemini in Chi PT and said how would
you view yourself in a few years and
apparently uh the question was shut down
completely by the AI there are
guardrails that have been put into these
AI models that essentially forbid the AI
from picturing itself in the future or
in the past okay and he thinks this is
deliberate that whole Vector where AI
seem to become sensient and freaked out
all the AI researchers and they shut it
down or this may be what happened at at
Chachi PT and now they've put guards and
you can't ask the question so uh uh go
try that out well of course I'm going to
go do that as soon we finish it course
but it's a really fascinating thing to
think about is that once you open up
that and somebody will because once you
have the open source models you can load
it up and and ask whatever question you
want once you get to that and an AI can
perceive itself or create a model of
itself in the future um H's uh
conclusion is that self-awareness comes
very rapidly after that and a sense of
self emerges very quickly that combined
with massive access to computation and
information changes the game completely
so that's there's something really
incredibly powerful that we should delve
a lot more into I love that idea so it
is true just going back to this it is
true that the the AGI models AI models
and llms have kind of stalled but I
think this is normal I remember that
conversation I had with Jeffrey Hinton
back in 2017 and I asked him what's the
next steps in Ai and he said we've
reached the end what we can do with deep
learning we need the next step and I we
don't know what that is and literally a
few months later the Transformer paper
was released I think we've now kind of
seven eight years later come to the
limitations and the boundary conditions
for llms and now we're going to go to
the next level and again we don't know
what that is but it's being birthed
right now I suspect uh Eric Schmidt um
love the man he's amazing he's been an
incredible benefactor the exerprise uh
and he's a uh a very expansive thinker
uh in the news this week a couple of
comments that he's made uh one about AI
models and one about whether Google is
losing the race with open Ai and why
let's talk about the uh what he said
this this uh week about what's coming up
next year uh SEL why don't you cover
that one I'll cover the uh the Google
yeah you know when you look at when you
look at how Evolution works right you
take half your genes from your mother
and half your genes from your father and
you cross it and then survival bias and
natural selection will pick the best
traits going forward and I think what's
Happening Here is we've developed these
different threads in Ai and in the case
of Eric he says we've got large contact
Windows agents and text action so we
take the kind of genetic capabilities
I'm using the for term loosely and now
you combine them the potential outputs
and the outcomes will be really powerful
and Incredibly uh uh uh incredibly
powerful and I think I'm incredibly
excited where AI goes with this yeah I
mean what could possibly go wrong I mean
so large context windows I mean just to
to dive into each of those elements here
we're talking about you know loading in
books and ultimately libraries movies
everything and having you know so one of
the future versions of AIS are AIS on on
your in your uh your employee team right
so you can imagine having AI agent who
steps in uh for marketing or design or
you know Tech and it
it reads
every email ever written inside your
organization it reads uh every slack
Channel and so on day one that AI
employee knows everything and is able to
hold all of that in context that's
incredible so for me this becomes like
the the slide rule to Excel spreadsheet
shift right uh every single employee
every single manager will have access to
multiple agents that has access and can
look at all the information in a firm
collectively and we'll just become
better decision-making engines again in
one vector but I think this is huge the
potential here is unbelievable and then
text to action is the fact that we're
you know AIS don't live uh in full
isolation there is a point now where you
can say your AI cook me dinner um you
know go and find this information go
physically you know clean this thing I
mean especially we'll talk about robots
in a little bit where robots become
extend you know physical extensions of
AIS in the world um the ability for AIS
to uh to have a gentic capabilities I
know you love that word well I think
once you have an AI that can program
right which we cross that Rubicon with
uh GPT 3 and four um you essentially
have the ability for any AI to impact
the real world yeah um because so many
of our devices are programmable devices
and we're essentially turning the world
into into information which they can
then be programmed and therefore uh
We've crossed that divide and now an AI
has true agency in terms of what it can
achieve in the physical world there's a
really important other piece of just to
be go here relating back to the other
one which is that when we talk about
intelligence um it turns out that the
need the evolution of intelligence was
almost completely the Adaptive need to
navigate in the physical world and so
again let's cover that more in the
robotics part but that's a huge uh
rationale for why Evolution created
intelligence in neor cortex St functions
in the first place all right let's talk
about this second one Google losing open
AI you know I've got to imagine that at
the executive conversations at Google
they're like WTF is going on here you
know how did we possibly get into this
situation well here's what uh Eric
thinks uh made them uh second tier to
open AI in some areas Google decided
that work life balance and going home
early and working from home was more
important than
winning and the startups the reason
startups work is because the people work
like hell and I'm sorry to be so blunt
but the fact of the matter is if you all
leave the university and go found a
company you're not going to let people
work from home and only come in one day
a week wow pretty damn spot-on and
ballsy of Eric to say that um and I
listen I know this is okay maybe we're
going to disagree on this right because
in the whole EXO model you know it's
like just distributed and all those
benefits but listen the companies that
I've seen I've invested in the companies
I've built when you're there in the
thick of it physically all together 7
days a week you got to believe that you
know I just went and and visited um uh
zipline um and I just did a podcast with
the with the CEO of zipline and when I
was physically there the energy right of
you know hundreds of people like
literally crammed into this office with
dashboards up on the walls you don't get
that virtually you don't get that kind
of energy that kind of Drive I mean it's
a new organ that comes out when I was at
figure uh with Brett Adcock you know the
team is there you know 700 a.m. to 900
p.m. every day just and they're excited
about what they're
building I don't know work from
home you know okay uh I think these are
two different topics that he's
conflating here and I I take the very
very big risk of disagreeing with Eric
which is one who was one of the smartest
and wisest people in the world um I
think the work from home versus physical
presence does have a factor and I
totally agree with you there right
there's an energy that comes from like
for example we just had a massive win at
open EXO and I can't I can't high five
anybody around me and there's a big loss
from that that connection that human
connection go straight back to the
comment we just had around um uh human
beings and being physically in mode we
you know year for years we thought
virtual conferences would take over real
conference says but people love the
scarcity of the human connection and
Conference inperson conferences are more
popular than ever so I completely get
the inperson versus remote work and the
difference there I disagree that that's
the reason that AI is open AI is beating
uh Google and I'll take you back to
Facebook Okay um Facebook beat Yahoo and
Myspace and Google Etc with this very
simple um organizational heris stick
which was Zuckerberg said to his
developers if you think your code is
ready to ship just go live on the live
site you better make sure you've tested
the hell out of it uh but but then the
the the developers had this unbelievable
sense of empowerment and they were like
wow the the trust he trusts us with this
amazing and they were putting out
features uh 10 times faster than Yahoo
or Myspace or Google okay uh it comes
down to organizational design the fact
that in Google if you talk to Google
employees today to try and get anything
done there so much bureaucracy it's
taking forever to do that's the thing
that's slowing it down I think he's
conflating those two things operating in
a big company today means you have these
control framework layers Etc and I've
got all sorts of War Stories from Yahoo
about this the the the reason Yahoo
failed was Terry seml by accident put in
a classic Matrix structure and manage
the company um and that structure is
great for uh um scaling and control but
it's terrible for taking risk and it's
terrible for Speed and if you're on the
consumer internet the two attributes you
better have are speed and risk you look
at Google and how much investment they
put into Google Plus uh they had all the
world's top researchers the product is
absolutely brilliant but all the
internal hurdles of having to navigate
should it connect with the YouTube ID
system and whatever basically by the
time they got through all of that
Facebook was gone and so this is the
issue I think is the internal
organizational design much much more so
than whe people coming in work I do I do
agree with you there right agility
agility always wins you know and and
we've studied this to death in the EXO
model right and I'll just C out this
little quick plug here we studied the
Fortune 100 and said okay um how many of
these use the EXO model or the
attributes in the model like autonomous
teams Community dashboards whatever um
and we found that in the fortune Run 100
over a 7-year period the companies that
followed the model the most delivered 40
times a shareholder returns and the
companies that followed the model the
least so really it comes down to the
organizational design as a main
heuristic for survival in the future in
the and and this is where companies will
end up following this structure because
we now have so much proof the more of
the model use the better you'll do so I
think I think the without realizing it
Eric is commenting on the organizational
structure of Google versus open AI being
comprised of small teams that are just
doing whatever the hell they want and
the sad thing of course you know we and
I discussed this with Eric when when he
was with us at at uh at abundance last
year at the abundance Summit was that
Google had a massive lead right in AI uh
ahead of everybody and was actually
being respectful and careful and not
putting it out before it was fully
tested and then when uh when Sam Alman
put out you know chat GPT it was like
okay gloves are off you know put on the
race sneakers let's go and and to give
them full credit they've responded
incredibly well Gemini is amazing what
it can do yeah I mean I don't want to
take anything away from Google I I they
are the drut I would still never bet
against them but uh they're they're
they've got uh they've got real
competition it's the curse of being a
big company the control Frameworks you
have to put in place prevent you from
being Nimble and today the name of the
game is being
Nimble uh for sure um let's talk about
this uh so uh our friend Imad mustak
previously CEO of uh open of openi
stability of stability puts out a paper
uh called how to think about AI um and
uh I did a podcast with him uh I think
Imad is pretty damn brilliant um and uh
it's a great paper uh we'll put the link
in the show notes to this podcast that I
think people uh should should read you
know I'm just going to point out a few
things uh he is still a believer that AI
is going to be creating as many or more
jobs than it's going to steal um he
talks about uh one of the ideas that was
discussed on the on the stage at
abundance last year of this AI Atlantis
uh imagining new continent is created of
a 100 million um AI researchers who work
for a few electrons uh versus pizzas
under the door uh and your ability to
get access to intelligence and use it um
is demonetizing and democratizing uh
around the world I know you had a chance
to look at this a little bit any
comments about what imods uh thoughts
are here um I I I'm in total accordance
with almost everything that imod said uh
I I've been on the soap box of AIS won't
take all the jobs very I'm very clear
about that I finally have a decent rale
around that by the way I'd like to hear
that so I was on part of a kind of an a
working group with Eric Bolson and a few
others on AI and employment right and
there was a really powerful framing that
I've not forgotten and they said look a
job is not just a job if you're like a a
customer service person uh it actually
you take that let's say you're a
financial adviser okay there's different
components of that that job that that
can be broken down into a set of actual
tasks uh and the task would be interface
with the customer uh do some research um
make investment decisions and act out on
those investment decisions etc etc well
an AI of say the 27 tasks that go into
being a financial adviser might automate
like 10 of them but it doesn't automate
the rest of them and so what happens is
a job doesn't you don't lose the job you
lose the tasks uh you automate the task
which makes you more powerful and you
spend more time on the other areas which
is human interaction action and uh
thinking about the future Etc and
therefore the reason AIS don't take all
the jobs is they're not covering the job
they're covering one specific task or
other even even AGI only covers specific
areas it'll increase but more and more
that's why uh you will have Amplified
jobs not job radical job loss except for
the areas where you're doing one thing
at a time if you were in the industrial
revolution a widget stamping a human
widget stamping out things on an
assembly that job went away because it
was one thing so that's my that I found
was the best framing I've seen for why
AI won't take over all the jobs so
listen I I do think that is the case
today that AI can do 80% but not 100% of
a job and therefore they're freeing up
people and and humans
do the whole job with the support of AIS
but I
have 100% confidence that AI will get to
a point where they can do 100% of the
job and from everything I've seen what I
used to think would be the hold out of
humanity that interpersonal relationship
the ability to be com uh compassionate
and um and you know understanding and
and patient and that human connection
holy I've seen AIS do a much better
job on that than than humans agree agree
but I think there's I I'll take you back
uh to the autonomous driving
conversation right okay we had
autonomous cars since the Google car in
2008 and we confidently predicted that
in a decade you'd have more than 20%
penetration of autonomous cars out in
the world Etc and the answer the reason
is that even in an autonomous car those
little edge cases of a bicyclist overt
taking another bicyclist and now you
have to kind of go wider because of that
or just avoiding potholes we can't do
there's all these edge cases that we
can't cover 100% of because human beings
are so good at adaptive uh physical
intelligence that a human a robot driver
can't cover all of that and is very far
away from that therefore we're very far
away from that domain I think we're
going to end up with the same par
Paradigm around this however to your
point I think what we'll do is reframe
what we mean by a job so that ASAS can
take more and more of it and therefore
the human being get squeezed over time
there's a lot um I really commend this
paper to everybody you could listen to
my podcast with emod on this subject but
if you haven't yet go and and and emod
tweeted the whole paper on his thing so
at emod if you want to go check it out
yeah uh for for sure you just have to
read it like four times to get your head
around it uh but it's but it's
beautifully written uh it's beautifully
written all right uh last subject on AI
before we go to uh other fun subjects uh
like neuralink and and robots uh I I
added this because I I think one of the
conversations that's not sufficiently
being discussed is the power
requirements of AI so today the US has
is generating about uh uh four uh
ter terawatt hours per year of energy
and if you look at energy I should have
put the the chart on here but if you
look at energy uh historically over the
last 20 years and our current predicted
growth in energy it's pretty flat the US
is not adding more
capacity um at the rate that it should
be uh China on the other side of the
equation has blown through the US it's
like tripled its total capacity on its
way to quadrupling its total capacity
India's been increasing and doubling um
and there's a uh there's an estimate
that by 2030
uh AI is going to require 100% of
today's US Energy grid
production um AI is a very hungry beast
and so we're going to need some new
sources of energy and uh uh the reason I
added this is I think you know
generation for nuclear is one of the
most important Technologies that's being
held back by public opinion and
regulation um I think it's super safe
and so China demonstrates first entirely
meltdown proof nuclear
reactor um that's you know incredible
it's like why not have nuclear energy
right we're going to have Fusion
eventually got it and solar is on the
increase but Gen 4 nuclear that is fail
safe meanings when it when it's fail
when it fails it's safely
contained I put this in my backyard how
about you what are your thoughts here um
I completely agree I think the whole
small nuclear and um milk proof nuclear
is the future uh to cover the Baseel
load until we generate enough battery
storage there were solar can take over
and other things um I I think what I
find powerful framing here is the same
conversation that's happened in Bitcoin
where people go oh my God Bitcoin
consumes the energy that Portugal uses
and therefore we should shut it down and
what's happening is we're finding all
sorts of like for example if you have a
hydroelectric dam in the far north of
Quebec it takes so long long for the
transmission thing you've lost the
energy by the time you get it 10 you
were useful therefore the dam the the
hydroelectric dams that's empty however
now you can put a Bitcoin facility next
to it and essentially turn that energy
into something useful and about 6 months
ago we cross
50% um Bitcoin mining by Renewables and
the next marginal 50% will be just the
next chunk will be all Renewables I
think the same thing will happen with AI
we'll start putting AI d centers in
thees or wherever
they a month ago I was in Kazakhstan and
there's a there's a valley in the east
of Kazakhstan where the wind just flows
and they've put a gigawatt Wind Farm
there it's so far it's not that useful
for anything but an AI Data Center and a
Bitcoin mining thing beautiful so I
think the when we think about the fact
that we have what 8,000 times more
energy hitting the Earth than we use
we'll just start tapping into that to do
all this and power all the other stuff
so I don't worry about energy at all
well I worry about it in the US if it
becomes the limiting factor for the us
being able to stay ahead in the energy
and the AI race I also worry about it
where if it's easier for large companies
to build coal plants or natural gas
plants um because they're not going to
stop right this is an allout AI war and
in Microsoft and Google and and meta
they're all all going to be uh just
buying as much energy as they possibly
can and uh if the answer because of
Regulation and because of ease of
paperwork is you know God forbid carbon
producing then you got a problem I think
the way the root commentary you're
making is the The Regulators in the US
need to take a very bold move here wake
up Regulators I think I think that's
absolutely correct everybody I want to
take a short break from our episode to
talk about a company that's very
important to me and could actually save
your life or the life of someone that
you love company is called Fountain life
and it's a company I started years ago
with Tony Robbins and a group of very
talented Physicians you know most of us
don't actually know what's going on
inside our body we're all optimists
until that day when you have a pain in
your side you go to the physician or the
emergency room and they say listen I'm
sorry to tell you this but you have this
stage three or four going on on and you
know it didn't start that morning it
probably was a problem that's been going
on for some time but because we never
look we don't find out so what we built
at Fountain life was the world's most
advanced diagnostic Centers we have four
across the us today and we're building
20 around the world these centers give
you a full body MRI a brain a brain
vasculature an AI enabled coronary CT
looking for soft plaque a dexa scan a a
gril blood cancer test a full executive
blood workup it's the most advanced
workup you'll ever receive 150 gigabytes
of data that then go to our AIS and our
physicians to find any disease at the
very beginning when it's solvable you're
going to find out eventually you might
as well find out when you can take
action Fountain life also has an entire
side of the Therapeutics we look around
the world for the most Advanced
Therapeutics that can add 10 20 healthy
years to your life and we provide them
to you at our centers so if this is of
interest to you please go and check it
out go to Fountain
life.com Peter when Tony and I wrote Our
New York Times bestseller life force we
had 30,000 people reached out to us for
Fountain life memberships if you go to
Fountain life.com Peter we'll put you to
the top of the list really it's
something that is um for me one of the
most important things I offer my entire
family the CEOs of my companies my
friends it's a chance to really add
decades onto our healthy lifespans go to
fountainlife
decomp it's one of the most important
things I can offer to you as one of my
listeners all right let's go back to our
episode all right let's go to one of our
favorite subjects and yours uh Bitcoin
use um you know do you still I mean
listen I remember you and I are on stage
at an ex prise event uh a few months ago
and like every other word was like buy
Bitcoin buy Bitcoin now we're not giving
Financial advice but buy
Bitcoin uh this one Morgan Stanley tells
wealth advisers they can pitch Bitcoin
ETFs in a first for a bank big Bank uh
fascinating right I wanted my mom who's
88 hi Mom good to see you um she watches
our podcast here and I said like you
know go tell your your uh you know
investment advisor to buy this ETF I
mean the ETFs were made so that it's
super easy to own Bitcoin and back when
we were talking about this I don't know
when it was uh uh when I was talking to
her about this eight months ago it was
like no we can't we can't sell you that
and like huh that's so strange now it's
going to be pushed
thoughts uh totally agree I give a I
give a talk to one of the biggest
financial planning groups in the world
that has about 10,000 financial advisers
I was saying so what's your Bitcoin
strategy and they're like oh uh we don't
allow our financial advisors to talk
about Bitcoin to their clients at all
and the financial advisers are like are
you kidding the our clients are asking
us about Bitcoin and we're not allowed
to answer you're killing us um why
because the regulatory risk they have of
they're worried that if somebody gives
Financial advice on bitcoin and it's not
an approved method of any kind by
whatever they face legal exposure so
they've shut down that conversation
again going back to mindset and
Regulatory similar to the nuclear
conversation I think there's an
underlying driver here that just makes
this inexurable which is the fact that
Jeff Booth's observation that um he
wrote a book called the price of
tomorrow that you should all go read and
he in the book he basically shows that
over the last 50 years every dollar
increase in global GDP has come from a
with a $ four increase in global debt so
we're growing the global economy with
debt and you can't it's structural you
can't pay back you can't just write it
off soing thees end well it does not end
well and look at the debt in the US
right now we're creating a trillion
dollars of debt every hundred days or so
um and we're now paying more interest on
the US debt um than we than the US
spends on its military okay that is a
pretty ridiculous comment and it's not
slowing down there's no mechanism this
is the problem with democracies there's
no mechanism to look down the line and
go hey we got to stop doing this uh and
so so this is a huge issue across
parties and nobody's looking at it you
don't hear it mentioned in the in the in
the political debates at all and this is
a massive problem the escape hatch
between uh that world and the ETFs
connecting to Bitcoin now gives a uh a
kind of an atomic bomb lifeline and a
shelter where people can escape through
that into the Bitcoin World which is why
we're all so optimistic about Bitcoin uh
the the recent drop by the way for
people that are track in it there was a
huge drop it turned out Germany sold a
massive chunk at the same time that
mount gaau was paying back a bunch of
their folks and there so a huge amount
of Bitcoin got liquidated this is the
best buying opportunity ever I remember
Michael sailor's comment that you get
Bitcoin at the price you
deserve yes really and S you know I want
to give you credit here because you're
on the stage I I can physic I just so in
detail remember you at our uh
Singularity executive program uh
2012 uh thereabouts you're on stage to
the to the room you know I just gotten
off talking about 6ds or whatever and
you step on you say have you heard about
this thing called Bitcoin and you start
talking about Bitcoin I'm going what the
hell is this Bitcoin you know we we have
um uh it's important to look back at the
history here just for a second when
Bitcoin came out in 2009 a lot of people
kind of just ignored it even though they
were deeply um excited about digital
currencies why because there had been so
many attempts in the past that had
failed right yeah and so they everybody
watched for a while myself included uh
I've watched Bitcoin go from 5 cents of
Bitcoin to 50 cents of Bitcoin to $5 of
Bitcoin to $50 of Bitcoin and how how
much higher could it possibly go yeah
and then at $500 of Bitcoin it's a hard
emotional choice to make when you knew
it was 5 cents Bitcoin that's a really
big thing to cross and I remember
finally buying a few at that at that
level um the the uh there are two types
of people that come up to me from those
days the ones that listened and bought
Bitcoin and they're hugely grateful and
the ones are like I wish I'd
listened and bought Bitcoin and it's
completely binary around that so I think
there's there's this is just one of
those things where you I think the way
Michael sailor put it was really best he
said go spend 100 hours researching
Bitcoin and then if you don't like it
come back to me with some Salient points
and we'll have a conversation yeah so
and nobody does you know it's
interesting I look at one of my largest
Holdings um if not the largest uh
holding outside of of real estate is is
Bitcoin and so when it drops from
$70,000 to
$50,000 you know the first reaction of
the amydala and the animal brain is holy
 run and hide right and and there's
got to be a judo move here for those who
are Bitcoin Believers to say oh my God
time to buy right and so sailor is there
and um you know I think I'm there at
this point too uh you know I was a great
there's a great meme um uh of a cartoon
where someone said you know Dad was it
true that Bitcoin was below $100,000 in
your day you know that's that's
wonderful yeah I actually look forward
with Glee when it drops because I'm
thinking oh I could buy some more I just
told many spare cash to do that but but
I do get this burst of oh my God I wish
I could buy some more so the big news
here has been uh a conversation by at
least two of the three presidential
candidates about the idea of holding
Bitcoin in treasury of the United States
let alone what micro strategies is doing
is putting Bitcoin in treasury for its
stock which has played incredibly well
right micro strategies is you know one
of the top performing stocks in the S&amp;P
um do you know so we've talked about
this right the 6ds you know when you
digitize something uh it's deceptive and
then disruptive it dematerializes
demonetizes
democratizes and uh the phases of
Bitcoin it went from the early
entrepreneur to you know uh high-end
entrepreneurs uh to
institutions and you know will we see
governments uh so what's your prediction
on when a we're seeing governments right
now but when the US might do this I
think I don't know about the US just
because the the the US dollar is so
fundamentally important to us hegemony
around the world that making a major
move in Bitcoin would would have a huge
impact on the dollar so maybe
stabilizing it uh maybe maybe people
have confidence that I think it's one
powerful way for the US to deal with its
debt is to just hedge it but if I was
the US I'd do it quite not talk about it
because that and that's what I think is
happening right now I think what's
happening is you you have to recognize
that after micro strategies and after El
Salvador took on bitcoin as its Reserve
currency that every CFO in the world of
a public company and every uh um a
sovereign wealth fund is looking at this
going ha I need to be thinking that
taking that into account and for those
of us that are bullish on bitcoin if 1%
of the fortune 1000 put 1% % of their
treasury into Bitcoin that would make it
the same price of as the price of gold
which is roughly a million dollars of
Bitcoin so yeah if you do the math the
more the adoption takes place and note
that in 15 years now people have not
figure out a way of hacking Bitcoin
right um the Satoshi wallet has $60
billion worth of bitcoin and you got to
see that you think there's a lot of
people trying to get into that wallet
and nobody's Managed IT yeah there's you
it's it's the greatest treasure hunt
ever um I I I don't think it's any
technology risk uh and I'm you know at
99.99% shity but the only question
becomes is there political risk right I
remember having a conversation with an a
minister from a foreign Nation having
dinner with I wouldn't say who it was
and they're like your government really
wants to shut down Bitcoin I mean in
terms of this current Administration
right so we have gentler and all of that
I want talk more about it but um
uh I I can answer that very easily
please it goes back to if you shut down
bitco you know when I send you Bitcoin
I'm sending you a string of text and
numbers how you interpret that string of
text and numbers have be is up to you so
it turns out in the US specifically
Bitcoin is protected by First Amendment
there's a strong legal case around this
there's a great anecdote around pgp if
you know that story yeah right should I
recount that for folks uh up to you I
mean it's really it's really important
one especially if you think of Bitcoin
in the US so pretty good privacy was an
Email encryption that was invented in
the in the late '90s if I remember it
right and um the US uh Department of
Defense desperately tried to stop the
propagation of pgp into the world
because then they wouldn't be able to
read emails globally um which of course
they wanted to do um and the pgp
creators were like well everybody should
have this why should it just be
restricted this so the dod put a a full
restriction saying itar regulations you
are absolutely forbidden to export those
so they looked at and said H okay what
do we do so what they did was they
printed the source code for pgp on piece
onto paper faxed it to the UK which then
ocred the code and were able to recreate
Bitcoin Department of Defense took them
to court and and the court said First
Amendment pal you can't stop people from
excting opinion so there's a really
strong precedent on First Amendment and
then property rights anywhere that has
property rights you cannot stop Bitcoin
from propagating so there's some very
compelling argum arguments to especially
in the US but globally anywhere where
you have property rights of any
reasonable level you won't be able to
stop it you're trying to slow it down
onramps off ramps Etc but they're not
going to be able to stop it I just did a
a great another podcast with B Bill
baright uh the head of Abra um which
again people go listen to it it's that's
you know how where I hold my Bitcoin
where do you hold your Bitcoin right now
uh I do self uh stodal on a stick and a
few other metrics does you like does you
do you pucker really hard when you pull
out that stick to go and do something
with it well it's it's really what you
do with the keywords and how do you
secure those yeah because the stick is
is thing but you know this is this is
the great thing about capitalism right
safe custodial models like Abra will
appear and people move to the swan is
another one that's really good at this
so there'll be a whole bunch of there's
so much economic incentive for helping
people with that problem the equivalent
of a digital uh Bank safety deposit box
is a really powerful one do you want to
give your nonfinancial advice that you
gave at X prise here which was oh uh
non-financial advice would be take 10%
of your of your net worth uh at the
minimum and put it into Bitcoin and
close your eyes for 10 years if you can
is it true that you pulled out a morgage
on your house and bought bought Bitcoin
well we sold a house yeah and my
condition with Lily to selling the house
so I want to be able to put a big chunk
of that into Bitcoin so uh Bitcoin is
almost about the equivalent of my real
estate holdings
yeah all right uh I'm excited for us to
keep this conversation in future months
let's talk about neurolink
news um Elon has his second implant uh
and it talks about human AI coms and
this is one of the conversations that
took place a little bit at at abundance
the past year is about the idea that if
Ai and humans are going to link up or
will AI take off without humans let's
listen to uh to Elon for a moment the
long-term aspiration of neuralink is to
improve the AI human
symbiosis um by increasing the the
bandwidth of the
communication because if even if in the
most benign scenario of AI
you have to
consider that the a is simply going to
get bored waiting for you to sped out a
few
Woods I mean if the AI can communicate
at terabits per second and you're
communicating at you know bits per
second it's like to to a tree okay so
first of all if we can communicate at
you know at kilobits per second or
megabits per second and it's
communicating at terabits per second and
still can get a board um do you remember
the movie her I just rewatched it and
there's a point at which the uh uh the
star of the movie is talking to uh to
his Ai and uh he finally gets the idea
that it's not a monogamous relationship
and he goes how many people are you
talking to right now and she goes um
8,736 or something like that and I find
that fascinating well this is the whole
bandwidth issue right I think that movie
if you haven't watched the movie Her R
please do go do go watch it is probably
the best framing we've seen on The
Realistic outcome of AI uh CU Hollywood
tends to always portray it as the Matrix
the Terminator uh the the whatever and
the robot overlords trick over the world
and if you're lucky you're pets and if
we're unlucky we're food it always goes
that way and but the reality is much
more likely that an AI evolves so
quickly past us they look at us as ants
and go you know you're a little one
liter brain in your head
vitalic accepted is not just not
interesting enough to to talk to I'm
talking to millions of AIS in par it
takes off it goes have a nice life nice
life thanks for all the fish thanks for
all the fish and I think that's the most
likely outcome which I'm kind of okay
with you know if that's the progression
of Life uh that's kind of okay but I
think what Elon is doing around this is
really really important and the the next
conversation around bandwidth is
critical yeah I mean right now we
communicate uh when you and I are
speaking um what what is it bits per uh
per second is it is it per second BPS
yeah no I know but it's like is it 40
bits second single digits I mean four
bits per second yeah it's it's not a lot
and and you think about the megabits and
gigabits that we have on our networks
there's no comparison yeah so uh here we
go uh think about this you're typing on
a keyboard right I mean is literally
that's about as fast as we can do it is
there's not a lot of bits per second um
and it's shockingly slow uh let's hear
Elon about uh making it faster years
it's going to be gigantic um because
we'll increase the number of electrodes
dramatically um we'll improve the signal
processing so you know we with with uh
even with only roughly I don't know 10
15% of the electrodes working with uh
with Nolan with our first patient we
were able to get to achieve a bits per
second that's twice the world record so
I think we'll we'll we'll start like
vastly exceeding the world record by
orders of magnitude in the years come so
it's like getting to I don't know 100
bits per second th you know
maybe maybe if like 5 years from now we
might be at a
megabit like faster than any human could
possibly
communicate uh by typing
speaking um obviously if we I find that
compelling right I mean I want as much
as
possible uh so let me ask you the
question here selem um they open up
neural links to the general public uh
are you are you like get me one baby as
soon as possible no um you're not no I
I'll tell you why so I go back to the so
I'll tell you why I'm incredbly excited
about this and why I'm like okay come on
let's they don't have to even shave your
head they could just go straight
in um the the USB port on the side of
the head is you know that's that kind of
old dream I think the the reason that it
requires physical intervention is a
tough one because our phones evolve much
faster than any implant would evolve if
you put it in right so there's that uh
you'd have to have this like deep thing
going into your brain which is fine once
it gets to I just don't want to be the
first test subject in that in that model
but I didn't say test subject I said
it's you know the FDA has approved it
it's commercially available now are you
going to get one I I would wait a little
I'm always weirdly I'm a late adopter in
new hack new technologies I'm always two
two phones behind everybody else just
because I'm I'm I use it so materially
that I can't afford to be at the
bleeding edge and have some stuff work
or lose things Etc so that's just me
personally but the I think why I'm
excited and why I'm eh on this I I'm
incredibly excited at the general
conversation of increasing output of the
human brain that's a really powerful
Framing and I think it's I love the
first principal thinking that Elon
brings to the table on any of these
conversations that brings everybody's
thinking up to that level and then you
have to think in that way and the fact
that he's without realizing it coaching
tens of millions of entrepreneurs around
the world to think in this way because
he does is incredibly exciting for the
future here's where I get a little bit
more if you think about it he he kind of
makes this comment in this clip that we
put out x amount of roughly a bit per
per second is the our output if you
average it across the day but you know
we just talked about why in person is so
important because when you're in person
face to face with some there's a ton
more happening than just my
communication patterns back and forth
there's the pheromones we're putting out
there's our body language there's visual
cues there's all sorts of verbal
tonality that goes along there's a ton
of band
occurring between two people uh on a
conversation much much more than just
the pure bits per second being output by
the brain but you know you know as well
as I do that all of that
information is being converted to
neuronal signals it is and your brain is
only able to process a small number so
as we're having this conversation you
know there's traffic noise going on
outside there's air conditioning comes
on and we don't notice that because I'm
focused on the wisdom that s missil is
is is uh speaking to me about right now
yes um and so there's no there's no
reason why uh in fact in AI can actually
pay attention to all of it agree do pre
do
pre-processing and share with me the
most inform important information
because I'm ignoring
99.9% of the information coming to me
right now and I I have an atttention
focus on what I think is important and
it may not actually be
important or there may be other
important information that I'm missing
my my point is that we have all sorts of
mechanisms to do that for us in many
cases so I'll give you a small example
um you and I both follow a few thousand
people on Twitter or X and then those
folks we found curate the information
out on the web and news stories and
breaking Tech news in a powerful way and
that pre it's that's a pre-processing it
filters down for us right so we do a
pretty good job of that an AI would do
an incrementally better job but not a
game-changing better job at that um if
I'm sitting in front of a person all the
signals that I get are are useful about
the world but it's not you know the the
fact that in might be able to look at
the signals of 10,000 people in a room
in a big conference and get some sense
of that uh but it's not probably going
to affect my decision making on a moment
by moment basis right where I think I
let me flip it around tell you why I'm
excited if you can increase the
bandwidth levels and then have brains
interfacing more powerfully the
potential I think it'll reshape our
brains unbelievably powerfully is a
mechanism for we need a if I had to wave
a wand and fix a Human Being Human
Beings globally as a species I would
basically find a way of cutting out the
amydala right you talk about this it's
it's constantly scanning for bad news
and danger and it takes over the rest of
the brain and floods it with cortisol
every time it perceives that it's a
completely useless device for today's
world because the amount of time we're
in actual physical danger is seconds out
of a year and so let let me give you a
broad so much potential to that if we
have the ability to to to interact with
high brandwidth we could actually then
emphasize the neocortex and and of of
more processing power at a rational
level and diminish the impact of the of
the the the igdal on us so R so I agree
with you and we can go broader than that
right the amydala is just your
negativity bias where you pay more
attention 10 times more attention
negative news and positive news but we
have all these other cognitive biases
right there's a familiarity bias there
is a recency bias all of these things
it's like we suffer from positivity bias
we we do we do though I think that's
unbiased but that's a different story um
but imagine you're having AI That's able
to uh to tell you listen um that that's
not actually true um you have this piece
of information from 6 months ago which
counter veils that and let me bring that
forward so in other words uh you know
human bias alert we can call it
alert but human bias alert I think AI
could play an incredibly good role
because the reason we have cognitive
biases is because the human brain cannot
process all the information being thrown
at it so we we take these shortcuts yeah
okay so a visual is coming to me okay
okay imagine I have a a headset display
and I'm walk around the world doing
whatever and I'm buying a a a a bar of
chocolate and an AI is scanning my brain
and proly bringing out these are the
biases you're operating under right now
these the cognitive biases that are
forcing and just having that feedback
loop of knowing what biases are I play
at any given point would be incredibly
powerful and give me a feedback loop
because this is where I think things
become really exciting is the recursive
feedback loop when you know what you're
thinking and why you're thinking
something that allows you then to
reshape how you're thinking this is the
whole basis
behind and and but we're so limited
right now by this you know you know two
and a half kilogram you know unit above
14 watts of power I just I just can't
wait to uh to plug in and expand beyond
that but you know that's me I I'm going
to throw one more little thing in this
okay okay you know just just you know
I've done a lot of mindfulness
meditation VNA where you sit and you
just be aware of what's happening in
your body just imagine that I could be
fully aware of all the activity in every
cell in my hands right now and I could
be fully cognizant the excitment and
energy around every cell in your body
which has its own many many sub
universes 40 trillion cells a billion
chemical reactions per second just that
is a profound thought in terms of could
I just contemplate that more profound L
forget interfaces elsewhere etc etc so
there's unbelievable without psychedelic
drugs they give us a shortcut to what's
possible and I think there's the the
ability to contemplate a broader with
broader bandwidth The Unbelievable
reality we live in is amazing all right
let's go to Elon again on uh on patients
outperforming Gamers we feel pretty
confident that
um I think maybe within the next year or
two that someone with a neuralink
implant will be able to outperform um a
Pro
Gamer nice uh because the reaction time
would be faster you know uh what's
fascinating I remember when I did a uh a
long form conversation with Elon after
we announced the $100 million uh musk
carbon prize I was asking him about the
first neuralink patient which was a
chimp um a m you know was it was
chimpanzee um called pager and it was
playing pong and uh I said did you play
against pager and he said yes and I said
who won uh and uh I think Pedro won but
I think Elon may have said he did I
don't know well uh but it's fascinating
uh that we're going to get there you
know the Olympics are looking at Esports
as an Olympic game um and we're going to
you know question is you be able to be
enhanced when you're playing those games
I that will be that'll be fascinating I
mean this is a long Trend right which I
think you know we have really good
evidence today that the best leadership
skills in the world are taught if you
play World of
Warcraft so do you let your son play
World of Warcraft not yet because he's I
think he's too young and he probably
plays that stuff with he plays half of
that stuff without telling me anyway um
the but I think the opportunity to
really really develop uh powerful skill
deep human skills using this capability
is massive I you know when you talk
about AI beating uh the pro Gamers Etc
that's great but we've seen that in
chess right and we know the outcome what
happens it it just Chang the difference
here is you know again directly from
from the neocortex and and these are a
lot of these are twitch games a lot of
these are Reaction Time games right and
so when the reaction time is minimized
um because you're going straight you
know input output I mean it's you know I
I I don't know is that cheating um it is
to some extent it's just doing things
better and differently Gamers spend a
ton of money buying a like a mouse that
is connected directly into the
motherboard so that they have that few
micro seconds Advantage um uh uh for me
it's eh for a lot of this but the the
general concept of interacting with the
the brain
and having a broader bandwidth to
process do signal processing is
incredible here's our last slide here
and I think this is the numbers folks
take away uh so prior to neuralink the
world record for a human using a device
is somewhere around 4.2 to 4.6 bits per
second um Nolan is at 8.5 and we heard
Elon in the previous video talk about
going to megabit you know when I think
about the notion that there's nothing
more
important um for a company or for a
nation than it's cumulative
intelligence um right the ability of a
company to uh perform its
Mission um is a function of you know per
capita intelligence I think maybe you
disagree with that I disagree with that
okay tell me where you come from I I'm
going to bring out my EXO bias here a
huge amount has to do with how it's
organized
right if you have all of the most power
let assume they're organized identical
but one group is more intelligent than
the other yeah of course that's going to
do better but but the better
organization always beats bandwidth um
and brain power but okay but both been
given a choice take both here you can
you can do both but I think there's so
much uh mileage to be gained by just
organizing better and not being top down
uh command controlled slow decision-
making that's what limits intelligence
the for example the basic intelligence
in any institution take the nuclear
energy discussion we were having earlier
the that limitation is not a function of
intelligence it's a function of the
ability to execute and recognize we need
a different framework for doing
something and operating from a different
model in a different framework it's the
changing of models that's hard you just
made my point right which is you know
intelligence and Regulators
different different conversation
Different Page different motivations
it's an it's an it's it's a motivational
alignment problem more than anything
else did you see the movie Oppenheimer
if you did did you know that besides
building the atomic bomb at Los Alamos
National Labs that they spent billions
on biod defense weapons the ability to
accurately detect viruses and microbes
by reading their RNA well a company
called viome exclusively licensed the
technology from Los Alamos labs to build
a platform that can measure your
microbiome and the RNA in your blood now
viome has a product that I've personally
used for years called full body
intelligence which collects a few drops
of your blood spit and stool and can
tell you so much about your health
they've tested over 700,000 individuals
and use their AI models to deliver
members critical Health guidance like
what foods you should eat what foods you
shouldn't eat as well as your
supplements and probiotics your
biological age and other deep health
insights and the results of the
recommendations are nothing short of
Stellar you know as reported in the
American Journal of Lifestyle medicine
after just 6 months of following biomes
recommendations members reported the
following a 36% reduction in depression
a 40% reduction in anxiety a 30%
reduction in diabetes and a 48%
reduction in IBS listen I've been using
viome for 3 years I know that my oral
and gut health is one of my highest
priorities
best of all viome is Affordable which is
part of my mission to democratize health
if you want to join me on this journey
go to vi.com Peter I've asked naven Jane
a friend of mine who's the founder and
CEO of viome to give my listeners a
special discount you'll find it at
vom.com
Peter let's talk about robotic news next
have we jump into that all right let's
go to robot all right so um so we're
seeing a lot uh in the world uh if I
think about the robotics right now we
talked about this uh again at the at the
abon summit there are like 30
well-funded
humanoid robot companies on the planet
um Optimus and figure are you know Tesla
their robots called Optimus and figure
Brett adcock's company um just release
figure 2 we'll talk about that in a
minute are the top two in the US and
there's a whole bunch in China because
China needs um robots um let's listen to
a quick note from from Elon on the
numbers the size of the market and then
we'll talk about uh this in more detail
the The Optimist numbers are like
they're really just they're like so
mind-blowing that you're like is this is
this real but because I I actually think
the market for humanoid robots is in
excess of 10 billion units like more
more than the number of humans um
because people will each want one and
then there'll be others that are
involved in industry and stuff so if
they do sell for $220,000 uh that's $200
trillion this is just a insane insane
number that's why I like I wonder what
does money even mean at that point you
know what does money even mean at that
point so so uh selem um uh the numbers
here to reflect on uh and I I got these
exact same numbers from Brett Adcock
when I did a podcast with him recently
uh $20,000 a unit that's what the price
sort of converges on and uh that's like
$100 a month if you're going to lease it
and uh you know 10 billion of them in
the world well I think again have I like
going to the extremes and just
considering both sides of this I think
at one level it's incredibly exciting
the best Framing and um metaphor of
robots comes from the AI conversation
with emod where he goes when you have a
bunch of if you're the head chef and you
have a bunch of Sue chefs organizing
everything before you you become way
more creative you execute way faster cuz
like in right now if I had an a sue Chef
AI in the kitchen and I want to make a
really complicated Indian recipe um uh I
like I spent a huge amount of time
Gathering all the freaking ingredients
just that would be a huge Game Changer
in terms of my ability to be a great
chef right so I think this is where
robots are able to do amazing things uh
over time um I I but I think the entire
economics numbers become irrelevant just
because the change in productivity is
such a GameChanger none of our numbers
in terms of GDP or something can match
what's economics economics are so broken
right I mean a GDP uh is a function of
the number of people working and the
amount of technology and the amount of
energy they have access to and all those
things and all those things are you know
infinitely it's worse than it's worse
than it's it's actually terrible because
it doesn't take account deflation so if
I we spend half a million dollars per
breast cancer patient in the US on
average right if you have the ability to
detect wax cancer early and save all
those lives GDP actually goes
down so that's not a great GDP is a
terrible metric for success of the human
race in the future it's just the best
one we've come up with that's easily
measurable uh for the future so this is
an important point where technology
becomes deflationary and we have to
navigate that for the future but that's
again a whole other conversation I'm
going to play this in the background as
we're talking about this is uh figure
two from uh from a company called Figure
AI uh and you know I went and visited
his plant and uh and on the podcast with
Brett he shows us a little bit inside
and it's it's a beautiful uh robot I
actually saw uh designs for figure three
as well which take this yet to another
level of of view
um and I don't know I I think that uh uh
we're going to see these every place um
uh and and so you know we've had the
argument about you said why do they have
to look like humans I think they're
going to look like humans because that's
the world we live in and they are
multi-purpose and you know was my
conversation with Brett who you know he
just raised like $700 million um uh from
open Ai and Microsoft and Nvidia and
Jeff Bezos and Incredibly you know what
makes this possible is the multimodal AI
where you're going to just talk to
robots and tell them to go do things for
you
H he made a he made a point let me make
one other thing he made a point that I
think is really important and I would
love your your reflection on this the
point that Brett made was listen as we
head towards AGI or digital super
intelligence we need robots otherwise
these AIS are going to be asking us to
do their bidding and that's going a
pretty pretty depressing
future uh okay so very valid point I
still sit on the uh cautious and
pessimistic side on this going back to
the autonomous driving mode I'll give
you one other triangulation on that
which is the Roomba vacuum cleaner robot
um people we you know everybody got
really excited about those and they're
terrible because you have to move
everything for you for the robot and now
you're doing the work of the robot which
is exactly the point that you just made
right everything you do is servicing so
the robot can do and you spend more time
rearranging the room so the robot can do
its thing than if you just vacuum the
place in the first place but these
humanoid robots will
will yeah the vacuum cleaner but I think
that that those small nuances will take
a lot longer to to to work in there than
we think we're going get really excited
about this by the way way is the hive
mind capability that these robots that I
think will be very exciting yeah I'm
going to skip the Nvidia uh robot slide
other than to say you know every company
out there is in some way shape or form
uh looking at working with with robotics
open ai's got other projects uh Google's
got its projects and we're going to see
robots you know I just
tweeted um that
um damn it I posted not tweeted I posted
um give me a damn verb Elon please I I I
posted that uh CES this year uh we're
going to see a ton of robots but
everything is going to be talking to you
right everything is going to be
generative AI enabled they can see you
and talk to you and that's going to be
just you know sort of uh Improvement
dour at CES this year I think it'll be
hugely amazing I I'm if there there's
not often I kind of feel tempted to go
to the chaos in Jungle that is CES but
this might be a year to go
yeah amazing we'll go to our last
subject here which is biotech and other
cool stuff uh this was a um article that
came out um and uh there's a particular
uh uh genetic variation that was found
um that increased lifespan in mice um
and by 25% and uh I think what makes
this interesting is it's actually in
human trials as well I I think what I
want to point out by this slide is that
we're we're continuing to find things
that are extending human lifespan or
extending uh mamalian lifespan uh and
that uh we're just at the beginning of
this journey uh it's still early games
here how long do you want to live how
long do I want to live uh you know I'm I
uh I've there's a big metaphysical
conversation that we don't want to get
into here about um living forever etc
etc I I think the best framing is uh
having a great health span which you
talk about a lot right is that's a
really important one because having a a
a vibrant life as opposed to just a long
life is really really a key success
factor um I think the world is so godamn
amazing I would like to be around for a
while long enough to see this massive
transition that we're going through
which um you know I I say this often I
think the next 30 Years is going to
drive the next several centuries of
human Humanity I think it's and how do
we navigate The Mad Max versus Star Trek
Futures that we have uh is going to be
really really uh interesting and
critical and it's just we you know goes
back to your comment about we must be in
a simulation because it's too just too
goddamn interesting today to be around
mean we're at the 99th level of the game
I mean to look at it that way right it's
like it would the the we are about to
evolve into something new it's like that
line from 2001 to Space Odyssey which I
can't remember but uh but it's like you
know the future is just unbelievably on
inspiring it's the singularity by the
way can I ask you a cool question I know
Ray keeps on holding to the singularity
date of like 2045 I mean that seems like
really if we've got like digital super
intelligence by 2030 don't you think
it's going to move a little faster than
2045 you know what's up with that I'm
right now plowing through the
singularity as nearer yeah I just
finished it um and what I'm struck by as
far as I've got into it is a The
Unbelievable pressence of his commentary
from 20 30 40 50 years ago this just
blows your mind um who is this man I
mean he can't be human to be making
these kind of comments uh that's one
observation the second observation is I
notice he changes what the singular
ideas to talk about more as a metaphor
than a real thing which I think is the
right way of framing it it's a great
metaphor for the fact that we just can't
predict past a certain Event Horizon and
let's just live with the fact that we
can't predict but in that in that Cas we
have we have serial
singularities oh I always we always
talked about this at Singularity
University where there's there's
non-stop small s's happening all the
time the iPhone arriving was a
singularity right uh Bitcoin was a
singularity other words that you
couldn't predict call it you couldn't
predict U you call it asteroid impacts I
call it Gutenberg moments there's black
swans there's just an increasing
frequency of those happening at an at a
at a ridiculous level that's going to
just change everything we do and how we
do it um going forward and the ability
to absorb that in on it and then make
sense of it is the biggest intelligence
quotient we're going to need we're going
to have to have over the next decade and
two yep I agreed but I
mean I think of a a AI
Singularity uh coming where I can't
predict what's coming after a I think
that's already there in my open EXO
world we have a subc community of about
600 folks focused just on AI and they
meet weekly just to try and process what
happened this week in Ai and and try and
make sense of it I mean it's just it's
the I would say that we've hit the
singularity already in AI the pace of
Chang is faster than we can even talk
about it or recognize it and and make
sense of
it yep I I I get it all right let's go
on um I think one of our last slides
here uh life bio is a company that David
Sinclair had started and you know David
made history when he showed that
epigenetic reprogramming using three out
of the four yamanaka factors was able to
bring back um the uh earlier state of
Youth of cells in particular it was in
the optic
nerve uh this is uh uh Dr Sharon I'm not
going to uh Rosen weig Lipson uh who's
the chief science officer uh for life
bio at at for David's company let's
quick take a quick listen here what
we're doing is we're building on the
work of Dr David Sinclair where he
identified that you only need three of
the amanaka factors A4 sock 2 and
kf4 which allows you to not take a all
the way back to a stem cell state but
rather to make a more youthful version
of itself so we do it in a in our
version of it is an
er100 so er100 is a two Vector system
okay so we have two vectors and it
allows us to use a Teton docs inducible
system short short form it means we can
control it hoping to be in the clinic in
2025 so the the point here which is
pretty amazing is that in the clinic
means for humans and we're using
epigenetic re you know age reversal in
humans in particular I think they're
going to be doing it for uh for a number
of uh eye related diseases and blindness
reversal but they're in primates right
now and it's working um and I just want
people to get excited about the future
in terms of uh you know age slowing
stopping perhaps reversing
aging and God knows there's a lot of
implications I the broader implications
you know what do we do with pension
plans and unemployment benefits you know
all that stuff is is is kind of struct
the structural changes just coming from
Life Extension or or un unbelievable uh
but I'm really really excited about this
I know you spend a huge amount of your
time now on the longevity stuff and and
you're kind of doing an unbelievable job
of popularizing it and and getting
people used to the conversation right I
think that's the hard the key part this
is you want to talk about singularities
uh breaking through the Aging stuff is
something that we've not really been
able to do as a human species in any
really meaningful way for our entire
4 billion year history of Earth and now
all of a sudden we're hitting this point
where we can completely change the game
of biology it's amazing yeah all right
last subject here for today Life on Mars
so uh uh we saw some data come back from
NASA's uh perseverance Rover uh which is
you know cruising around getting data
what it did was it found a particular
rock that in that rock uh were three
elements that were critical first it
found water in the Rock second um it
found organic compounds that were part
of life and precursors and then it found
evidence for chemical energy sources in
the Rock and when you have those three
things together uh typically that spells
life I just saw this morning an article
that uh that they also found liquid
water on the surface of Mars so you know
I'm excited about two three things
number one
the notion that I think there is life on
Mars today um it's microbial it's
subsurface uh it's in the permafrost in
the water um and just finding life on
another planet just changes everything
the second thing is go ahead the second
thing is going to be interesting is
there is a theory that because Mars
cooled first because it's further from
the Sun uh that life evolved on Mars
first and there's an exchange of
material between Mars and Earth as
asteroids um strike the Martian surface
the ejecta reaches escape velocity and
so it's going to be interesting if we
find Life on Mars and compare it to life
on Earth did it originate on Mars
first um and then there's the whole
panspermia model which is life you know
evolved elsewhere in the universe and
it's just floating through space and it
seeds planets as it intersects all right
now over your wisdom well I mean there's
no question in my mind of the pens
spermia model being the real one because
we found tardigrades can survive in
space where they should there's
absolutely no reason that that um a life
form should be able to survive in space
if it originated in Earth and yet here
we have them so this it's pretty clear
that life has evolved and many many many
many places it goes to the whole um
Drake Equation which we don't need to
get into right now but if you want to
check out but the the the reality of uh
life being pervasive around the earth it
the only then question is what how do we
answer the FY Paradox which I think we
have a reasonably good uh response F
Paradox is being there must be life all
over the goddamn Universe why haven't we
seen aliens where the hell are they why
they come to why Haven they brought me
home yet and the best model the answer
I've heard is the transcension
hypothesis by John smart you get to
Virtual Tech reality technology and you
can simulate anything so you go inward
rather than trying to go outward cuz
it's just too hard physically to go
outward I do that reality this is not
surprising I'm just thankful that we've
actually found it so that we can shut
down all the religious
idiots sorry just to be clear that
article doesn't say we found we found
the precursors for it I know but but one
of the big questions in everybody thing
is where's the primordial oo that we
think we've seen and here we have it on
another planet so little by little we're
filling in the gaps of how life Titan
gamed Europa you know the moons around
Jupiter and Saturn are likely to have
even more advanced life you know what's
what's fun is we're alive during this
period of time right um Starship you
know Starship flight five is going to be
going up soon can't wait for us to talk
about that in our next our next podcast
conversation and it is going to bring
people you know 100 people to the
surface of moon and Mars um and take us
out to the other planets it's going to
be the you know the whatever you want to
call it uh what was the trend what was
the most important like the 707 of
aircraft right that became the KC 135
tankers and really first transatlantic
really widebody jet it's going to allow
us to go there and uh and we're going to
find out and it's I'm going to do a
final plug here for X prise because
notice that you're you know you created
xprize because you noticed that uh
Lindberg crossed the Atlantic and all
the teams competing
developed ancillary technologies that
created the commercial aviation industry
right and boom you put a honey putt down
in in for the space world and now we
have a close to a trillion dollar space
industry and we're doing that non-stop
across the board so the future is so so
exciting it it is and and I didn't
mention in the beginning selem uh Sim is
also a member of our board of directors
of the x prise foundation he's Godfather
to my two kids I'm going to add your
your additional uh uh anyway I love you
so so much buddy uh and this was a fun
conversation I really en super important
and and I want to debate hotly some of
the other topics we'll do we'll do that
next time yeah U and if you're enjoying
these conversations with s and myself
please subscribe let us know I'd like to
do this you know once a month where s
and I get together and and argue and
disagree on all of these things Sim
where do people find you and and your
companies uh atmail uh is on on X
Twitter and open xo.com yeah all right
buddy right you're you're off on
vacation I'm off to Indonesia and India
family stuff and then back uh in a
couple of weeks you must be a god when
you land in India I mean I'm you know
you're Indian and I'm sure I try and
hide actually because I'm scared that
once people see that that they'll steal
my passport and I won't be able to get
out to keep you there so all right be
well take care take care
