this is the knowledge graph insights
podcast episode number five you might
think that the lofty perch of multiple
decades in Industry analyst roles would
Inspire Grand visions of tech
transformation with Leading Edge
technology quite the opposite in the
case of Alan Morrison he shows how
Enterprises can advance their data
maturity by cultivating basic graph
thinking in their organizations and by
taking small pragmatic steps like
adopting established standards for
interoperability or simply adding
metadata to a spread Mach welcome to the
knowledge graph insights podcast where
experts on knowledge graphs and the
semantic web share their wisdom with the
digital and business communities our
mission is to demystify and democratize
Knowledge Graph technology and practices
to make the benefits of knowledge graphs
and semantic technology accessible to
all and now here's your host Larry
Swanson hi everyone welcome to episode
number five of the knowledge graph
insights podcast I am really happy today
to welcome to the show Alan Morrison
Allen is a currently he's a contributor
at data Science Central a well-known
publication in the field um he's a
freelancer and consultant around
knowledge graphs and a lot of other
areas as well um his background he comes
out of um the Consulting world most
recently before his current role as a
freelancer and consultant he worked for
many years at Price waterhous Cooper the
big consultancy uh as a senior research
fellow um so welcome alen tell the folks
a little bit more about what you're up
to these
days hey Larry great to talk with you
and and folks should know that you and I
have some history together as a part of
the data worthy Collective which is a
like an informal Meetup Group uh
collaborative um thinking going on every
week uh and um uh you know it's it's
been great to know you over the years
um what I'm doing currently is is um
trying to help the knowledge graft
community in particular gain more
visibility gain more uh Traction in the
Enterprise and it's it's a long Hall um
Enterprises are slow to change it's like
you know turning an oil tanker on a dime
it's very very hard kind of thing to do
um and so there's so much Legacy
involved and so um when I was at PWC we
worked with a lot of large companies and
you'd look for pockets of innovation
and you'd look for The Foxes instead of
the Hedgehogs because the foxes were the
ones that were curious about doing
things different
ways um the Hedgehogs were the ones
who were expert in doing things in one
way so um we we had this kind of gorilla
approach to Innovation and we also
worked with the c centralized Innovation
group inside the firm to try to help the
firm itself
self um modernized and so um in my last
five years at the firm I was um plugged
into the AI efforts that were emerging
because machine learning was becoming
much more
feasible and so I I've taken this
knowledge that I have of AI and and um
the semantic web socalled um an old ter
but it still has utility together and
I'm just trying to help
Enterprises see the advantages of these
things and adopt them to the extent they
can be well you just said like how hard
notoriously difficult it is to get
Enterprises to think and act differently
but they're all jumping over a all over
AI like it's you know the best thing
since sliced bread um so it seems like
there's a little but there's a lot of
opportunities there it seems like to not
ride the coattails but to enter the
conversation around around um these new
technologies and there's a lot of kind
of interplay between uh generative Ai
and machine learning and llms and all
that world and the knowledge graph world
can you kind of stitch those worlds
together for us a little
bit yeah I think it's it's good to do
that it's good to step back and say you
know what are we trying to do here how
are we trying to do it and we've got
some peace parts that are talked about
in the media
at
infinitum um generative AI is just all
the time in the conversation because
it's it's a powerful interface
technology as it stands and some
Enterprise providers are using GI as
basically a front end and then they will
connect uh their own backend um and
so um you know I think you have to think
about in generative Ai and other kinds
of AI in the context of this bigger
picture and it's all driven by data um
it's and when we say data we don't just
mean binary bits I think we mean ideally
contextualized information
knowledge getting wisdom and
decisionmaking capability to the right
Point uh where it's actionable at the
right time for the right purpose and so
it's it's a distribution problem uh of
knowledge essentially the right kinds of
knowledge and and so you really have to
think about data and this is where I get
passionate about it
because
um you know the information is really
the heart of it is in this is in this
contextualized environment that should
be being built and it should
be an organic kind of effort that
involves both humans and
machines and I'm a ww worker so I think
about machine learning as a kind of a
table saw you know and and so um the
knowledge is like the wood that you're
working with you know it's an organic
thing and and so you're you're using all
this different kinds of tooling I got a
lot of different kinds of doing in my
workshop and I'm not a great woodworker
but you know I I think
that the source of the wood is really
important what kind of wood you're
working with and and you know we could
do all sorts of things uh if we had the
right resources inside of Enterprises
Enterprises are really starred for good
data um and they they just are not in
the habit of collecting it very very
well and I was I was in intelligence in
the Navy when I started and um just
collecting voice traffic and and
analyzing it and it was so systematic
about how the data collection happened
there was this whole data life cycle
environment that that um we were a part
of and everybody was managing according
to the the needs of that and I just
think that that was a very effective way
that enterprises could take advantage of
to really collect what they need to and
just understand if you're going to
digitize things you have to have this
continual process of collecting and
analyzing and managing this
information um and it has to be
organically constructed so that it's
scalable and it does what you need it to
do so um you know that's basic where
where where i' I've been focused over
the past years yeah the way you describe
that is so
um evocative of like you like the wood I
love the W woodworking analogy but also
that your military experience like
there's I think any Enterprise would
argue that like you know that
they're they would claim to um attribute
the same importance you know a similar
level of importance as like Naval
intelligence data about you know
whatever you were whatever you were
researching and yet they have these
sloppy data practices and or not if not
sloppy at least not thought through and
and and sort of optimal are there I
guess can you talk about well two things
one how could they be better at like
that data hygiene and that data um
practice that you just described that
was so well entrenched in your Navy days
um and then how in particular how
knowledge graphs and the whole world of
like semantic Tech um can help you do
more with that data once you or and is
it a prerequisite to have that good data
hygiene before you can do the cool stuff
with knowledge graphs
uh let me let me start with the last
question first
um it is a prerequisite to have a
certain amount of data maturity uh when
I was at PWC we had a data maturity
curve and um it was frustrating to see
that most of our audit clients were not
terribly High On That maturity
curve and I think the tooling gets in
the way
um there's so much siloing that has gone
on over the decades and um so many folks
including me are in the habit of just
using certain tools and so the learning
curve for learning something new is is a
bit Steep and so what's happened is that
um we've just proliferated these data
silos that that have limited ility in a
short lifetime when you could be just
contributing to a much larger ecosystem
that's shared and
reusable and so um I think that there's
just a um a mentality that goes along
with the tooling that needs to be
dispensed with so you could start up say
a gill gorilla team that just tries to
do these um these domain description
kinds of exercises you've seen
pharmaceutical companies do this for
years and years um because they have
to um do drug Discovery at the molecular
level and they have to track things at
the molecular level so it's it's very
precise and detailed what they're doing
and they're still using
spreadsheets but they're they're
describing their their findings in the
spreadsheets and then they're making the
spread sheets part of this bigger
Knowledge Graph mix if they're um
Advanced and so what you're seeing is
the ability to to do more metadata let's
say you know semantic metadata simple
stuff not complicated stuff and just put
enough of it in a spreadsheet so the
spreadsheet is sharable and reusable in
a sense and so I you're seeing this in
financial services too where we we've
got uh the OMG the object Management
Group is working on a standard
for uh smart spreadsheets you know so
we're trying to desilo to the extent we
can we're taking it a step at a time
yeah that's and when you talk about
silos and Guerilla teams it's like and
there's this truism in Consulting about
you know just start small and just start
someplace and anywhere I'm curious about
these Guerilla teams that you would
assemble back in your Consulting days
because that sounds like I I hope that a
lot of my listeners are going to be
people who are in organizations that are
like oh come on we got to do something
with this they're going to be chomping
at the bit they might have big Ambitions
so I guess first of all like you
know and I get I'm as guilty as of this
as anyone first like scaling back your
expectations and your Ambitions but also
with the awareness that if you crush it
at a small scale that you might get
bigger adoption so I guess but my
question is like what do those Guerilla
teams look like and how how do they work
I I sort of backed into this um years
ago when we
started writing about the semantic web
so-called back in 2009 uh we were
publishing a a quarterly called the
technology forecast and we were looking
at um business
intelligence what's the what's the
stumbling block in business intelligence
and of course it's it's having
enough of the right data to make good
decisions so you have to bring in all
these different sources these
heterogeneous sources not only
structured data but less structured
information and
so that was the starting point for
thinking about what organizations should
do with their data but then within PWC I
wanted once I once I had researched the
topic I got so interested in how this
could be really a big thing and could
really help companies if if they were to
bring together all this heterogeneous
information in a more integrated and
interoperable fashion um so you know I
started working with client companies
and internally at
PWC with innovators who um were as
passionate as I was about organizational
change and you know bringing these
organizations up to speed in certain
ways so we're really sort of working
against the conventional org chart the
hierarchical org chart one of the things
we we knew to do was to to sort of build
our own informal
organizations so we we had the
flexibility in a
consultancy to to sort of be triable in
how we organize so we built our own
tribes and um Partners who
were powerful Partners would be the
tribal leaders and so you'd look for
partners who had budget who could fund
Innovation
projects and and so I think the same
Dynamic happens in a command and control
environment like a like the military for
example I've seen champions emerge for
example in the Department of Homeland
Security uh people who have a a border
control border U border patrol
background um working to advance the the
cause of adopting knowledge graphs um
for border security and
detecting and uh inter intercepting uh
drones for example On the Border when
they're trying to smuggle drugs or guns
or something you know
um same same principle applies um you
it's just um it's harder to do inside a
command and control environment than it
is in a Loosey Goosey thing like a
partnership for
example yeah that I love that gorilla
approach but kind of what you're getting
at too is um about the the power and the
benefits of an Knowledge Graph like you
were talking about the heterogeneous
data the structur and unstructured just
sort of this mishmash of stuff and can
you talk a little bit about how knowled
graph helps pull that maybe not pull it
together but pull information about
those kinds of bodies of data into a way
that is more powerful and useful to the
organization it's a great question
and the the experiences that I've seen
have mostly been failures when it comes
to these kinds of efforts over the years
and you think about I they've been
useful failures and and I've had good
friends who've been involved in these
failures um but the situation has been
that we're trying to boil the ocean when
it comes to uh a model of
um of the data uh a unitary model of the
data that brings all the data together
so that you've got a model of the
business essentially in an
Enterprise and uh this is something that
MCC semantic Arts preaches all the time
you want to rationalize that
model and so I I saw a model at IBM back
in the 2010s when they were working with
ontologies they were trying to get all
their
software uh together all their software
development efforts together with a with
a Knowledge Graph at that point and they
had over a thousand 2,000 Concepts or
something um it's just a monster
thing um fibo was another effort
financial industry business ontology
just a massive effort of of these big
Banks to to try to model the environment
that they needed to use for reporting
purposes for example um it's much better
it's much better to have a few hundred
Concepts at at a at
maximum and then focus on domain
specific efforts that will articulate
the domain so that you start to get a
sense of these context that I was
talking about and how the contexts fit
together so the knowledge graph is
essentially a relationship Rich approach
to connecting these things and studying
how they interact and the thing about
the way AI is currently done by
comparison uh it AI currently with
machine learning it's it's sort of like
um a recipe in a kitchen you know you
you put some of this ingredients and
some of that those ingredients in
together and you mix it all together in
a
mixer um this is not really helpful
for um this ambiguation you know um
comparing Apples to Apples certain kinds
of apples to apples or certain kinds of
molecules to other kinds of
molecules um
knowledge graphs have to be articulated
in the
relationships in the entity relationship
models um are what art makes the
articulation possible I'm married to Lee
so the fact that I'm married to Lee
leads to all sorts of interesting things
about our history together and that
history together is a context my family
is a context
and so similarly with organizational
change you want to be able to model the
organization the people inside the
organization you want to empower them
and so it's good it'd be great if you
could have the organization will change
people um get together with a Knowledge
Graph people build a Knowledge Graph
about
organization about the organization and
sort of Empower The Innovation you know
do what do that kind of thing we were
trying to do back in the day with our
innovation groups you
know that's interesting how do but you
you've mentioned you've written fairly
recently on LinkedIn about um I thought
it was a success story about about using
about using a knowledge graph is I don't
know like like I think in my a lot of my
Consulting and Contracting work I've
used I think of all my deliverables not
as final deliverables but as
conversation starters your conversation
continuers you know that like it's never
done and you never figured out and and
so when I read that post you where you
were talking about knowledge graphs
that's how I was kind of picturing it
like hey let's gather around this
knowledge graph and see if it helps us
understand the org better was I reading
that
right oh absolutely you you you have a a
whiteboarding dynamic um ideally where
where you're you're talking about the um
the entities and the relationship so
you're representing you're basically
representing um at a high level um the
the the organiz ation and the problems
you're trying to solve together how can
you best utilize the resources of the of
the organization to solve certain
problems and so um you know people do
this all the time on whiteboards they're
always drawing diagrams on
whiteboards um you you always see mind
mapping going on but um this the
knowledge graph is is just an extra step
that um artic Ates the Dig digitization
of it so that Maes can help humans do
more with it you can
actualize the model that you've come up
with on a whiteboard in a Knowledge
Graph environment I mean that's where we
should be going with this technology is
is kind of a Miro kind of thing that
people can work on together and then
activating it you know uh that way that
the Enterprise Architects would be much
more empowered to do what they're
supposed to be doing yeah that's uh well
you're preaching to the choir that's I'm
working with a friend now on trying to
get the precious data out of mirror
boards into something more manageable
and useful but just the way you talk
about that I love that that description
of um the you know like that that these
are activities we're doing anyway and I
think one of the appeals of graph
technology is the nodes and edges just
nodes and connections between them and
which is very much like the things you
sketch out on whiteboard in a in a you
know workshopy kind of session but the
power of the graph and you just alluded
you just mentioned this as well is that
it's articulable those connection those
entities and their relationships are
articulable in a way that both humans
and machines can understand which I
think is kind of the fundamental power
of the knowledge graph is that
correct
yeah certainly that's a big part of it
um I I think of it in you know being a
woodworker um by Hobby um I think of it
as sort of Tinker
Toys um and I don't know if many people
are know what Tinker Toys are but you've
got a wooden Hub with holes in it and
then you've got sticks that uh that you
you use to build something and you can
build it um you know three-dimensional
any kind of three-dimensional object
with Tinker Toys and in a in a Knowledge
Graph environment the only difference is
that you've got the potential for all
sorts of different dimensions and humans
can only comprehend a few Dimensions at
once but machines can go far
further so but you can sort of
um design the interface so that humans
have what they need and machines have
what they need and then there's a coming
together of those those understandings
in the in the U enriched information and
the uh the data and the
metadata yeah and that and that that um
interaction I want to kind of swing back
a little bit to the the Gen stuff and
llms because you mentioned earlier that
like that's sort of the interface for a
lot of this now and there's a merging
architectures that try to like I get the
it's like you're trying to get the best
out of each of those kinds of Technology
like the people love the conversational
interface and conversing with their data
aspect of like a an llm but but all the
benefits you've just been talking about
about knowledge representation with a
Knowledge Graph um what do how do you it
seems like there's been like just the
last week or so Microsoft announced
their graph rag um uh scheme and there's
many other uh rag kind of things out
there um what do you think is going to
be the most like productive way or the
or the kinds of architectures that'll
emerge to get to kind of optimize the
the benefits of these two sort of um
comp mentary
Technologies yeah I think there there um
needs to be uh a fuller picture of all
the things that can contribute the most
to this kind of
environment and
um when you're when you're focused on
the knowledge graph space you learn a
lot about different kinds of
databases and and so the database bace
people in this space are really super
smart and they're doing some really
interesting things and that stuff should
not be
neglected um I think that that stuff is
just as valuable is what's going on in
generative Ai and neural
networks and um I think that you know
one of the frustrating things about web
development and
and
um data
science is that there's not enough
attention paid to all the techniques
that that are still incredibly important
today that have been around for decades
and database technology is one of the
primary ones that I would point to and
and so the difference in in databases
Now versus 20 years ago um
relational databases haven't scaled as
well as graph databases do and the graph
databases help you change the mentality
of of the people who are working on the
things so you you have this I'm sort of
rambling here but let me just finish the
point
um in the in the knowledge graph
Community there are people who think in
graphs not everybody thinks in graphs a
lot and and tables are
simpler tables a lot of people
can utilize tables everybody uses
tables but the fact that you've got this
graph
mentality leads to connectability and
scaling and ecosystem development and
and where we should be going with this
ultimately Larry is is not just feeding
some data into a model and and trying to
evolve the model it's really Building
Systems where we can
share whatever we want to in a digital
form that's consumable by machines and
humans at the same
time
so we need more than just neural
networks to be able to do that and I
think that a lot of these technologies
that have been around for 50 or 60 years
are complimentary to what's happening in
in machine
learning and and what's frustrating to
me is that that um a lot of people just
think AI is just machine learning and
intelligence is so much more than just
machine learning absolutely yeah that's
um because I mean knowledge graphs
knowledge representation is a form of AI
um and expert systems and Robotics and
vision and all there's all kinds of
other Stu so hey I know I want to do a
whole other episode just about the data
Tech database technology that underlies
this but today we're running short on
time and I I like to keep these around a
half hour but before we wrap up is there
anything last anything that you want to
revisit from the conversation or just
want to make sure we share before we
wrap
up yeah I I think that
um in general um there's there's so much
opportunity out there I don't know where
to get started and and sometimes I don't
know who to talk to because um I I like
I've I've been looking at systems and
how they're coming together and and so
I'm talking to a Content person when I'm
talking to
Larry and I talk to Knowledge Management
people and I talk to data management
people and then I talk to business
people and all of these people could be
using the same system to manage
information and
and make it make it sharable all these
people could be doing things the same
way we have the standards they've been
solidified um you know we're really
blessed with a community in terms of
semantics that that has the vision to
bring the system together and what we
need is is is just more oomph to bring
the organization into the picture more
somehow and make them understand you
know you could you could just have one
Department you don't need three
departments to manage all this stuff and
why don't you all work together the same
way you know I I wish we could have like
a meta organization capability that we
could apply to to all these all these
companies that have these
issues I love that vision of a meta
organization like the not overarching
but like just the the the connecte part
of it which um is what crafts are so
good at yeah yeah collaboration is
something that I mean that's another
conversation itself isn't it yeah well
no that's well this is only
collaboration yeah I was gonna say this
is only episode five we got plenty of
and I definitely want to have you back
on for like several more conversations
because we there's five rabbit holes we
didn't go down today
that I would love to go down um well
thanks so much oh hey one very last
thing alen if folks want to connect with
you online what's the best way to find
you uh I tend to look at LinkedIn every
day and I I I hope I'm findable on
LinkedIn I'll put it in the show notes
as well I'm pretty you're one of the
more prominent Allan Morrison there I'll
observe so
well me and an organist and and a
scientist are the ones so I think you
could figure out which one's which yeah
yeah I'm duking it out with with a brain
scientist for the swans round I don't
know my I don't I don't like my odds um
well
than thanks so much alen this is your
blast sure I'm happy to do
it for show notes and to sign up for our
newsletter visit our website at knowledg
graph insights.com and please rate and
review us on your favorite podcast
platform thank you for listening
