uh I have to confess I'm relatively new
to Alice's work um but I was in contact
with her probably about 6 weeks ago now
I think it was Alice and uh we had a
fascinating chat because for a long time
I've been kind of fascinated by the
interrelationship between the cognitive
line and the social emotional line and
what exactly is going on on we seem to
know very little about how these two
systems in the brain or in the body are
interrelated and
interconnected and uh this is actually
uh an area that Alice has been thinking
about and working working on for some
while so uh today really really pleased
that Alice can join us and tell us about
her work and by the way she also writes
an extremely um insightful fascinating
interesting blog uh on the mind of the
coach uh which I've been reading avidly
in in recent weeks which I heartly
recommend anybody who's in the coaching
business to have a look at so thank you
Alice I think uh without further Ado I
should hand over to you ah thank you
thank you so much for such a generous
introduction I'm actually quite nervous
because uh there are so many people in
this room who wisdom I respect so deeply
and from whom I've learned so much so I
really come uh with a learner mind as
much as a sharing intention um because I
think and and also this is such a
beautiful audience for this type of
content or for the content that I'm
passionate about because you're not here
to learn about it you're here to
co-create and you you too are doing this
work in the world so I am really really
curious what you make of the little
threads that I'm going to share and you
know how you see it weaving into the
bigger picture of this work that we're
all part of so very humbled and very
grateful to be here my intention that I
kind of came with initially and I'm
still holding it is to keep the intro
part very very light because I'm
assuming already a foundation of
knowledge and kind of invite you into
the thick of what I found in my own
research in hopefully an experiential
way rather than a theoretical way would
that work for everyone
is a yeah awesome okay so just a b bit
of uh background and context I've come
into adult development research from a
background as a practitioner a
facilitator a coach um in my home
country uh Romania so I'm Romanian IM
migrated to Australia a few years ago uh
we we have a really interesting cultural
context that I think has informed the
work of those of us who have ended up in
this field because we didn't really have
generation ahead of us to learn from so
there was this before 1989 and after
1989 kind of Two Worlds which have
completely and profoundly shaped my own
upbringing and my own history but also
the context in which I've ended up doing
this work and other people like me have
ended up doing this work so we have in
my home country a whole generation of
Consultants who are now in their 40s who
started this work of Consulting and
facilitating in their early 20s which I
think in in Western countries doesn't
really happen because you would have a
whole career before you go into
Consulting whereas for us there was no
corporate world to learn from so
everybody kind of jumped into this and
those of us who were drawn to training
and development kind of started doing
training and development as a thing so
I've been immersed in it and grew up in
it in a in a sense as a
practitioner um living it and also
supporting others on this journey and
I've had a lot of frustrations over the
years and the biggest frustration has
been one that I br pretty sure we share
or other people in this room share
around the knowledge action Gap you know
what to do but you don't do it and
leaders know what to do and they don't
do it and we were doing all of these
soft skills programs with all of these
techniques for dialogue and you know
good conversations and did delegation
tools and all of that stuff and people
were just you know enjoying the learning
and then not applying it so for me this
has been this obsessive question around
what does it take to embody what you're
learning what does it take say to
actually have the maturity to be that
person that you know
theoretically would be good or effective
to be so this kind of uh I carried this
through 15 years of practice till um I
felt like I I need to understand it more
deeply and um I stepped into research to
do a PhD in it and as part of that I
moved to Australia and took life over or
started live life over which in itself
if we think disorienting dilemas and
heat experiences uh has been a really
good case study of what a massive
disorienting dilemma can look like uh in
terms of dissolution of identity kind of
no more um feedback around you know who
you are and what the value that you
bring is so I in a way I lived my
research as I was conducting my research
and I was really lucky to uh be given
access to one of the largest leadership
development programs here in Australia
New Zealand 250 leaders cross sector
cross industry every year we're going
through this program uh and the program
itself was developmental without being
um explicitly presented as developmental
but uh Keegan was part of the faculty
and Amy Edmonson was part of the faculty
and Ron hitz was part of the faculty so
this was this just amazing opportunity
for me to see the impact of this
Collective holding space these amazing
people were creating and it so happened
I ran the study in 2020 when all of a
sudden the program went online everybody
went in lockdown everybody was deeply
traumatized and going through this
program at the same time um and I had
this this question in my mind how do you
actually capture learning as it is
happening because in previous research
around the impact de development impa
impact of programs like this people
would look at the end and kind of ask
participants you know what was the
experience but six months later it's not
the same as as you are in it so I
invited these people to journal through
the program every week they would be
journaling around actual stuff that was
happening in their lives not necessarily
in the program itself so people shared
losing loved ones they shared the
anxiety of not knowing how to reorganize
their
businesses uh they shared a lot of
personal stuff in these journals journal
entries and they also gave me access to
their teams to inquire you know are you
noticing any changes in the behavior of
your leader
and they also sat through interviews
with me so I ended up with this massive
massive mountain of data and also
measured them before and after with the
with the GP to kind of see you know is
there in within six months any shift in
their development the bottom line was
that 30% did shift or the glp said they
did shift into a later stage uh now
after watching Aiden's research and I
highly encourage you to check out Aiden
Thorton's
um dissertation it's I'm currently
having my mind blown and kind of trying
to integrate what that means for
us um but um 30% developed and 70%
didn't and interestingly 30% not only
did not grow but they regressed into an
earlier stage after the program and even
more interestingly the people who
regressed were the latest stage
people so that was very very intriguing
to me may not be surprising to someone
you um so this is the
shsh story of what I set out to uh find
and the invitation that I've got for you
is to experience what I found rather
than me telling you what I discovered
let me just very briefly share this uh
this fundamental difference between
horizontal development and vertical
development and I know that vertical
development in itself is a bit of a
controvers IAL term and there are many
arguments for which maybe we shouldn't
be using it because it's a blanket
statement for a host of complexity of
development but I think in the service
of bringing this work to the general
public perhaps horizontal and vertical
are the best terms that I think we have
at the moment but essentially my
understanding of it and the way I've
treated it in my research is that
horizontal defines what we know the
content of what we know and as I was
kind of um going through the literature
I started to have an issue with this
idea of hierarchy that is implied by
horizontal and vertical so I came up
with a metaphor to accompany this which
is this metaphor of the piano so when
you learn to play the piano you need to
learn the technique you need to learn
musical Theory you need to learn all of
the technical aspects of piano playing
so you can be a decent piano player and
that is your horizontal development but
then your vertical development in the
metaphor of the piano is how many
octaves on your piano are you actually
playing how complex is the music that
you're able to create and what is your
relationship to the music itself so
vertical would look at how we think the
mindsets we bring to the work we do the
structure of our minds rather than the
content of our minds so when I say that
some of the participants in my research
developed something in the structure of
their thinking seems to have shifted
towards more complexity towards more
maturity and for some of them they seem
to have lost access to the complexity
and maturity they could access six
months previously so that to me was
really really intriguing as to you know
what is it that actually happened and
why and I could only find one thing that
was a clear differentiator between these
two uh categories of people and the
experience I'm about to invite you into
is what they came across or stumbled
into instinctively I then turned it into
a practice that I might now integrating
into my work so how much sense does this
make make and any thoughts and any yeah
just anything from anyone before I go
forward and maybe at the end we can
actually uh talk a little bit more if
people are interested about you know the
metaphors we actually use in our work
and and how these metaphors can bring it
to life in different ways or you elicit
different reactions in the people we're
supporting in their own development just
to mention um this dialectical thinking
group here
and um I find myself always wondering
about the distinctions that we make
between vertical and horizontal and how
we might integrate that distinction as
well as the distinction between theory
and practice or Theory and
experience um so I I think we must
realize that these these are just
metaphors and therefore they are
simplifications and the complexity is
somehow uh bound up in the integration
of the two
yes I I wholeheartedly agree with that
statement
Nick
yeah no so I actually started to dive a
bit more deeply into 's work and uh I'm
I think I'm just starting to scratch the
surface now uh through Ursula who opened
this amazing Universe to me so I was
aware of oto's work but I didn't go deep
in
it I hear you and I absolutely resonate
with that um and that definitely isn't
the angle that I've taken it and it it
is an interesting then question perhaps
maybe uh for afterwards when we're kind
of sense making but I'm wondering you
know how do we keep the integrity and
the ethics of our practice while still
staying open to learn and
cross-pollinate because um and I say
this because when I came into it I had
no allegiance to any school of thought
and I just like any you know beginner
researcher I started to kind of do my
lit review and see you know who are the
people who have measure adult
development and how they have done it
and uh I ended up using the glp because
just practically torbert's work was the
most robust from a validation
perspective so there was enough data
published aart from Lo loevinger's
initial work like you know as a modern
tool the glp was the one that had most
written things about it that I could
find so I ended up kind of using his
framework as my main measurement
framework for that very reason but in
the processes I've gotten to actually
know some of the people in the space and
you know uh get to know them as humans
as well as researchers I've come I've
become very intrigued about could we
cross-pollinate more but I'm also
hearing you say is there too much like
is there a moment when you're actually
connecting this with stuff that has
nothing to do with it and where is that
boundary I don't know where where it is
exactly but I'm intrigued by that
question I hear you yeah but um in terms
of my theoretical framework just to
clarify what that was the adult
development part of it was informed by
put grer and torbert's and Keegan's work
as the three big
thinkers uh and I also brought in
transformative learning and Mees Ro's
work because a as a practitioner for me
it's always intriguing you know how do
we design learning development
experiences that are actually
developmental so I felt that that
cross-pollination between adult
development and transformative learning
is an interesting
intersection uh so that is the the
academic the theoretical lens if you
want that I took to this
the experience I was um suggesting we
might uh you know play with to see what
I found so the the one thing that came
out of it was that everybody during that
year experienced profound disorienting
uh dilemas of all kinds and all types of
dilemmas from personal ones to
professional ones so nobody was spared
but how people dealt with these dilemas
was very very different so I would love
as a practice if you'd be Keen to play
and you don't have to share with anyone
what you're working on but if there is a
dilemma that you're struggling with
personally at the moment or
professionally you as a human on your
own Journey I'd love to invite you to
tap into a dilemma for a little bit and
walk you through some steps that my
research participants seem to have
figured out instinctively intuitively
that have turned out to be developmental
for them just so you have a bit of a
felt experience of it so then we can
kind of unpack it together that will
will involve a bit of thinking but it it
will involve quite a bit of feeling as
well so to preface that and I'm pretty
sure this group here is uh comfortable
with getting into the deep spaces but I
always say you know if it feels
uncomfortable at any point you just
don't want to do it anymore just stop
but I am going to invite you into the
body to feel some of your feelings at
some point in this exercise you happy to
do
that have a go at it okay so you'll need
some pen and paper and we'll do an
alternation of sort of guided meditation
type of um invitation with some
journaling of things that you find in in
a few steps that we'll take together so
does everybody have a dilemma that they
would be Keen to work on for themselves
in the next 20 minutes or so and a
dilemma has to feel like a tension
between two opposing needs could be a
decision could be be something that
really makes you feel torn in some way
and it feels unresolved and it feels a
bit
stuck and you should be able to to write
it down or Define it as on the one hand
something and on the other hand
something else it's a bit of a polarity
we could think of it like that as well
and it but it has to feel or or it it's
ideal if you choose one that really
feels emotionally charged for you
you're you're really working your way
through it and haven't found your way
through it but you know what the two
sides of it are so I invite you to just
write down those two sides of your
dilemma I'll just bring them to mind if
writing down is not an option okay
everybody's got their dilemma down on
paper yeah awesome so I'd love you to uh
close your eyes for a few moments and
just bring this Dilemma to your
awareness to mind and just notice what
are the thoughts that come up it's
almost like you're taking on a role of
journalists documenting your own
thinking about this
dilemma not feelings yet but just
thoughts what is the landscape of
thoughts when you bring these two sides
of the Dilemma to mind what thoughts
emerge
there might be trains of thought thought
throwing you into another thought and
another thought you might want to follow
those strains of thought for a
bit but I invite you not to start
analyzing why you're having the thoughts
just a knowledge the thoughts
themselves just giving you a few seconds
to be in that space of thought around
this isem just maybe notice how
busy is your mind right now how many
thoughts are
there are there some thoughts that are
just stronger they just come up
recurrently they seem to take over the
landscape and trying to capture as many
of them as you possibly
can acknowledging them not judging or
analyzing just noting them
when you feel you've got a
grasp you might want to write down
record just as a journalist would record
the thoughts that have come to your
Consciousness right now around this
dilemma download them in a way from your
mind onto
paper try writing down as many as you
can
let me know when you feel like your mind
is a bit emptier and much of the
important thoughts are or many of them
are already down on
paper okay ready to go to the next step
yep so I'd love you to close your eyes
again if you feel comfortable to do that
and now with your thoughts out of your
mind they're there they're recorded
still holding the dma in
Awareness I invite you to shift your
attention to your
body and just notice every sensation you
possibly can that is present in your
body and you know is connected to this
dilemma and I'm saying sensation and not
emotion for now because I'd love you to
just observe anything that you can pick
up things that you might not even have a
name
for what are you noticing from the tip
of your toes to the top of your head
what is present in your
body and just
acknowledging these
Sensations and acknowledging what
happens when you acknowledge them so if
you find a sensation in the body that
you maybe haven't been aware of
before that is present because because
you're holding this styline awareness
what's your impulse what do you feel
like doing do you feel like leaning into
it or studying it or do you feel like
not wanting to feel it anymore leaning
away from it just acknowledge the
impulses that arise when you identify
any of these
Sensations and if you love to learn in a
visual way or a kinesthetic way you
might even
notice colors or
textures or certain consistencies
associated with some of these
Sensations just notice what is
there and if you allow your attention to
expand and really hold all of these
Sensations are there emotions present in
the body that you can
name and if yes what are they
what are the emotions that this dilemma
brings up in
you you might want to even be precise
and find the emotion and The Sensation
and how they might be connected and just
observe
that and as you notice all of this and
you notice your impulses towards all of
these emotions and all of these
Sensations I'd love you to bring in
intentionally purpose y
curiosity you might even imagine you're
pouring in into
yourself like a
substance curiosity that comes and
infuses your body and touches every one
of these Sensations you've just picked
up you might have one particular emotion
or Sensation that you really want to be
curious about you're intrigued by
it and you just allow yourself to be
pure toly curious you have no idea what
you're going to
find you're not even trying to think
about it you're just experiencing the
sensation of curiosity
bearing on the emotion you picked up on
earlier and just breathing into this
mix all of the sensations all of the
emotions connected to your dilemma and
curiosity together what does that feel
like in your
body and what are you noticing happen if
anything is anything changing at all do
those Sensations shift in any
way as you broaden
curiosity just acknowledging that for a
moment and as you do you might feel
moved to write down some of the things
you found out you discovered you noticed
you
felt or you might draw you might sketch
something there might be a particular
movement of the body that you feel moved
to create
I'm particularly inviting you to notice
and record any shifts that might have
happened when you brought curiosity in
or anything you you noticed before and
after curiosity anything that you found
interesting or intriguing in some
way
when when you feel like you you're
complete with this step
yep so one last invitation for all of
you is to just allow yourself now to go
back to the dilemma and the original
thoughts you had and just bringing all
of this wisdom you've tapped into all of
this learning from going into your
body and bringing curiosity in and just
noticing what thoughts are present now
about the
Dilemma noticing if anything has changed
in your
thinking or if any new thoughts have
Arisen in some
way and even if there is
any
experiment or some sort of action
impulse that arises from this reflection
something that may be become possible or
a door that opens in some
way that you might be Keen to explore
afterwards and as before if you want to
chot down anything that you're finding
interesting in the shifting landscape of
your
thinking just to be able to return to it
and maybe reflect a bit later on you're
welcome to take a moment and and jum
down
is
everybody feeling like they're complete
yeah
okay whoever might want to share a
little bit of their observations and
experience
I love that you're um you're bringing up
something really interesting and I I'll
show you what actually came out of my
data that you said the fear didn't go
away it just moved into the background
so it's still there but it's almost like
the perspective on it has shifted and
you're also but if I got correctly what
you were saying you can hold it without
being paralized by it with this new
perspective so it's still there but you
can work with it there's there's
something something becomes possible
despite the fear it's not like we've
sold for the Fe but we've made it
manageable in a way or or you've made it
manageable kind of playing with it in
this in this way and bringing curiosity
in yeah thank you does anyone want to
build on that or does anyone hold a
question that they'd like to bring in
I'll be happy to show you the the
science behind what we did and and hear
your thoughts
afterwards thank you I love the words
you bring to it
yeah awesome so would you like me to
share with you the framework behind this
so then we can kind of open up the
conversation and see what we make of it
would that be okay to do
yeah so
um so what I found as the only
differentiator between the people who
developed and the people who didn't
develop was how they dealt with the
emotional landscape that was brought up
by their disorienting dilemas so when we
Face these dilemmas these big conundrums
where things just do not make sense
anymore all of us seem to um drop into
this space that uh kaisu Mali some of
you might be familiar with her work
she's um in the space of transformative
learning uh she's a researcher from
Finland whose work I absolutely love and
she coined This this term of Ed
emotions which are all of the emotions
we feel at the edge of our meaning
making it's that very moment where
you're current it's almost in in Bob
Keegan's for those of you who are
familiar with his subject object Theory
and I know there are many of you who are
it's that moment when you're just you
feel the limits of that thing which
you're subject to it just doesn't make
sense to you anymore but you can't make
it object you can't look at your mindset
yet and there's that desperation that
locked kind of brain pain moment and we
feel these Edge emotions so what I found
was that most of us don't want to feel
them and that's not no surprise to
anybody probably and people not only
don't want to feel them but particularly
in these highly competitive
performance-driven corporate contexts
people feel like something is very
deeply wrong with them when they feel
this stuff so high performing leaders
don't want to feel fear and anxiety and
confusion that is very threatening and
there's a lot of shame that comes with
that which is another Edge emotion so
most people in my study when they felt
this they started to either shut down
distract themselves blame the
environment so they they would say
things like um you know we went through
immunity to change and yes it was an
interesting intellectual exercise but
you know I'm so busy and I didn't have
time to apply anything and other people
talked about going through the immunity
to change exercise which Bob Keegan
facilitated for that group and saying it
was terrifying what I found just freaked
me out and I was so amazed that I was so
freaked out so that Minority of people
who shifted they believe they have
choice so they chose to engage with
these emotions instead of shun them or
ignore them they owned them as something
that is theirs and there's value in it
and almost all of them brought in
curiosity which was super intriguing for
me as a finding so all of them spoke
about I was very intrigued as to why I
was so anxious why I was so fearful why
I was so you know as you so beautifully
just mentioned before why why is this so
much fear around something that I've
done over and over again and I've been
through this before it just is so
intriguing to me and when they did that
something really really interesting
seemed to happen which I've ended up uh
naming or calling the contrast
contrasting emotion space where the
original Edge emotion doesn't go away
but it becomes bearable under the impact
of curiosity so that it's almost like a
chemical reaction or that's how I
picture it where curiosity tempers in a
way those Edge emotions and for those of
you who are into the Neuroscience of
this I think it would be fascinating to
actually look at the you know
sympathetic activation and
parasympathetic activation and how these
emotions when they come together create
a space of enough emotional balance so
people can actually critically reflect
so in a way if we accept that adult
development and um I think in
dialectical thinking for me is all about
IAL reflection at the end of the day but
we don't really critically reflect I
think or I found unless we're able to
work our way through this super
challenging and painful emotions that
come with having our minds changed with
allowing our minds to be changed so when
people engaged and went into this space
of contrasting emotions and were curious
enough so the discomfort became bearable
they started to challenge their own
assumptions to kind of question their
old patterns of thought um you were
speaking about conditioning alen even
being able to notice your own
conditioning and kind of make it object
that's also powerful critical reflection
right and from that came new meaning new
insight and came new ways of doing
things and very interestingly again and
not surprisingly it kind of all fell
into place once I kind of step back to
it from it and see the whole picture
people who went through this process
successfully they were way more likely
to experiment and act on their insights
which for us as learning designers as
facilitators as coaches that's our
Obsession right how do we help people to
actually do the thing that they realize
needs done to to close that action
inside Gap so and and kind of my insight
after the research was that perhaps the
reason these people experimented more
was that in the course of experimenting
they encounter Edge emotions again but
now they have a way to deal with them so
you're going to go out and you're going
to try a new behavior and you it's going
to feel really you know scary so to give
you an example I had one of the research
participants he was a board member in
the organization he was part of and one
of his disorienting dilemas when he did
his immunity to change was around a
really hard topic that he had been
procrastinating for months in bringing
into the board as a topic because it
would have opened a can of warms and it
would have made him the you know the
conflict generator and he was The
Peacemaker that was his identity so he
just couldn't not conceive opening that
can of worms but he knew it had to be
done so he talked about how terrifying
that was for him to actually go out and
do this have that actual conversation so
he designed this experiment for himself
to actually bring that topic up in the
next board me meeting and when I
interviewed him he described this whole
process from his perspective as bringing
in that
conversation how afraid he was how uh
fearful of the Judgment of the others in
the room and how conscious of you know
how limiting his thinking had been up to
that point and interestingly enough
people did not react not even remotely
as badly as he had anticipated so that
kind of reinforced his belief that ah
actually to have courage and and and
open up something that can be
conflictual can also be healing so I can
still hold some of that identity that I
have as a Healer which was part of The
Peacemaker kind of um label that he had
carried along with himself for a very
long time but I can still be a Healer
even when I'm in conflict or when I
bring up stuff that makes other people
uncomfortable so there was a shift in
awareness and there was a shift in
action and there was a a shift in
self-concept but at the core of it was
this struggle with being curious about
why emotionally it's so
hard um and finally the the the last
element that came out was that the way
to support this process for people is
through inquiry but inquiry including
that emotional landscape which I think
for a lot of coaches who have a
preference for the cognitive approach
that is an interesting stretch to really
sit with our clients in the emotional
space and in the sematic space alongside
the cognitive in facilitation the same
I've experimented with this with you
know very interesting types of audiences
like
policing um where people have done the
exercise you've just done now and it led
to some really fascinating conversations
afterwards so that kind of inquiry with
a action prompting and also that
capacity to hold space for the group to
feel safe enough to tap into this
discomfort so I I would say that the
external circle is an invitation a
prompt for what can we do to hold this
process for people and I'm sure there
would be other elements for it but these
are the ones that I'm I have data on and
I can kind of say you know I think I
think they have value or uh I'm
confident to advocate for their value
so that's kind of the story
of of the frame
behind what do you think questions do
you have what Reflections do you have
I'll be happy to share these slides if
anybody needs them I'm actually
wondering I mean what this prompts for
me is um where the the context in which
we uh use our cognition and emotions are
very different but I
think human nature at the core
it's still human nature in these very
very different
contexts so I'm almost intrigued by this
idea of how does actually Co cognition
and emotion how do they meet and how do
they end
up
um I don't know what the word is um
enhancing each
other for the benefit of the human
growth in that context so I don't know
how do we support leaders to have the
emotional capacity to withstand the pain
of cognitive dissonance when somebody
proves them
wrong um because you know I think
cognitive dissonance when you see
counter uh evidence to your beliefs is
actually emotional pain it's Edge
emotions so if we were able to have this
capacity to withstand that discomfort
maybe we would allow ourselves to be
grown by others and grow others in turn
more ready
and even in the scientific Community um
I've witnessed recently some very
interesting debates and and you can see
this playing out the resistance we have
when somebody brings in something that
contradicts our worldview or our
expertise or the stuff that we've
defined ourselves through that to me is
again an example of being thrown in
midst of Ed Edge emotions and you know
where are we able to sit with curiosity
and go oh this feels pretty
uncomfortable this person 20 years
younger than me kind of challenged ing
something that I've been working on all
my life how do I stay open to that um
and I think there are Myriad other
examples I'm involved now in a an
interesting cross-national policing
senior leadership development program
with uh police leaders from 10 countries
and this is at the core of the
conversations that they're having around
you know to have transnational
collaboration you actually have to also
have an attention to self and emotions
in that environment are really an athema
but they're now discussing emotional
emotions and emotional maturity and
vertical development as a thing um so
yeah I'm just intrigued by how many
places this thing can find application
in or this way of yeah thinking or
inquiring yeah I'd love I mean I'm there
might be people who who have a
perspective on that question or more
perspectives on that question but my my
my prevalent thought on that is have you
ever seen a child who's not inherently
curious because I have never seen one I
really think that curiosity is part of
our our fundamental human going towards
seeking
impulse so I I wonder if you know what
we perceive as a lack of curiosity is
actually the result of trauma and and
kind of not wanting to lean in into
these
spaces and I'm sure all of you working
with leaders have heard that you know I
know I need to think about this stuff
but it's just terrifying to go there
because I might I don't know what I'll
find and if I tap into what I feel
that'll be you know potentially
terrifying or
potentially what if I can't bring myself
back from that so I wonder if it's lack
of curiosity or it's actually an
overwhelm of you know it's just too much
of
yes I love this yes theod Doan and this
makes me also think of Maria montesorri
and her horme the the Greek word that
she used to define that life force
present in every child where if you
create the context they just go for it
they're always seeking to learn it's so
fundamental yeah
I love how your mind goes to application
because that is what I'm really
intrigued by you know if if there is a
bit of a nugget of value in this in the
idea of bringing curiosity to bear on
our difficult emotions so we make
space you know what are creative ways to
integrate this with different practices
that different people are doing or learn
from each other you know how do you do
it how might I do it uh I think there's
so much value in that
so I think it's super important what
you're saying because what I I noticed
is nobody in my research spoke about
feeling positively from being curious
about their negative emotions so that
was not the outcome it was more the fear
receding a little bit into the
background and making room for
possibility so I make it a point in my
practice to actually normalize the
discomfort not not positiv it almost and
I'll I'll give you an example that it's
been so striking and personal to me when
I was writing my dissertation my
daughter was six and she was playing the
piano downstairs and I was writing up
here in my office and I heard her stop
like make a mistake make a second
mistake and then stop and throw the book
and start crying and shouting I'm never
playing piano again and I was wondering
how do you how do I explain this stuff
to a six-year-old in a way that makes
sense to them is and is helpful and you
know how kids at that age they have
pains in their joints frequently so we
often spoke about the pains in her
joints because she's growing up and it's
just unpleasant but it's part of growing
up so it occurred to me to make this
analogy and I said to her so how are you
feeling I'm angry and this is stupid and
I can't get it and I said look do you
know those pains in your joints yes do
you like them no do you accept them yes
because this means that I grow up okay
what if this is pain pain in your mind
and your heart this frustration this
anger you're feeling you're feeling is
the growth pain in your
mind and it's not it's not going to go
away it's just a sign that your mind is
growing honestly it's been and she's
eight now two years later it's been just
gamechanging it's and she's not any way
in any shape or form more willing to be
frustrated to be clear she still doesn't
enjoy it I don't enjoy it but there's an
acceptance of it so I feel I don't know
if this if this touches or answers your
question but I that is my way of not
positiv vising it but normalizing it and
for me these are very different things
it's almost you know how do we recognize
the growth pains in our hearts from
healing from a painful past from healing
from recent pain and outgrowing that
pain without trying and I also think in
a way if you think of toxic positivity
and how positive psychology has been
misused in many ways to to kind of put
forward this lens of everything has to
be smiles and joy and it's not that to
me is also avoiding Edge emotions and I
don't think we're doing the work when
we're positiv vising we're actually
avoiding doing the
work yeah you know interesting and I'm
inviting you to experiment with this
really because I think it's also new and
I'm I'm just learning I am and I'm
experimenting myself so the more of us
play with this and maybe we share what
we're learning the more we can actually
learn um but I noticed that the the
power of this thing seems to be when you
bring curiosity not to your thoughts or
your cognition but to your body almost
like bring curiosity in as a sensation
you might have no idea what is actually
occurring but something is occurring so
it's almost like a sematic invitation to
access curiosity to soothe your soul so
you can hold more in your mind so in a
way when when you say error to me that
that makes me think of cognition am I
right or am I wrong but I think if I
bring this just into the body first it
doesn't even matter if I'm right or
wrong this is what I'm feeling and I'm
just being curious about what I'm
feeling in this moment and through the
simple act or choice of being curious
something really powerful happens where
I relax enough I can withstand that
discomfort enough for my mind to go to
new
places perhaps in dialogue with other
Minds so it doesn't have to be a solo
exercise I think it's to an this point
when you do it together it it is
probably 10 times more powerful when you
do it with other
people but it's um so often people go oh
and I when I ask myself a question about
those thoughts 20 other thoughts come
but it's not about asking a question
it's about trying to access the emotion
of curiosity in your own gut in your
body in wherever you feel in your
feelings in your
throat does that distinction make
sense it is 100% I think that's the
words I I love that distinction I think
it's so important and I also wonder
Jonathan in the context of
practice how confusing can it get when
we like even it it's reminding me are we
defining the terms that we're using
because I think the majority of people
in the context that I work in and I'm
sure those you work in in in like
professional spaces when you say
cognitive people think just rational
analytical abstract and it's it's when
we talk about the thing or we think
about the thing but we don't want to
feel the thing that's kind of my um
informal way of trying to make sense of
I think what you just said when in fact
they're never
unrelated and in a way you could also
say people might sit in the Co in the
hyper rational realm as a way to avoid
feeling the pain of whatever it is that
they're not wanting to
feel um yeah it's interesting and also
I'm intrigued by your comment there that
you know know seeking curiosity kills
curiosity and I was wondering if you
might want to just maybe share a bit
more about your thinking when you when
you say that
and so are you is is that in a way kind
of inviting us to think if you are to
introduce this or invite people into
this kind of activity how do you make
sure um I don't even know what the
answer is but I'm almost I'm thinking
when I hear you talk I think the people
in my study what it seemed to me was
that they had this belief that those
emotions held some value so in the you
know love for truth kind of principle
they did believe there was value in
those emotions and that prompted their
curiosity it was like oh my body is
selling me this thing there must be
truth in it there must be value in it
even if I don't like what I'm feeling so
what is it so then curiosity in a sense
emerged as a result of that assumption
of that underlying assumption versus I'm
feeling anxiety something's wrong with
me I've got to fix it so I think the the
belief system or the assumptions were
very different in the two cases and then
now as a practitioner I'm wondering how
do you teach this thing without forcing
it or how do you teach this thing in a
way where people access something that
is already in them um to kind of yeah
connect it back to what you say how do
we not
sick in a way that kills it but harness
it in service of
growth it's never my opening activity
when I work with a group to put it that
way but I have noticed that once you
have trust with a group this kind of
work becomes
people are hungry for this kind of work
when when the space is safe and
interesting and and their brains are
stimulated I think that's where that uh
intellectual aspect can work in our
favor where where there's substance to
it in a way where you you know I there's
an explanation but let's have an
experience so then it's almost like the
rational mind goes okay um I'm not
completely out of my depth here I'm
going to just tap into something a bit a
bit different um
but yeah if if people experiment with
versions of this or you know see links
with your own work and might want to
share I would love to learn from your
wisdom um it's been a fantastic session
and if I can end on a slightly
dialectical note I think following ura's
prompt um I I kind of see um the the
thinking system is sometimes in conflict
with the feeling system in people and
this conflict is is preventing
development but what you pointed to
today is the idea of curiosity which
perhaps belongs to both systems both
thinking and feeling acts as some kind
of bridge at reconciling the conflict
between those two systems and therefore
enabling development um so that's uh
that's a great dialectical note to end
on and uh I hope people will will
continue the dialogue with you um
because is sharing knowledge in this way
is so so valuable and now we have these
uh Zoom Technologies that's so easy to
do um so uh so once again thank you very
much and thank you everyone for
participating today thank you so much
it's been wonderful uh being here and
learning with all of you looking forward
to the followup conversations thank you
