40 50 years ago our Paradigm was that we
have to remove nature remove the trees
to plant soy pasture now we know that we
need Forest so the the Paradigm has
shifted we need to redesign the
landscape so that we maximize the
connectivity between productive areas
and forested areas these two things are
not competitive anymore they depend upon
each other
recently Carlos nobre joined me to
discuss the state of the Amazon
rainforest the risk of its collapse and
flip to Savannah in the coming decades
and why that's important for the health
and stability of the entire world as if
we shouldn't have known that following
that this week I am joined by Andre
guimar another expert on the Amazon to
discuss the political and economic
realities on the ground in Brazil
in the fight to both preserve the
Integrity of the Amazon forest and the
Amazon basin as well as the well-being
of the people who live there Andre
guaras is the executive director of the
Amazon Environmental Research Institute
which is a Brazilian Think Tank focused
on the challenges to the Amazon for
reaching zero for deforestation as well
as uh developing sustainably he is also
the facilitator of the Coalition on
climate forest and agriculture a network
of over 200 entities from the rural
sector Academia and Civil Society
focused on a long-term vision for the
land use in
Brazil as always thank you for listening
to and supporting this podcast if you
enjoyed this two-part series on the
Amazon consider sending one or both of
these episodes to someone who might be
interested in learning about this topic
as well as discuss it with some of your
friends or colleagues and how it might
impact your lives and choices going
forward forward with that please welcome
Andre
guar
Andre H that's all the Portuguese I know
my friend uh that's a good
start um you
know we talked briefly a couple weeks
ago and uh I immediately felt uh a you
know a kinship with you and I was
looking forward to this
conversation and isn't it a blessing
that uh uh and and and a boon that two
people living on different continents
who've never met can use modern
technology to come together and have a
conversation about the crisis uh of your
country the forest in your country the
whole planet that we're
facing uh it's it's such a perilous and
amazing time to be alive don't you think
absolutely Nate I couldn't agree more I
think uh this is this is one of the
beauty uh beautiful aspects of of being
on this planet these days is we do have
problems yes but we can communicate on
an efficient way and try to find
solutions for the problems and I think
that's a that's pretty much of a
privilege of being uh walking on this
planet a privilege and a responsibility
uh I increasingly think and and I think
more people increasingly
feel okay so so we're going to take a
deep dive on what's going on in the
Amazon forest uh the relationship to
climate the relationship to Global
Systems the relationship to the people
of Brazil um bioeconomic Regional models
of of economy and all that um but let's
just start what um with how did you
first get started uh on this topic as a
as a researcher as a defender of the
Amazon um I I am going to miss by by
training I I graduated actually in the
University of Brazilia where I'm talking
to you from back in
1991 uh a few months uh away from the
the the big ecological moment of our uh
recent history which was the Rio 92 the
echo 92 the meeting Rio de Janeiro which
grouped together more than 150 global
leaders to talk about you know climate
to talk about the challenges of of
protecting biodiversity the challenges
of you know
uh humans embracing nature so I think
was one of the very first moments in our
history that you know these uh uh issues
of of protecting nature and in
protecting nature and protecting
ourselves uh was debated in in a large
scale in a in a in such a high level
debate and again uh when I graduated
again a few months before Rio 92 you can
imagine the the the the debates and the
media and the attention that the public
was given to the subject
particularly the environment and
suddenly for for you know young students
or young scientists as myself the Amazon
appeared on the rider screen up until
then to be very honest with you I'm a
human guy I I used to live in Brazilia
my parents are from s Paulo so uh uh the
Amazon for me were something very
distant something very you know unknown
something very dangerous something very
you know from from many many
perspectives was was strange to my it
but suddenly because of the the event in
Rio de Janeiro that big uh green blur in
the Brazilian map appeared to me and and
I had remember I had two job offers when
I when I graduated one was to you know
be an agronomist to really run farms and
you know dedicate my time to you know
producing soy and and other products in
the in the central Brazil where I am
where brazilla is and the other job
offer was actually a an idea of putting
together a project with an another
couple of young scientists to try to
understand the Dynamics of logging in
the Amazon I had no doubt Nate I said
thank you very much to my uh uh job
offer to become an agronomist I took
everything I had including my wife and
my dog put it into a little car and
drove 2,000 kilometers to the north and
reached Bain where I lived for four
years and started my career and honestly
I would do that all again if I had the
opportunity to I think I would do that
again if I had the opportunity I would
do that right
now um so so uh I just recently had
Carlos snow uh on the show who I know
you are a colleague with who said when
he started and he's a little bit older
than us um that there was only
0.5% of the Amazon forest was deforested
and now it's uh approximately 177% so so
when did this major deforestation begin
and what were the main drivers at the
time and and the main drivers now I
think to understand the process of of
deforestation we have to to go back to
the I would say the late 60s early 70s
back then and there were lots of oil
crisis and you know global economic
crisis and Brazil was a net importer of
a number of of goods and services such
as oil for example we were a net
importer of oil but we are also a net
importer of food so Brazil used to
import poultry used to import fruits
used to import uh you know other uh food
products and and and so on so uh we had
problems with the the balance of
payments at the country so several
working groups were created at the time
to short out ways to to replace uh
Imports so one of these groups was a
group dedicated to uh replace uh food
imports and uh from that group a number
of initiatives came out one of them was
the the setup of imraa imraa is the
Brazilian Agency for agronomical
research so the objectives of embrapa
back then late 60s early 70s was to you
know to bring the the northern
agriculture to Tropical regions so adapt
agriculture to Tropical region so we we
have seen back then lots of incentives
both to develop science and to uh uh you
know bring Brazilians to the to the
interior of the country I'm talking
about the Sado the southern part of the
Amazon but also the Amazon so roads were
built infrastructure was was designed
electricity was connected dams were
built to generate electricity to cities
cities like Bay and manow which are
today 2.5 3 million people cities were
have gained traction and and enhanced
its population so the the idea of of uh
of developing the agriculture of Brazil
which initially was to replace the
Imports of food was one of the main
drivers of the occupation of of central
Brazil and the southern part of the
Amazon so it is a success story if you
if we cut a long story short and and
look at it from from today's eyes we'll
see that Brazil is today you know one of
the largest producers and exporters of
of food and agricultural Commodities on
the planet so this is a tremendous
success story on one way on the other on
the other way we we we have promoted
this growth at the expense of half of
the Sado biome and nearly at 20% as you
said 17 18% of of the Amazon biome so
there was an environmental cost
Associated to this this development
which you know strikes us today and put
you know a responsibility on our on our
shoulders to redesign this process we
can continue the way that took us here
we have to rethink the model so what you
just described in
Brazil is a microcosm of what's happened
in the entire planet with growth and the
cost of the environment except in many
other countries what happens in their
country environmentally stays in their
country but that's not the case in
Brazil because as we hear in the news
the Amazon forest are the the lungs of
the planet uh maybe you could uh
describe how important the the Amazon
basin is to to the global uh weather and
climatic and and natural world
absolutely um the Amazon uh uh stores
the equivalent to 10 years of global
carbon emissions so that's the the the
the the weight of the Amazon in terms of
of climate change I mean if we if we had
the Amazon burn you know from in in a
few days we would add a dramatic
situation to the planet because uh
zillions and zillions of tons of carbon
would be immediately emitted to the to
the atmosphere so the Amazon is also
responsible for maintaining or at least
help to maintain the the the climate in
our planet but Brazil as as uh we've
talked about is is a is a natur is a
enormous producer of of uh food and
commodities agricultural Commodities and
so on according to the minister of of
Agriculture Nate we Supply food to to 1
billion people every day and that is
directly related to the moisture that
comes from the Amazon and allows for
Brazil to have such a successful uh
agricultural production system among
other benefits but the main benefit one
might argue is you're an exporter of
ecosystem Services the vast majority of
which are not included in our prices or
our goals uh of our current system
absolutely uh one one kilo of soy Nate
requires 4,000 lers of water nearly uh
uh What uh 1,000 gallons of water to to
to be produced we we don't spend that
water but the water is necessary to to
be in the system so that we produce the
soy 1 kilo of beef demands 15,000 L of
water available in the system to be
produced so all across the the life
cycle of the animal so you know water is
absolutely necessary but it's not just
the volume of water but when it comes
when it stops so the distribu ution of
water in addition to the volume of water
is something that the tropical forest
provide as a service to agriculture as a
service to food security as a service to
the planet so just to quote one example
of how dependent we are and sometimes we
don't realize how important it is to
keep Forest standing for us for for our
daily lives so I know the last two years
have had some incredible droughts um and
uh there's the smoke from the fires can
be just visible on a on an aerial map of
of South America has have you tracked um
the standard deviation of precipitation
uh flood and drought like over the last
few decades and has the amplitude uh
increased of of the the variation in
rainfall absolutely this is this is one
of the one of the analysis that we keep
keep doing all the time the variation if
we look at the volumes Nate it's pretty
much stable right over the past decade
so we don't have more water or less
water falling what we have is a is a
different distribution of water and
that's for no other reason that we are
having landslides for example in several
cities including s Paulo which is a big
city more than 20 million people City
they are facing challenges in s Paulo in
Rio de janiro in other parts of Brazil
we have had a a severe uh uh uh severe
flooding in in h Grand D which is a
state down south of Brazil it's a it's a
tragic story because R is responsible
for about 15% of the Brazilian GDP and
80% of the economy of that state was uh
somehow damaged because of the the water
floodings and so on so all of those
those disturbances are related to a
let's put it this way a different
distribution of water which sometimes
gets concentrated in a few days
sometimes a few hours it's uh we've been
experiencing situations in in some parts
of Brazil and that's not different in
other parts of the world in in Germany
in Indonesia in mosm in several parts of
the world we are experiencing the same
thing you know the the Water Systems
both the natural ones the rivers and the
the the the artificial ones the sewage
systems for example they weren't
designed for that amount of water so we
we at the end of the day we we face you
know challenges in our infrastructural
system in cities for example such as the
sewage systems but also in the natural
systems with floodings and and uh water
disturbances that we haven't been
experiencing uh you know three four five
years ago so take me through the history
of how Brazilian government Brazilian
policy surrounding deforestation has
changed uh over previous decades and
where does it stand now let me roll back
the movie uh couple of the decades maybe
three decades we have had a peak of
deforestation in
1999 around 1999 2000 uh that year
26,000 square kilometers were deforested
in the Amazon in one year that was the
peak of
deforestation which took place in in the
year 2000 or around the year 2000 a peak
in the rate of deforestation in the rate
of deforestation correct in the rate of
deforestation that year uh 2 26,000
Square km so you know the images of the
degradation of the Amazon the images of
of the forest fires similar to what we
are observing today Nate were were on TV
screens were on on the national news
every day in 1999 in 2000 so the the
Brazilian population started to think
well this this is
my inheritage this is my asset and and
we are just letting it burn so there was
a a discomfort in Brazil so the the the
a government which was El elected in
2002 and started it it mandate in 2003
president Lula his first mandate they
said we have to do something and the
minister of environment was structured
led by Minister Marina Silva and the end
result was between 2004 and 2012 80% of
the deforestation in the Amazon the the
deforestation in the Amazon was reduced
by 80% from 26 ,000 Square km down to
4.5 th000 Square kilm so this is
a unprecedent uh uh process that took
place tons and tons millions of tons of
carbon emissions were avoided many many
uh biodiversity loss was avoided at the
time however and here's a big however
from 4.5 and then we moved to five and
then to six and then to seven and then
to eight and then to 12 and then to 15
and now we are beginning to to drop it
again because we had a a government pre
prior to to the current Administration
which
was for which it wasn't important to
fight deforestation they have they had a
different Vision they had a vision of
you know to to develop the country we
need to open and clear more areas that
was the vision of the previous
administration is is that because the
previous administration and the
officials
uh didn't understand the ecological
systems uh or because they didn't care
um or don't you know I think they didn't
care to be very Frank with you they were
just uh willing to promote development
and that has harmed indeed uh the forest
and harmed the Amazon we are now even
with the for the the the efforts of the
current Administration we are now where
we were about 12 13 years ago in terms
of the level the rate of the
deforestation so we are we are backwards
instead of moving forward but there's
still a challenge there so under Lula my
understanding uh is that there's a
promise or uh an intent to stop
deforestation by 2030 which is just 5
years from now so you said uh um in 20
years ago we were at 4,500 kilm uh per
year um uh reduced and where are we now
like roughly 13 around 13 14,000 square
kilm in one year that's where we are
that's a long way to go from 13,000 to
zero in in five or six years what is the
general irrespective of one's political
affiliation in Brazil um what is the
general citizen uh in Brazil their
attitude towards the importance of the
Amazon has that changed I I think
According to some pools that we we we
follow and actually my my Institution
have actually uh ran a poll a few years
ago with this question how important is
the Amazon for you how how how is your
perception of climate and the impacts of
climate in your life so questions like
this were asked and we were very
surprised Nate that more than 70% of
Brazilians were indeed concerned about
the future of the Amazon did understand
at some level the implications of the
the Amazon's degradation and
deforestation to their daily life so
Brazilians are among the most you know
interested people I wouldn't say
conscious yet but interested people into
what happens uh in our backyard what
happens with with the Amazon it's
important to say it's relevant to say
that we are highly dependent upon uh you
know the Amazon to survive as a country
I mention agriculture which is not
irrigated and depends upon the the water
cycles that comes from the Amazon but
you know more than 70% of our
electricity is hydro powered PL so PL so
we do depend upon a lot of water flows
to have electricity in our homes uh to
cut a long story short that's absolutely
necessary and people realize that
dependency I hadn't thought about that
so if the pump between the Amazon and
the ocean and the rivers in the sky if
that slows down or disappears so does a
majority of your electric uh Power
precisely precisely and we have had I
mean right now this is uh we we are
having shortages the the water levels of
the reservoirs are to the minimum level
so we had to turn on thermop power
plants in order to keep the electricity
levels that we need in the country so
that has been happening over the past
few years mainly because of drought and
a poor water distribution uh along the
years so we are facing challenges and
problems with electricity Supply in our
homes so I'm paying for 40% more in in
my electric bill compared to 3 months
ago because of shortages in in water FL
waterfalls uh and the the river headings
and consequently the reservoirs are in
low levels so what have been some of the
most effective policies in Prior uh
administrations to halting uh the rate
of deforestation and and looking ahead
to 2030 or beyond what what do you think
are some of the most uh important ways
uh that Brazil might halt
deforestation one thing we've learned uh
back in the early 2000s Nate when we
reduced the deforestation in 80% in the
Amazon was that reducing deforestation
is one thing keeping deforestation down
is a different thing so you have
different two boxes to deal with one and
the other challenge to reduce
deforestation command and control
punishment you know law you have to
respect the law if people respect
respect the law you know we we we will
reduce naturally deforestation more than
90% of the deforestation in the Amazon
is illegal so fighting illegal loggers
fighting uh land Grabbers fighting
farmers that are not in in compliance
with the the Brazilian forest Cod for
example reduces deforestation right but
keeping deforestation down requires
replacing an old-fashioned unsustainable
economy for a a sustainable and and you
know Green economy let me give you an
example there are municipalities in the
Amazon Nate that more than 50% of their
GDP is directly related to illegal
activities I'm talking illegal gold
mining illegal logging that generate
jobs in those municipalities and I'm not
just the direct jobs involved in in in
uh in land grabbing or in in uh chopping
down trees but the hotels at this at in
the cities they depend upon the gold
miners to you know create their their
economic result their financial results
so at the end of the day you have to
invest in green jobs you have to invest
in bioeconomy you have to invest in
modern technology so that new jobs are
offered to the to the Amazonian
population so that they they wouldn't be
going to the illegal activities anymore
so keeping the forestation down is still
a challenge you need punishment Comm man
and control but at the same time you
need reward which is a different
incentive because obviously all that
illegal activity is because they're
being compensated or rewarded by the
products of their illegal activity so if
we had if we favored and preferred
whoever they're selling it to something
else then maybe a bioeconomy or
something else might take a foothold yes
MH
yes what we are leaving through today
was planned as I I mentioned before in
the 60s and 70s and the mindset was
let's expand the country Brazilia where
I live was was was built out of nowhere
in the middle of Brazil back in the in
the ear late 50s early 60s the idea back
then was to you know bring Brazil to the
countryside bring Brazil to the to its
interior most of Brazil still today
takes place in the Cure area uh some 70%
of the Brazilian population lives up to
200 km from the coast from the Atlantic
coast so Brazil is still the big cities
s Paulo Rio Salvador HiFi PTO ALG Etc
these are all coastal cities and and and
most of the population is there so the
idea of bringing Brazil to the country
to sahad to the Amazon begun in the late
50s have had a lots of incentives over
the 70s now the challenge Nate is to
redirect those incentives uh uh the
approach that we do uh uh promoting here
at the at the pum that we do believe and
where we are trying to to position our
science is to indicate where did where
do we need to change the incentives we
are still incentivizing with
subsidized money out of my pocket out of
my taxpayer money we are still
subsidizing chainsaws to chop down trees
in the Amazon this is happening today
and why is that because the the credit
lines that are available and the credit
system is still design with a with an
ancient I would say mentality of
expansion we need to expand the frontier
in order to thrive that Paradigm has to
be shifted to you know we need to
intensify and redesign the frontier and
in order to redesign the frontier to
stop deforestation and intensify the
production generating more jobs and less
deforestation we need to refocus rethink
the incentives that we have designed you
know 30 40 50 years ago so you mentioned
that Brazil is probably one of the
biggest exporters of Environmental
Services uh to the world um but you also
are one of the largest exporters of beef
to the world H how can these two
statements continue to simultaneously Be
Be True in the future what are your
thoughts on that they have to and let me
tell you why um first of all uh you know
Brazil in some some crops let's let's
say soybean for example or even corn and
cotton and at some extent in beef Brazil
is very competitive it's very very
efficient it produces a lot per Hector
it produces a lot per unit of of dollar
it produces a lot for for input so it's
an because you have a lot of sunlight
and great soil and the hydrological
flows of the Amazon Nature blast us with
those those assets and and fortunately
you know we were able to use that on an
efficient manner when it comes to
production when it come to economic
outputs but when it comes to Nature
outputs that's not so efficient so there
is a a room for improvement in Brazil
but still Brazil is quite efficient in
producing those uh some of those goods
so if we uh somehow uh uh uh continue
exploring the frontier what's going to
happen is that the the production will
will start to fall and actually we are
observing that in some region so right
now what we need is more Forest we need
to restore some areas we need to replant
Forest as I said we need to redesign the
landscape let me just give you one
example to illustrate what I'm saying
Nate soy for example soybeans they are
up to 20% more productive up to 100 MERS
away from a forest fragment so the more
contact that I have from my crop land
with forest with nature veget vegetation
more production I have because the roots
of the trees are helping the soil
somehow or the the the they attract more
rain because the forest is there why why
are they more it's a combination of
factors you have natural enemies of
insects for example which leaves on the
trees it leaves on the forest we leave
we you have uh uh more moisture closer
to the to the forest you have more a
healthy soil and so on so it's a
combination of factors except if that's
true and if our economic system and our
incentives favor higher yields then what
would happen eventually everything else
being equal is a patchwork quilt of some
Forest some uh soy crop some Forest some
soy crop because that would give the
highest yield for soy but eventually the
connectivity of the forest as a as a
trophic pump the way you were describing
earlier would gradually disappear yes
precisely Nate you know again back 4050
years ago we didn't know that I mean our
our mindset or our Paradigm was that we
have to remove nature remove the trees
to plant whatever plant soy pasture
whatever right now we know that we need
forests we need the crop land and the
pasture land in contact with Forest
fragment in contact with n natural
vegetation so that it can produce more
so the the Paradigm has shifted we need
to again as you said redesign the
landscape so that we maximize the
connectivity between productive areas
and forested areas so that we can
produce more so now we understand that
in order to be effective and efficient
in producing agriculture we need Forest
alongside these two things are not
competitive anymore they depend upon
each other forests depend on you know
human beings to protect them and human
beings human activities such as
agriculture depend on B Forest this is
this is now clear to science I have a
lot of questions on this so th this this
would be true even 50 years ago when it
was the entire forest was largely intact
but now um according to Carlos sbre and
many other scientists that I've read and
interacted with we are approaching a
tipping point where if we DeForest much
more and I think there's a difference
between actual deforested like 177% and
then some other percentage which is 20
or 25% of forests that are not fully
intact so degraded right but as we
approach those tipping points these
efficiency soy near Forest conversations
change because it's a dynamic system
right absolutely absolutely that there's
a trend in some areas in the Amazon for
example that it's it's becoming a Savana
so in a Savana you have a onethird maybe
less carbon that you have in a in a in a
you know rainforest a mature rainforest
a climax rainforest and and if you have
less biomass less carbon you has Le you
have less Environmental Services being
generated one mature tree from the
Amazon with a 30 40 m high in it it can
pump up to 1,000 lers per per in one day
to the atmosphere one big tree the trees
in the Sado have a very in a savannah
have a a way Li limited capacity
compared to a a climax 3 in the climax 3
in the Amazon so the more biomass you
have the more services you have
available on the other hand the more
degraded you have in Forest the less
Environmental Services you have so the
challenge for the future and this is not
for Brazil I think that's for the planet
is to understand that we do depend upon
nature to thrive and the more we
understand how we do depend the more
we'll be able to protect nature and
benefit from it I think certainly in our
circles people are are fully eyes wide
open uh aware of that now and it's my
hope that the world wakes up to that
before it's too late and we just see it
in hindsight oh um so uh I want to
get back to the beef question in a
second but I I think I read in something
you sent me or or one of your talks that
um a kilogram of chicken from Brazil
that is consumed in England in
London including all of the shipping
emissions and energy to ship it from
Brazil to to London still has a lower
environmental footprint than a chicken
raised in in England is is that true
that is true that is true that is true
why is that true uh corn which is the
basic uh feed for for chicken is also
produced here so the the the integration
of the system so you have cooperatives
in the southern part of Brazil which are
extremely efficient in terms of ptry
production because the the the inputs
are nearby consequently the the
efficiency is also uh an issue okay so
then this becomes an issue of scale
because if we had the appropriate scale
then from an economic environmental uh
emission you know Allin uh cradle
degrave uh analysis it would be more it
would be better environmentally for
people in England to import their
chicken uh from Brazil but if everyone
in the world did that then the
incentives in Brazil would be so strong
that we would tip over the Amazon
tipping points and it would be an
ecological disaster right so there's a
there's there's a threshold there
finding finding the fine tuning there is
one of the challenge Nate you're
absolutely right right let let me give
you another example which you know is
it's it's it's a bit away from our
conversation but for examp electric cars
right people are you know everybody
advocates for electric cars today and
everybody's willing to change their six8
cylinder cars for for electric cars and
so on and so forth but what about the
source of energy if I drive an electric
car in in Beijing in China 70 or 80% of
the electricity is thermal power plant
so I'm actually burning coal to to fuel
my car right if I'm
H using an electric car in Brazil for
example 70% of the of the electricity
that fuels that car is uh you know
renewable Hydro solar or wind so you
know it's not because the car is
electric that it's uh emitting less
carbon to the atmosphere you have to
look at the whole
chain so uh that's the the tricky so you
have it to look at the the the the the
feed for the animal the you know the
medicines the equipment the the whole
chain to analyze whether or not it's
better to import or to produce locally
sometimes it's better to import
sometimes locally so let me ask you this
um in my episode with Carlos uh we
summarized that there are things that
Brazil needs to do uh on behalf of the
Amazon and its own country for the rest
of the world and there are things that
the rest of the world world needs to do
for Brazil and the Amazon namely we need
to reduce our emissions otherwise the
Dual uh threats of um threshold of
Savannah tipping points and 2 degree
plus climate means that there's a
positive feedback and and we lose the
Amazon the one thing that Carlos
suggested that the rest of the world
could do is stop eating beef unless they
know the destination what what is your
response to that or how do you think
about that situation I I think in the
long run it beef is going to be you know
for a niche product very expensive very
difficult to produce to transport to you
know to justify the existence of it I
mean but that's in the future we still
have billions and billions of people uh
on this planet that has deficits of
protein for example so we need to
address nutritional challenges that we
still we still have in many many
countries including Brazil with do have
a partial part of our population that is
still do not have access to you know
good quality and good amounts of protein
a day and one of the cheapest ways to
produce protein is through uh the beef
industry through the poultry industry I
I believe that in the future we will
have Alternatives or more efficient ways
to produce protein part of it will come
from you know vegetables but part of it
will come from animals eventually part
of it will be synthetized in laborat
chies so we we we will have a different
reality in the long run but we still
again we still have billions and
billions of people that are way below
the capacity to uh you know to have uh
you know funds or money available to buy
you know Cutting Edge technology of of
protein so we need to provide cheap
protein to a number of people before we
reach a momentum in which we can uh get
rid of it small caveat um beef in the
way that you describe as the most
efficient uh way um is true but using
the wrong prices because we don't
include a lot of the externalities in
the prices so absolutely is there is
there a difference um with soy or beef
or any of the other main uh agricultural
products in Brazil between large and
small scale farming operations in terms
of the impact on the
Amazon yes yes there's a big big
difference uh uh specifically in the
Amazon you have uh the the Brazilian
forest Cod asks or uh requires from
farmers in the Amazon biome to set 80%
of the farm aside for conservation so if
I have a th hectares of land I can only
use for crop land or or pure land 200
hectares out of those 1,000 that's the
requirement of the of the forest Cod for
medium and large Farmers so and what
what happens to the other 800 they're
left alone they are left alone they left
alone they have to be let left alone for
conservation purposes it's what the what
we call the legal Reserve so it's a it's
a legal requirement if I'm in Sado I
have to leave as to set aside 30% for
conservation if I'm in the Atlantic
Forest the coastal area of Brazil 20% so
it varies depending on where you are in
the country the Amazon is the most
rigorous re request which is 80% I mean
people that would go to buy a land in
the Amazon they know that so they buy
the land knowing that they have to set
80 % aside for conservation that's the
rule of the game unless they change it
and hope hopefully it's not going to be
changed that's the the law that law
applies for medium and large Farmers
small holders they are in in different
uh uh under a different type of of uh
compliance requirements from the forest
code they often times are in what we
call the rural uh uh agrari reform
settlements they are all together often
times they are legue of Reserve or the
area that they have to to protect is
collective it's not individualized each
property so it's a collective area so
that gives you a a different of the of
the in terms of medium large SI Farmers
with with small holders but most
importantly than that Nate is the fact
of uh that around 30% of the
deforestation in the Amazon takes place
inside small holders property and why is
that some 70% of the farm small farmers
in the Amazon differently from medium
large Farmers but small holders in the
Amazon family Farmers More than 70% have
never seen an agronomist or a technical
person in their lives the only Capital
they have is the natural Capital they
don't have access to financial Capital
they don't have access to technological
Capital they have limited human capacity
human capital because it's only a family
the only Capital they have available is
the natural capital is the natural
fertility of the soil so every year they
had to clear a new half a Hector or a
new Hector in order to keep the minimum
level of production in in in their
property so when you sum up one Hector
for multiply it by 700,000 small holders
in the Amazon you'll see that that's
about 30% of the deforestation in the
Amazon and that's a challenge
indeed how many Brazilians are
struggling now to make ends meet a
living paycheck to paycheck and how does
that um
affect the overall trend of of
deforestation that you're describing or
did you just give me that you're talking
about Brazil as a whole or
Amazon uh both
both according to the official data
somewhere around uh 30 million
Brazilians are still below or near the
poverty level so we're talking here
people that do not have three meals a
day for example so we we still have a
Tens of millions of Brazilians still
having to you know sell what we call
sell their lunch to buy the dinner in
other words they they're not fulfilled
in their needs in the Amazon the number
is is smaller but still a percentage of
the population there this again the
Brazil and the Amazon situation just in
so many
ways is a microcosm of our of our Global
situation so if we had into uh a world
of less affordability inflation um
more disruption higher droughts and
floods higher amplitude of of natural
events uh kind of the default
pathway that itself is going to put
everything else being equal which I hope
it's not that itself is going to put a
burden on the Amazon because these
people these 700,000 uh farmers are are
not going to have any recourse but to
use the capital they have which is the
one hectare and use it however they can
to get money or food to survive MH yep
often times to survive we have about
four million people in the Amazon today
uh one thing that is important to say
Nate we haven't mentioned yet is that
that most of the population in the
Amazon live in cities uh somewhere
around 80% of the population in the
Brazilian Amazon they are in cities big
cities like benam and our but often
times in Med medium and Smalls size
cities 30,000 50,000 100,000 inhabitants
so it's a it's a quite urbanized uh
territory out of the 28 million people
living in the Amazon some 20 to 22 Liv
in cities so we have another you know
five six seven8 million people living in
rural areas and four million of those
living in rural areas are small farmers
are living under you know minimum
conditions of subsistence so and and I
see that as a problem the half empty
glass is well four million people are
living in poverty in the Amazon the half
full glass is that if we provide
technical assistance to those people and
this is something that uh we've done
we've actually tested that hypothesis a
few years ago we've invested in in
create we've created here within eam a
group of technical extensionists so we
provided permanent good quality
extension services Technical Services to
3,000 families in the state of par we
were testing the following hypothesis if
we provide technical assistance to those
Farmers they will leave better and they
will reduce the deforestation uh that
would that would be necessary for them
to survive and thrive the end result of
this project three years of a project 25
million hais involved 42 technical
people involved were two
numbers 140% increase in the income on
average and 80 % reduction in
deforestation they don't need to cut
trees anymore because now they have
access to fertilizers uh some equipment
that would allow them to produce near
their homes instead of chopping down
trees every year so what are some of the
farming changes in the methodology Etc
that you you inform and and practice
during uh those those uh extension
people one of the things that we've
looked after was H cattle raising some
80% of this small holders in the Amazon
do have cattle cattle is like a savings
account this is important to understand
this like a savings account to small
holders when someone gets sick they sell
a couple of animals go to the city to
get hospital treatment uh when someone
you know the daughter wants to go to
school in the in the city they would
sell the animals to allow for the for
the the the kid to go to school and so
on so it's a it's a savings account they
don't have bank accounts but they have
the animals as as a savings account so
it's it's an important part of the the
economy and the economic safety of those
those families right so again 80% of
small holders have cattle on an
extremely inefficient way the average
head count is half an animal per Hector
right if you provide if they they they
invest 300 kilos of nitrogen and this is
not hypothetical this is reality 300
kilos of nitrogen per Hector fences
a little bit of of training to to the to
the to the farmer and a pump to pump
water from the river into a more
comfortable area for the animals you can
move from less than one animal per
Hector to up to five animals per Hector
and we've done that so again you you you
don't need to chop down every year half
a hectare to expand your pasture land if
you use minimum this is not rocket
science we're talking here you know
fences nitrog
and and a pump and then you move you
know fivefold sixfold more production of
of catle this is just an example of how
income production can be increased
without the needs to to open new areas
and the same goes for you know uh food
crops like manoch and and fruit
production when they have the the the
the availability of of fertilizers the
availability of minimum technology you
know to you know how to plant trees
what's the the distance between one tree
one plant and the other basic
information they can multiply it by two
three four times the yields which means
that they don't need into to go into new
areas anymore they stay closer to home
and more efficiently let me put you on
the spot here Andre first before I do
that what what did those uh symbols on
the wall behind you uh represent I love
the green and then the the wood and then
the red it's it's there's something
artistic in an abstract sense but what
are those the that that's very symbolic
to me uh uh Nate the the wall in green
is is it pumps color so this is one of
our our characteristics our logo our you
know materials are all in this this
green so this is what we call our green
but most importantly are those
equipments over here these are
indigenous uh equipments used for for
Wars and uh chief
Chief R is probably one of the most n
recognized leaders in the in the
Brazilian indigenous groups and uh he's
uh 80 he's nearly four 90 years old now
he's an old guy and uh we have had a
relationship with the Institute that
carries his name Institute of Hai since
a long time we are partners with the
Institute of Hani and we we have this uh
this uh uh I would say this this
vocation of of bringing indigenous
leaders to the environmental discussions
globally so the the climate cops for
example the conference of the parties of
of the climate convention we we used to
bring always alongside with our
delegation we invite two or three
indigenous leaders to participate in the
discussions to learn what's going on and
so on and chief RI was invited to come
along with us to cop uh oh my gosh cop
26 or cop 27 in bone in Germany and at
the end of the cop because he was part
of our delegation he was participating
in our and he was very thankful for for
IAM so he took this actually there are
three of them one on top of the other
and he you know gifted us with with
those so I I was thrilled because this
and and by the way those were were made
by him himself so his hands were used to
produce those uh those uh equipments
here which again are used to war of
course I'm not willing to hit nobody on
the brain but if necessary I can use you
to educate some of my colleagues here
please don't take me for for literally
on this
one uh I'm going to come back to the
question that I was going to ask but you
brought up the indigenous people in in
the Amazon my understanding is there's
over 350 tribes in the Amazon how many
of those have your has your organization
epom worked with and how are the
indigenous uh peoples and Nations
playing a role in efforts to preserve
the Amazon forest well F first of all uh
around 30% of the Amazon is formed of
indigenous territories we're talking
about U 200 and 200 and so ethes
different ethes we are talking you know
about 150 160 different languages uh
from different Roots I mean different
these are totally different languages so
there's an enormous cultural
diversity in in those areas again 30% of
the Amazon uh that those areas Nate are
they they they represent less than 5% of
the deforestation in the Amazon despite
being 30% of the total territory less
than 5% of the deforestation takes place
in those areas and this is directly
related to the presence of indigenous
people you know they are there they have
fire brigades they looked after their
territories this is their land this is
where their ancestors are were buried
that that's their you know uh uh uh you
know ceremonial places are are in those
lands so they have a profound respect to
the forest these are people we are
talking here some of those uh those
those ethnic groups they have thousands
of years living in the Amazon
harmonically with uh with the forest so
uh they are the guardians of the forest
the Guardians of 30% of the Amazon
needless to say more so the um the
survey that your organization did and 0%
of Brazilians um cared about the Amazon
that would be a silly survey to give to
those indigenous peoples because it
would be a dumb question they would they
would intuitively know that their
livelihoods and their future are
intimately connected with the forest
absolutely are there any common
principles or or ways of life uh that
you've observed that the indigenous
people in in Brazil uh help them live in
tune with the Amazon like things that
they do or ways that they think MH
there there's there are some beautiful
stories there it because uh you know the
indigenous groups you know they they
have nature as their clock they have
nature as their calendar so you know
that that tree on when that tree blooms
that's the time to plant manc when uh
you know that tree over there you know
let goes their leaves this is the time
to fish a certain fish that will take
place in C so they have these uh you
know connections which for us is AB
absolutely difficult to understand but
this is their daily life we have to use
Google we need Google exactly their
Google is looking at the trees you know
looking at the Rivers looking at the
animals so the way the animals behave
you know tells them a story or tells
them that this is the time to do
something so you know the connection
that these folks have with nature is uh
metaphysical it's it's you know it's not
written on books and and so we we need
to learn from them we need toar learn
from them not just to you know to
protect the forest but to respect the
differences I mean I I tell a lot here
my institution that we are all for the
the you know the we are Defenders of the
biodiversity what about the cultural
diversity what about the you know
religious diversity I mean we have to be
coherent and I believe that you know the
the future of mankind is a diverse
future or no future at all so we need to
be open to see and respect and sometimes
learn with you know the different and
the indigenous groups present in Brazil
they offered us an enormous opportunity
I'm very proud to have you know more
than 200 different cultures in in my in
my in my country you know there are
nearly 50 indigenous tribes they have
never been contact yet living in the
middle of the Amazon we just know that
they are there because here and there we
we we we fly over them so we know
they're there but they never in contact
and I have a profound respect to the
fact that we are still protecting those
groups me too I I think there's
something in many of us that when you
say a fact like that it it it lights an
ember of of Hope and reverence that the
superorganism hasn't reached quite that
far yet true um so on this conversation
uh there are at least four things that
need to happen one is the global human
economy needs to um
reduce emissions and eventually pull out
CO2 uh from the air in order to get back
down to uh a safe operating Zone uh for
the the anthropos scene or the hallene
number two is um Brazil needs to stop uh
deforestation uh number three Brazil
needs to eventually reforest so that we
go back from that
177% uh um deforested Amazon down to 15%
or 133% or eventually maybe we we get
back to where it was 50 years ago and
then the fourth thing is obviously as as
you've brought up is have a bioeconomic
model to support the the people uh in
the forest in your country of Brazil so
if you were benevolent dictator uh on
these issues leaving aside the global
emission issue um because that may be
out of your benevolent dictator control
what what sort of things what sort of
Pathways could you envision in Brazil in
the Amazon that would allow us in the
next few decades to completely stop
deforestation to reforest and have
economic models that that work for the
people I would focus a lot of my
attention into incentives uh you know
humans react to punishment yes we do
react to punishment but we do react much
better you know uh through incentives
and and and I think uh we we have an
opportunity in the Amazon for example to
redesign incentives to uh we don't even
need to create new incentives incentives
are there we have subsidized credit
lines we have uh you know money from the
public sector you know supporting poor
families but what I think is that we
need to rethink those incentives on a
new paradigm the new paradigm is a
paradigm of more Harmony and here let me
be philosophical here a little bit
because you know we we are often times
trying to you know balance the game so
we need to balance the game but
balancing supposedly we have two sides
on a on a on a on a scale so we need to
balance two sides when it comes to
harmonize I mean we are all equals so I
think we the challenge is to you know
once again promote more incentives
refocus incentive so we have a better
Harmony we have people respecting the
indigenous groups because the indigenous
groups do produce something that is
important to the country they are
protecting Water Services they are
protecting Environmental Services which
we need to our economy so the
understanding those connections in my
view is fundamental for any human uh
Community to uh you know behave properly
and and you know design a future in
which we be more harmonic with nature
and consequently be more know
sustainable in the wrong run right now
we are not sustainable we need more than
three four five Planet Earths you know
to survive in the you know model the
consumption model that we have today
that has to change and I think that has
to change and we have to change looking
at you know our ancient cultures they
have a lot to teach to us the indigenous
groups they have a lot to teach to us so
what what is your uh what is your work
the work of your organization ipam uh if
you're wildly successful what are some
things that you hope to
implement we are science-based
organization so our uh raw material is
data and our product is uh you know
information so we do believe that good
quality information have the power to
change that's what we have been doing
over the past 30 years that's what we
intend to continue doing uh however uh
it's it's a need I have to say it's a
quite Ane inefficient uh process uh
translating science into policies
translating science into corporate
decisions is very difficult often times
more difficult than producing science
itself so I think uh if I if I had a an
opportunity to do one thing I would try
to translate science on a on a way that
you know Ordinary People on the street
of decision Akers on you know political
levels could could use more efficiently
and this is this is you know uh I think
it's a it's a it's a mistake that many
many scientists do is is you know they
think that their work ends on a paper I
think the work of a scientist begins on
a paper that's when you really defend
your ideas and channeling those ideas to
make changes so I think uh you know my
view to this organiz ation in the future
is that we approximate the distance
between science and decision making on a
individual basis on a collective basis
on a country basis it doesn't matter we
need science to be closer to people's
decision-making process on a daily basis
this is my personal challenge for my
life many countries are uh I've I've
learned recently are threatening to
boycott Brazilian products if Brazil
doesn't start to uh protect the
rainforest what's your opinion of that
strategy from the International
Community I think boycotts boycotts have
to be very carefully used often times if
you look at history of boycotts they
serve the purpose of those that are
promoting the boycott but not
necessarily they s solve the problem
that the boycott wants to solve let me
give you an example concrete example
right now as we are speaking Europe is
is designing and we'll be launching in
the years to come a policy called UDR
European Union deforestation regulation
so basically the UDR says that well
there's a list of products that they
import and they are not importing from a
certain date products that have promoted
deforestation so they don't want
deforestation in those products so I'm
talking here soy uh I'm talking here
corn beef uh leather coffee cocoa so on
and so forth fine uh however the world
is a little bigger than Europe I mean
that UDR system will certainly solve you
know the European uh problem with with
important deforestation but my question
is is that going to solve deforestation
I doubt you know Europe represents a
smaller portion of the Brazilian market
for
example so what about the balance you
know so it at the end of the day create
two worlds boycotts in my view they
create two worlds one is the word that
can attend the boycott demands and the
other word that cannot so the the
problems continue you're not sorted
out okay I'm going to put you on the
spot Andre um you talked about your your
mission uh both your organization and
your personal on science uh and and
policy so I want you to give an elevator
pitch two different ones about a minute
each give a pitch to people uh uh in the
world on the state and the importance of
the Amazon and how they should think
about it and what to do and then do the
same pitch to someone that lives in your
country uh in
Brazil I would say for for the globe
something very simple Nate you know it's
better to have an Amazon on our planet
than not have an Amazon and you do have
a role to play in making sure that your
kids and your kids's kids will see the
Amazon and will benefit from the Amazon
simple as that this is this is what I
would say to the planet to to a
Brazilian something similar you know the
Amazon is fundamental if you have uh
three kids one of your kids will be
employed in the future if we keep the
Amazon standing I'm talking about not
just the farming of of our econ the
farming portion of our economy but also
you know the industry of of uh you know
equipments the industry of input
suppliers Financial Services which
trying some p over you and so on so you
want to get your kids employed in the
future make sure that the Amazon is
protected so uh we have multiple
multiple risks uh and thresholds uh both
in the world economy and the world uh
ecology um but let me let me ask you
this hypothetical question so in my
opinion we are headed towards 2 degre
Cel above pre-industrial times and and
probably above uh I hope that some
something happens either technology-wise
or economic wise that that's not the
case but I think that you and I would
agree that that's probably uh that's a
trend yeah that's the
trend um we are also sitting at a state
when 177% plus uh of the Amazon is
deforested and although we are reducing
deforestation it's still net positive
which means more kilometers square
kilometers are being uh removed every
year in the possible scenario where the
world does hit 2 Dees
c um but
Brazil maybe with your help uh yours and
your colleagues and others takes a
different path and does start to respect
uh um and rebuild the Amazon in a two
degree celsius world how important is it
how critical is it that the Amazon's
component in that world reverses and we
go back because if we were able to
reverse deforestation and go from 17 to
12 to 5 to the way that the Amazon used
to be that itself removes a lot of
carbon like you said the Amazon contains
10 times as much of our emissions so if
we regrow it by 20% that's that's more
than the emissions of a couple years um
is it possible that that this could
happen that Brazil could
really value the commons both its own
Commons and the Global Commons which is
the the the lungs and the Heart of the
planet and the Amazon forest what are
your thoughts on that it is not just
possible but absolutely necessary uh
let's look at some numbers to illustrate
my point here we have about
120 130 million hectares of uh land uh
deforested in the Amazon right
about onethird of it 40 million hectares
is
degraded highly degraded not just
degraded highly degraded I'm talking
here former pasture land that is now you
know soils exposed so those areas are
just sitting there they they have very
limited capacity to naturally regenerate
so we need to intervene in those areas
40 million hectares in the Amazon alone
let me put it in perspective Nate Brazil
the entire enire country of Brazil have
uh 65 70 million hectares of crop land
so we are talking more than half of what
we have in cropland in the entire
country more than half of what we have
is the graded land in the Amazon so we
have the chance to if we don't do
anything else in terms of Technology no
no enhancement of Technology we can
multiply by 1.5 or 1.6 hour production
without chopping down a single tree just
benefiting from you know the the area
that is already degraded highly degraded
the Amazon alone seado has another 20
million hectares and so on so we do have
enough land to expand the agricultural
Frontier without chopping down a single
tree so that's one one point but my
other point is that we should not do
that we should actually restore some
forests within those 40 million for the
reasons that I stated before we need to
redesign the frontier we need to
maximize the cont between paser and
kland and Native vegetation but in order
to do that we need to have a to build an
economic or a financial stream which is
not buil yet so the planting Forest has
to be looked at as a business not as a
philanthropy right now we are restoring
forest with philanthropic money we need
to restore forest with the mainstream
money and that means that companies
countries banks have to B benefit from
they have to profit from it so it's on
us scientists it's on us Brazilians to
show to the financial world that there
is profit you know in restoring forest
and in my personal view that pro pro
that profit is in two two two issues one
is environmental services such as carbon
sequestration and maintenance and and
and and maintenance on on the ground and
the other one is agricultural uh crop
yields improve right so or increase so
you know there there's profit there
potentially but we need to make sure
that you know Banks investors companies
observe realize and invest that's the
challenge so there is the possibility of
the rebound effect or the backfire
effect is that as incomes go up there's
more barbecues and more demand for beef
Etc so you make uh income that is more
environmentally sound but you spend it
in the global economy on something
that's not so Environmental friendly
yeah that's a good point a good point we
have to agree on a moratorium you know
we will continue to thrive we will
continue to expand production but we're
not chopping down any any more trees we
need to agree on that boy I um you know
I haven't talked about the Amazon yet
and now I'm I met several people in New
York at climate week and I have become
aware how critical um the Amazon
situation is not only for the people in
South America but for the whole world I
mean it is like you said the heart of
the planet it um do you I mean you are
uh at least since 1991 uh an an
ecologist a scientist looking at the
situation of the world do you have any
suggestions for the viewers of this
program uh who are paying attention to
what's happening in the world um at this
time of um anxiety and opportunity yes
uh I would say that you know for
everybody especially for young people
Nate I think they they need to think
Global and act local let let me try to
illustrate it I mean we need to
understand what happens in our planet
this is our planet this is our home so
we need you know I'm sitting in Florida
and you know I need to understand if I
was sitting in Florida I need to
understand what goes on in Africa if I'm
sitting in Zimbabwe I need to understand
what goes on in Brazil the good news is
that we have social media we have
Internet we have you know technology
which allows us to you know get the
information quick we are not using well
that information look at the elections
in some countries there look at the
politicians you know benefiting from the
fake news and so on so I think there is
a an industry of fake news which is
taking advantage of the technology but
that this going to be over at some point
you know people will realize what is
good and what's bad on the internet at
some point in time and so thinking
globally for me means get yourself
informed what goes on in the country
make your make your mind make your you
know create your own opinion about
things this is number one so look at the
at the planet but act locally for
example Nate I have with my family H an
agreement that if I have two products it
doesn't matter what the price is if I
have two products to that I can buy two
similar products that I can buy in a
supermarket and one of them was produced
closer to my house I would choose that
one simple choices like that let's look
at the plan let's learn globally about
the global issues but acting locally you
know go go visit the cities that are
close to your city you know do tourism
next door to your city instead of
catching a plane or in addition to
catching a plane to visit Paris I mean
you know these are individual decisions
on a daily basis that if you sum up them
all up we may have a better Planet what
advice do you have for young people in
their late teens early 20s who are
becoming aware of uh climate and the
Amazon and the economic and energy
issues ETC mhm spent some time H you
know learning about the let me let me
give you my example uh uh Nate why did I
choose to go to the Amazon and become
you know a scientist and uh gave up my
agronomic uh career uh you know the
salary that was offered to me was five
times uh more in the in the business
sector than it was to be a scientist but
it wasn't a variable in my life so what
I would what I would advise young people
too is you know don't be you know
excited about making millions and
millions of dollars being so competitive
and so on competitiveness and is is the
more harmonic you are you are to the
environment that surrounds you the more
competitive you are to survive the more
competitive your kids will be because
they have a better culture coming from
you so you know look at the planet it's
a beautiful planet learn about the
planet and help the planet to survive in
the long run you do have a role to play
we we have uh we all have a a role to
play and just to finalize that that
message Nate I a few years ago I used to
say that well the the work that I do is
for my uh grandkids you know I'm working
for my grandkids I have two kids but I'm
working for my grandkids because the
impact of climate change will take you
know 20 30 40 years to to arrive few
years back I started thinking that well
not really to my grandkids but maybe I'm
working for my kids because you know
things are happening you know sooner
than later now I'm thinking well maybe
I'm working for myself and a few few
weeks ago I realized that actually I'm
working for my parents are which are in
their 80s because they are breathing
smoke as we speak in the capital of my
country today so their health is being
affected by the degradation of the
Amazon today not in 30 years time so
please young people we need we have a
job to do and that job is today not
tomorrow what do you care most about in
the world
Andre people living in
harmony harmony you know being equals I
mean I meet a millionaire of course I
admire that guy but you know when I talk
to this millionaire I look at him or her
in the eye same level when I meet
someone in the middle of the Amazon with
no income no money at all no assets at
all you know I I have to look at that
person as an equal I look I have to look
at her or him in the eye and we are all
the same I mean we we we we we are born
naked and we die naked we are all the
same Nate and what happens in between
you know borning and and and and dying
is what's going to make the difference
and and I think the difference is made
not in you know building more things not
in accumulating more Goods not in making
more money but instead you know in
making more friends in learning more
about the the planet in you know being
in in in harmony with nature harmony
with the others especially if they are
different from you so value the
differences and the
diversity if you could wave a magic wand
and there was no recourse to your status
or or security what is one thing you
would do to improve human and planetary
Futures I would stop poverty I would I
would I would you know cancel poverty
from this this spey we we don't have any
more poor people this is this is an
absurd Nate you know in 20 thou
2024 we have to leave with poverty we
have to live with families and kids
starving to death uh you know we we have
enough food for everybody we have enough
food what we don't have is money to buy
food so you know income distribution
making sure that you know everybody has
the minimum conditions to leave to
thrive to you know uh to be happy right
so uh I would stop poverty thank you and
and thank you for your time today if if
I were to ask you back in the future for
a repeat conversation what is one topic
um that you're passionate about and you
know a lot about that's relevant to our
uh Global ecological and economic
Futures that you would be willing to
take a a deep dive on food food
production we we we are in the in the
the merge of of a revolution in food
production for good hopefully uh you
know we need to feed seven eight billion
people this is not easy but we have to
feed that people those people with
quality with you know good level protein
good level of carbohydrates good quality
of carbohydrates vitamins vegetables you
know I I do have a very very diverse and
and and you know uh nutrition uh but I
would like to that nutrition to be
available to everybody regardless of
where they are regardless of their
religion regardless of their gender I I
would like to talk about food and I
think that has everything to do with
with climate change that has everything
to do with Forest tropical and
non-tropical that has everything to do
with the essence of being humans right
we do eat before we drive cars we do eat
before we learn uh to read books we have
to go back to the origins and uh make
sure that we understand who we are and
who we are is B based on what we eat so
let's talk about food my friend if you
want okay sounds like a plan thank you
so much and uh I've never been to Brazil
maybe one day but thank you for all fix
this thanks for all your important work
and uh I have high hopes for people in
Brazil and the world waking up to
protect our forests uh and Earth Systems
and honor NES and uh looking forward to
talking more about food and other issues
my pleasure really honored to be here if
you enjoyed or learned from this episode
of the great simplification please
follow us on your favorite podcast
platform you can also visit the great
simplification tocom for references and
show notes from today's conversation and
to connect with fellow listeners of this
podcast check out our Discord Channel
this show is hosted by me Nate Hain
edited by no troublemakers media and
produced by Misty stinet Leslie bat Lutz
Brady hyen and Lizzy serani
