this video is brought to you by 880,000
hours hi welcome to another episode of
Cold
Fusion before I even utter a syllable I
think we should make something clear
when we say AI our minds go straight to
the often trashy consumer generative AI
that's been all over the news but
there's a distinction between that and
regular neural networks that are quietly
being used in novel ways in the
background I've called artificial
intelligence and dichotomy multiple
times for this reason
and just a last bit of housekeeping
we're not going to split hairs on
semantics here because basically
artificial intelligence in the modern
Zid K is synonymous with neural Nets so
the terms will be used interchangeably
just for
Simplicity okay so there's no question
that AI certainly has split opinions
among the public we can take America as
an example to quantify this a 2024 yugov
poll breaks it down the four most common
emotions towards AI are caution concern
skepticism and curiosity interestingly
14% think it's already more intelligent
than people and another note the younger
people are the more positive they're
likely to view AI this includes views on
ai's effects on society their own life
or the economy whatever the figures are
globally one quick look online will show
you a fact a lot of people love to hate
AI online all you hear about is scummy
companies that lie that overpromise its
capabilities and underd deliver and then
there's the other end you also hear
about sneaky companies replacing workers
with AI for example this unfortunate guy
I just lost my job and I lost it to AI I
I've been a graphic designer for the
past eight years of my life on Monday
this week I got told that I'm being made
redundant turns out basically all of the
material that I've provided over the
past 6 years is now being fed to Ai and
templated a design that would take me 30
minutes now takes AI 30 seconds in fact
a little while back I made an episode
looking at the corporate deception when
it comes to AI but that's all the
surface stuff that everyone keeps
talking about what about something new
what if we dug deeper and took a
comprehensive look at the flip side that
is how can AI be used for good what I
mean is this are there any world
benefiting positive applications of AI
that can't be achieved with any other
technology so in this episode we'll
explore how AI can and is making a
difference in many fields like
disability support medicine designing
better chips and other important sectors
keep in mind that some of these projects
featured are still in their early stages
so a lot could change in the future but
conceptually I found these very
interesting we also feature a special
segment from Tasmania Australia I
traveled there to see how AI is being
used to help replenish a species that
has declined by
95% so in this episode let's dive into
the real world impacts of AI
you are watching cold fusion
TV it's no secret by now that AI is
predominantly powered by Nvidia gpus
especially in the training process so
much so that it's seen nvidia's value as
a company quite literally Skyrocket
along with the AI hype these gpus rely
on powerful silicon to deliver their
capabilities but there's a Twist now ai
is improving the very same chips that
they run on it's an interesting Clos
Loop cycle let's see how it works in
chip manufacturing there's a key step
known as lithography this is where
detailed circuit designs are edged into
semiconductor Wafers it's achieved with
something called a photo mask Nvidia
designed a new GPU based algorithm along
with a new library which accelerate
computational liography by 4 times
basically they've developed an algorithm
which paraly their task among many gpus
this reduces amount of time needed for
computing a photo mask from several
weeks to an overnight job the main
problem was that creating photo masks
used to be a slow arduous task that
could take weeks but now Nvidia has a
new platform that consists of generative
AI algorithms that can speed up the
process what used to take weeks is now
40 times faster and can be done
overnight there are 89 reticles for the
Nvidia
h100 running on CPUs a single reticle
currently takes 2 weeks to
process kitho running on gpus can
process a reticle in a single 8-hour
shift nvidia's new platform is called Q
litho and it chews through nanoscale
computational lithography problems at
incredible pace and at incredibly small
scales we're talking 2 nanom in size
that's like comparing the width of a
human hair to the size of a football
field this AI driven approach isn't all
just about speed it's about making what
seemed physically impossible
possible tsmc the world's largest
independent semiconductor Foundry is
already using this accelerated process
other big names in the industry like
asml have joined the effort together
these companies are setting the
foundation for the next generation of
semi conductors aiming for 2 nanom
technology and Beyond so then if Nvidia
has been using AI to create their own
chips you'd expect to see a huge bump in
performance right well where is it well
take a look at this chart comparing
nvidia's GPU performance to Mo's law
it's hard to know exactly how much the
AI system is helping but AI is making a
difference here so what's the takeaway
well what's fast today is about to get a
whole lot faster AI could take the
computing power of tomorrow to levels
we've only dreamed of and as a side I'm
sure most of you know about dlss it's
nvidia's AI upscaler that manages to
provide higher quality visuals without
demanding excessive computational power
better chip design is something that one
might probably expect in terms of
contributions of AI but using AI to help
regenerate kelp plants in remote parts
of Australia well that's new even for
me I was invited to travel to Tasmania
Australia to check out how AI was being
used to help restore Australia's giant
kelp population thanks to a project by
Google the Commonwealth scientific and
Industrial research organization or CSO
The Institute for marine and Antarctic
studies or imass The Nature Conservancy
or TNC the Great Southern Reef
foundation and the kelp Alliance that's
a lot of collaboration so something must
be going on here and before we dive into
it we got to understand what's at stake
here so Australia has a massive kelp
forest stretching from Midway down the
West Coast all the way to the island
nation's East Coast in fact 70% of
Australians live within 50 km or 31 Mi
of a kelp forest due to Rising water
temperatures a large population of kelp
has died off over time in Tasmania this
number is at a staggering
95% that's right only 5% of the original
population
remains so who cares about some undersea
plans
well kelp is actually important in
sustaining thousands of types of sea
life for example some animals feed off
kelp others make kelp their homes and
other animals feed off those animals and
so on it's a massive community and
ecosystem with thousands of types of sea
life depending on kelp it's not hard to
imagine the runaway domino effect if the
kelp forest goes permanently
extinct to get started on fixing a
disaster in the making mapping out the
scale of the problem was essential now
doing this by hand is virtually
impossible possible so how does Google's
AI help well Google is using their own
engine from Google Earth and a cloud
platform called vertex AI to accelerate
the discovery of the remaining kelp
forest at superhuman speeds Google is
partnering with the ngis to quote locate
and analyze kelp forest in more than
7,000 square km of satellite imagery for
the first time this helps researchers
paint a more complete picture of these
ecosystems we sat down in person with
Leia Kaplan sustainability business
leader at in Tasmania to share more the
giant kelp is interesting because it the
canopy floats on the surface which means
that we can actually detect it with
satellite imagery um the reason that is
important is because understanding the
entire um geographical span of the giant
kelp in Australia actually hasn't been
done before um and so to generate a map
of where the kelp is remaining so that
we can understand how restoration
efforts are progressing that's really
really important and it's something we
can do at scale with satellite imagery
which is just way more affordable than
the old way of doing it which was
basically to fly a plane and take
photographs so um satellite imagery can
be automated the processing and the AI
detection of CP can be automated um and
so we can actually um have ongoing
remant Maps once the mapping is carried
out Google the csiro and imass can use
AI to do what it does best pattern
recognition and prediction using the 5 %
kelp that has survived the higher
temperature range AI analysis can
uncover the genetic patterns that enable
this kind of kelp to survive once that's
figured out this special kind of kelp
can be bred and then used to replenish
the dying population with a new breed of
heat resistant kelp we had a tour of the
CSO and imass labs to see parts of this
in action to get more insight into the
genetic profiling I had a chat to Andrew
Carroll product manager at Google
research to give some further details so
one component of of any sort of study is
to understand what amount of genetic
diversity is present in the species just
to understand where the starting point
is the second set is to understand what
are the traits that give resilience to
various challenges and that the key
challenge here is is thermal tolerance
it's the ability for Kel to withstand an
increase in in ocean temperatures This
research project wouldn't just make a
difference in Australia but could have a
positive impact globally Google states
that they're making the geospatial map
accessible to all scientists and the AI
tools used are open
source perhaps one of the most
incredible ways that AI could make a
difference is potentially giving
Mobility back to those who have lost it
introducing AI powered Prosthetics yeah
so it's a full it's a full robotic arm
like there's a AI chip in here and then
this like attaches to like the remainder
of my arm there's uh sensors and stuff
in here that reads the signals and
nerves in my arm that the surgeons REM
so like me thinking about opening
closing like I'm using the same nerves
and stuff he evidently looks quite happy
and you can feel his Joy let me tell you
another story this is Sarah deard 2
years ago she lost her arm in a subway
accident at age 45 she's gotten a new AI
assisted bionic arm it trains itself and
gets better the more she uses it but the
thing is it's heavy and has to be
charged every day but still the
important thing is that it's given her
the ability to do everyday tasks that
were once impossible simple things like
making a coffee straightening her hair
and hugging her daughter the New York
Times did a piece on her earlier this
year and they put it all perfectly quote
AI is seeping into further Fields like
healthcare while many researchers have
raised alarms about ai's risks other
experts said that those concerns must be
weighed against the Technology's
potential to improve lives end quote and
that is the central theme of this
episode AI can do good so with all seen
Prosthetics before but how do these AI
powered ones work neural Nets and
machine learning are used in these
Prosthetics to interpret electric nerve
signals from the patient muscles it
allows for more precise and intuitive
control AI basically gives the
prosthetic a brain imagine a prosthetic
leg that knows that you're climbing a
stair or a hand that can grab a cup
smoothly without spilling that's neural
networks in action it can use sensors
within the limb to gather information
from the external environment sensors
read the muscle signals then move the
limb and it can be smart and adapt
several companies are using AI to create
smarter prosthetic limbs Autobook offers
a bionic hand which uses AI for improved
functionality and control rewok is known
for their powered walking assistant
system last year they revealed their
plan to use AI for autonomous decision-
making in the new exoskeleton prototype
how long had it been since you took a
step almost 20 years 20 years when you
stand up and you hadn't stood up in
years that was something that um that
was the best part of it other examples
include osor an Icelandic firm that
makes bionic prosthetics for lower limb
utees actively powered technology allows
power KN users to expand their
activities including those that are
still challenging for users of passive
knees an atom limbs which combines
Advanced senses and machine learning for
more accurate and realistic movement in
prosthetic arms we basically cover your
your stump in electrodes and you train
it up with your Phantom limb that we
can't see but you can flex your finger
extend your finger rotate your wrist
rotate it the other way and our machine
learning and AI system takes a huge
amount of training and spits out a
result so that now you whenever you
think can just move so there's nothing
in your head nothing on your head
nothing in your arm it's all this
surface electrode and AI that basically
Powers it according to an estimate
there's over 550 million mpts worldwide
there's 2 million in the US alone and
that number is expected to double by
2050 so just take a second to think
about how many people's lives could be
changed by Ai and Advanced Prosthetics
but there's a catch even though there's
huge potential this technology is not
quite ready for the prime time for
people who need it most one big reason
is as you've probably already guessed
the cost building a robotic system that
can mimic all the movement is quite
challenging to add to this recreating
sensation is probably still decades away
at this point if it's even possible at
all but even with what's available right
now it's no doubt changing lives for
those who have access to it over time as
the technology improves and
Manufacturing becomes cheaper access
will increase and that is a great
thing Prosthetics are just the start but
in the field of healthcare neural
networks are showing potential it's
augmenting the way we diagnose treat and
manage Health on a global scale this
graph extensively lists the areas in
which healthc care is already having an
impact sectors such as medical equipment
prep medical assistance and a variety of
technicians are the ones being most
affected the implications for healthcare
are enormous and most doctors right now
are sleepwalking they do not understand
how artificial intelligence is going to
completely change the practice of
medicine I'm a doctor myself once more
this is not an attack against any one
doctor but I believe the medical
profession has completely sold out and
they totally deserve what is about to
come to them over the next few years and
if any doctor out there thinks they can
Shield themselves from these changes
well good luck to you because you are
absolutely not going to be able to do
that big change ahead better brace
yourself for that this next section is
bypassing that tide conversation of AI
replacing doctors and other healthcare
workers that's not what I'm going to be
talking about this is more about AI
helping with the heavy lifting in many
ways Google's Med LM aims to do just
that Med LM is a set of AI tools created
to do things like quickly write up
patient notes and help find important
markers and diseases the idea is to make
healthc care tasks easier and more
efficient it's not just Google though
Nvidia has rolled out some AI tools to
make surgeries and Medical Imaging
smarter and faster Titans like Johnson
and Johnson and GE Healthcare are on
board with nvidia's AI tools looking to
the field of medicines our Ural from ey
Americas has seen a positive shift in
the biofarma industry they note that AI
has gone from a meaningless buzzword to
a real game changer in just a year and a
half what do they mean by this typically
finding new drugs is a lengthy Journey
filled with research clinical trials and
testing this process can cost
pharmaceutical companies billions of
dollars and all with a high risk of
failure now with the help of AI they can
cut down on time and cost and that's a
big deal we can point to a few biotech
companies that are already using Ai and
deep learning to boost their research
for example recursion Pharmaceuticals is
using nvidia's AI supercomputer bioh 2
to find new medicines faster benevolent
AI checks drugs that are almost ready
for testing they want to treat diseases
that don't have good treatments yet
atomwise on the other hand utilizes its
atom net deep learning neuron Network
for binding Affinity prediction this is
a crucial step in the drug Discovery
process this helps them find effective
drugs quickly and more often neural
networks are speeding things up and
making the whole operation more
efficient and smarter Mr armchair
skeptic out there might shout I call BS
but this is not just theoretical
McKenzie published a research study
where they found that AI does indeed
positively impact productivity and boost
success rates in biofarma research this
is a hidden movement going on under the
noses and away from all the general AI
hype already two 270 Aid driven drug
Discovery companies have been
founded combined with rapid advancements
if corporate greed stays out of it we
could see new medicines with less side
effects for a cheaper price it's a tall
ask but a man can dream others in the
space like delire Diagnostics have
developed a test that uses AI to
identify indicators of lung cancer
similarly researchers at the Children's
National Hospital in Washington have
created an AI tool designed to diagnose
rheumatic heart disease and children
and in the past year there's been plenty
of these Medical Solutions coming online
in a previous episode not long ago we
already saw how cancer detection is
being made easier through the use of AI
all you need is a simple sample of dried
blood detection rates can reach up to
85% and best of all it's quick and cheap
and it's not just one research paper or
one hospital that's used this solution
it's almost prolific so in science
independent verification is always great
so this is really exciting in robotic
surgery AI is helping doctors and
surgeons with Precision we've covered
the robot surgeon Da Vinci all the way
back in 2018 but now it can utilize
machine learning image recognition and
more for advanced image analysis
surgical planning and real-time
adjustments tailored to the patient
unique Anatomy so in all of this it's
important to note that the training data
is critical for healthcare related
Solutions the effectiveness of the data
can be cut down due to variables like
demographics age G gender and
environmental factors so even though I
think these early signs are very
promising we have to be realistic it
will probably take some time before we
see a robust meaningful impact for the
average person but this is still a great
start what if artificial intelligence
could help create better batteries
lithium ion types of batteries are
crucial for everything from mobile
devices to electric vehicles but lithium
is very expensive and WS havoc on its
intermediate
environment replacing lithium is a major
challenge that could take years and it
could involve testing millions of
alternative materials AI can be
extremely useful in this context and
it's already being used to great effect
in a notable study AI was instrumental
in sifting through millions of
possibilities to pinpoint 23 materials
that hold promise for Next Generation
batteries this collaborative effort
between Microsoft and the Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory has been
documented in a recent publication in
related research in early 2024
Microsoft's Nathan Baker and his
colleagues used AI to sift through 23.6
million candidate materials it tweaked
existing electrolyte designs by
replacing some lithium atoms with other
elements the result was a battery that
required 70% less lithium than other
Current Designs the Breakthrough
material that the AI found was named
n216 experts from the Department of
energy later ensured the Practical
viability of the material
n216 is essentially a novel electrolyte
where half of the lithium atoms were
replaced with sodium this unconventional
recipe opens up exciting possibilities
for battery
physics using this material they were
able to whip up a rough low conducting
prototype that could turn a light bulb
on but the thing is from the idea to a
working prototype only took 9 months a
massively accelerated time scale
especially for a brand new chemical in
battery research but of course there's
some catches so not so fast there are
still some questions over the training
data as the available data in battery
engineering is limited and there could
be some unforeseen complications in
bringing future AI designs to life in
these batteries but this is no doubt
some cool
progress I think it's safe to say that
by now we've been inundated with
consumer facing AI applications with
every single company adding AI as some
quote novel perk honestly it's been over
done and frankly it's annoying at this
point but as a person who's been
covering neural networks on this channel
since 2015 before all of this hype it's
good to get the full picture the stories
I just covered are ones that I
personally found fascinating it helps to
see where we stand in the grand scheme
of things and not to get too tied up in
the noise sure I guess some people might
find it interesting to generate AI
stickers in their messaging app for
whatever reason but to have ai
potentially solve some of the broader
problems of humanity and to ultimate Ely
help us dream of a better world as
cliched as it sounds that's what most of
us have always imagined AI to be and now
that it's showing some promise in some
of these areas it's good to see that
there's some positive movement in that
direction and that's despite the
complete mess on the other side of the
coin so what do you guys think feel free
to share your thoughts in the comment
section
below today we've seen AI helping
Humanity but what if you wanted a career
to do the same actually have you ever
thought about how long a career is on
average it's about 80,000 hours of your
life so it's worth spending some time to
plan it and this is where the nonprofit
80,000 hours can help after 10 years of
conducting research with academics at
Oxford University they've come up with
some of the most fulfilling career paths
careers to help solve some of the
world's most pressing problems 80,000
hours has a job board that's constantly
updated with hundreds of active job
openings that they think might help you
have a high impact you can filter the
job by location role type job
requirements and what problem area they
work on I want to highlight that
everything that they provide is free
they're a nonprofit their only aim is to
help you find a fulfilling high impact
career for example I think the career
path of information security in high
impact areas is critically important and
there'll be more demand as time passes
and they've got an entire career review
on it go to 8000 hour.org coldfusion to
be sent a free copy of their in-depth
career guide which helps you learn about
what makes for a high impact career get
new ideas for impactful paths and make a
plan plan based on what you've learned
and put it into action so that's 80,000
hour.org
coldfusion so thanks for watching and I
hope you learned a thing or two
hopefully this has opened your eyes a
little bit just to see that AI isn't all
completely bad anyway that's enough for
me my name is toogo and you've been
watching cold fusion and I'll catch you
again soon for the next episode cheers
guys have a good one
true s for
