hey guys it's Matt Gray from chelam UK
philosophers here um just had a
fantastic conversation with Matt Seagal
the renowned process philosopher um he's
well decorated respected academic um
he's associate professor of philosophy
cosmology and Consciousness uh the
California Institute of um integral
studies he's published three fantastic
books the reemergence of shelling
philosophy in a time of emergency in
2014 physics of the world Soul
whiteheads adventuring cosmology in 21
and crossing the threshold etheric
imagination in the post Canan process
philosophy of shelling and Whitehead
that's uh 23 which is no longer last
year because it's 25 so happy New Year
to everybody um thoroughly enjoyed this
conversation we touched on
psychedelics
metaphysics ethics ecology
cryptocurrency um
Bitcoin um obviously a in Whitehead and
the limits of knowledge laid down by C
so the sort of canting threshold and
postan metaphysics and you know we
touched on the work of sort of castr
Hoffman Levin and sheldrake and it was
just a a really really really fun
conversation I could I could just listen
to this Matt all day and
um yeah awesome hope you enjoy it speak
soon
bye hi Matt hey
Matt um I'm sure you're probably aware
that Matthew means um gift from Jehovah
in ancient Hebrew um yes I'm sure I'm
sure that is is true for for for
yourself um all of my friends know this
you know um so I I thought we could
perhaps start I mean you're obviously a
renowned sort of whian thinker you're
you're an expert on process philosophy
and process Theology and so on and so
forth but amongst other things but could
you give us a bit of a kind of informal
you know introduction to sort of where
you where you come from how you ended up
getting that sort of philosophical Edge
that led you led you into the path of
Whitehead and so on so so what's your
background yeah well excited to chat
with you Matt um yeah Whitehead's
definitely become like my home base at
this point but um I am
deeply devoted you know it's not just an
interest it's a it's a real Devotion to
philosophy as a a life path um and I'm
lucky enough that I get to teach and uh
do do research and that they pay me to
do to do this uh I still have to pinch
myself every morning and um you know
just I'm I'm so thankful that uh you
know that there's still enough um
interest and uh passion around these
ideas you know that I get to do this for
a living um I usually refer back to a
experience I had as a
seven-year-old um to explain how I got
onto the philosophical path um I'll give
the short version of the story basically
I I realized my mom was going to die
just sort of spontaneously one day she's
still alive perfectly healthy at the
time but it was just this realization
that eventually she would die and um
that really tore me up for a few weeks I
was just crying and worried uh that I
wouldn't see her again if I went to
school and um and that it lasted a few
weeks and it wasn't until I considered
my
death that this sense of um dread of my
mom dying began to shift because when I
faced death uh directly as something
that I myself would eventually
experience all of a sudden it wasn't so
terrifying and became more
mysterious and that contemplation as a
seven-year-old in very simple terms
without any vocabulary or understanding
of philosophy or the history of
spirituality and how people have
culturally found ways of you know
dealing with death um I I was hooked you
know just in that that that sense of
wonder that contemplating death inspired
in me and again I didn't have the words
for it as a
seven-year-old um but I was a very
curious kid I love to watch people and
was
just a quiet kid and sensitive to these
subtle psychological and social dynamics
that I would see going on around me and
just took a really deep interest in The
Human Condition and had a couple of
really influential teachers in high
school exposed me to some um ideas I
didn't really become a
reader uh until maybe Junior but really
senior year of high school uh and
started to become a verti just have a
vicious appetite for for books books and
started reading Carl Young and Alan
Watts and Frederick n maybe a little too
early didn't understand what I was
reading as an 18-year-old but it it it
had an attitude about it that I liked um
and yeah it
wasn't um exposed to Whitehead until
after high school um I was listening to
some lectures by a psychedelic
philosopher named Terrence McKenna uh uh
who mentioned he drops Whitehead's name
here and there um Alan Watts also
dropped Whitehead's name in some of the
lectures I was listening to from him but
uh I was I was warned not to study
Whitehead alone uh but to you know do it
formally in grad school and got to study
with a professor named Eric Weiss who
has since um passed on beginning in 2009
no 2008 actually I took my first course
with him on Whitehead
and um never looked back I was just
hooked
uh there's something about Whitehead's
philosophy that's
so comprehensive and um also applicable
to so many do different domains of
experience that um I haven't gotten
bored with it all these years later um
but you know I'm also very interested in
the history of philosophy going back
to um at least in the west going back to
the presocratic and
big platonist um and I like to study
philosophy as an evolution of
Consciousness not just as a history of
ideas but like um shifting World Views
and like the very way human beings
perceive reality has shifted over the
course of Millennia and I think
philosophy the history of philosophy
reflects that and can help us um find
guidance in the present as we you know
face a very uncertain future
um and so now a lot of my work is um
yeah trying to deal with what's called
the metac
crisis um where socially
ecologically the human species seems to
have reached a uh a breaking point where
the old ways of thinking and and doing
and being are no longer adequate to the
circumstances we find ourselves in and
we need more than just new philosophical
perspective to deal with this situation
but I think our our basic attitude and
um view of what the human being is and
our role in the universe needs to change
right and and so there's a bit of a
chicken and an egg thing with like oh is
it the worldview first that needs to
change or is it our institutions does
this need to be a groundup political
revolution or do we need to shift
individual Consciousness first and I
think you know all it at once um and I
just happen to be
more uh
perhaps better situated to address the
philosophical side of this crisis
so yeah how well does whad lend himself
to to this crisis in terms of you know
his metaphysics and how how would they
apply to a sort of modern problem yeah
well and his book um his 1925 book
science of the modern world which is now
100 years old
he was already recognizing the way in
which this OB obsolete already then
mechanistic
worldview um led us to imagine that the
natural world around us only had
value uh if we as human beings
attributed value to it and
um that's not only anthropocentric but
even uh the type of value that that
human beings attributed to Nature is
often purely economic um I mean there
were movements already early in in the
20th century to you know in the US at
least to establish like the national
parks and there was this sense oh we
should protect the Wilderness protect
the environment but um even there the
values were aesthetic and very
anthropocentric but for the most part
value in our world 100 years ago and
still today if not more so today is
based on um
economic uh
profitability and white had warned that
if we continue to ignore the intrinsic
values of the natural world around us
the value that um other species have
just in and of themselves without human
beings having to place any value upon
them whether economic or aesthetic or
any other type of human value of course
we emerge from that world don't we you
know we we are all that world as opposed
to distinct entities from it and that's
something to do with that shift is it
not exactly exactly and so rather than
thinking that the human being is the
sole source of value in the
universe we from wet's point of view
need to come to an understanding of our
own values as derivative from the cosmos
derivative from the rest of the
community of life on Earth um so that we
inherit our sense of value from these
wider much more ancient life processes
right um and it's so it's a tremendous
decentering of the human being and a a
humbling but at the same time an
acknowledgement of our power because we
we can and are
destroying um the life systems of the
planet and because we're so alienated
from those life systems we're only now
beginning to wake up to the danger that
we're putting our own species in by
undermining the conditions of our own
Survival so acknowledging the intrinsic
value of the Living World was I think
something that that um very few
philosophers were aware of Whitehead
wasn't the only one back then um but he
was one of the very
preent uh thinkers who was warning about
the trajectory we were on and um I think
much of what he warned
about has come to pass you know and on
some level so much has been lost already
it's not that it's entirely too late but
um there's so much that we can't recover
cover that's already been
lost yeah I mean this is fascinating
because you know it's quite easy to get
lost in the details of metaphysics but
it seems to me that your metaphysics
actually have applicability to the real
world um because given you know I mean
could I just um run this past you so is
it because of the process nature of um
wheh head wheh head's thinking that it's
sort of less objectified if you like so
it's less about counting objects in in
in the world and and so that can ramify
in terms of economics and cultural sort
of attitudes and so on is this the kind
of thing we're talking
about yeah well it's you know he has a
different approach to what
would
um what scientific knowledge would
amount to I think
the scientific materialist project was
originally rooted in the idea that we
could come to have certain knowledge and
as a result of that knowledge kind of
absolute control over uh um natural
systems because if if the universe is
primarily uh mechanistic all we need to
do is reverse engineer those mechanisms
understand um the mathematical
principles that underly them and then um
when we find the right
model that we you know there was this
tendency in among the scientific um
materialists and mechanists to equate
model and
reality um it's not like the ancient you
know prior to the Scientific Revolution
the medieval and and ancient
thinkers uh you know like Archimedes
ancient um engineer had a very detailed
understanding of mechanism it's just
that um these ancient thinkers never got
the strange idea to identify the
mechanisms and the models that they
could mathematically work out with the
way that nature operates because they
understood nature to be alive um and
even insold and something shifted with
you know
decart and Newton Galileo and and the
other sort of founders of this new
scientific materialist
approach um where all of a sudden yeah
nature was equated to a machine and this
pursuit of knowledge that would G give
us a certain degree of prediction and
control over nature became the
primary um Drive underlying motivating
science and Whitehead is Shifting our
conception of what it would mean to know
nature because as you're saying there's
this um process Dimension to his
understanding of reality there's also a
relational Dimension so often his
metaphysics is called process
relational uh metaphysics or ontology
because what there finally are for
Whitehead are not bits of matter moving
around an empty space that might be
geometrically modeled L with uh absolute
Precision um you know there's there was
this old idea of nature at an instant
and simple location and from White
head's point of view with quantum theory
and with uh relativity Theory and then
even before that there was this rise of
statistical methods in science where you
know if you want to understand um you
know how gas operates like we're not
going to be able to track every
individual molecule but statistically
and large aggreg get we can you know get
a sense for how gases will behave and so
there's already an epistemological shift
going on and Whitehead is kind of um
spelling out the metaphysical
consequences of the shifts that already
occurred within science in the early
20th century and so knowledge becomes
less about um being absolutely precise
and certain and more about um knowing
how to enter into relationships with uh
these processes that we're embedded
within and you know we're navigating um
in a whitean universe we're
navigating uh relationships with living
systems that are responsive to our ways
of looking at them and our ways of uh
you know uh interacting with them so
that it's not just dead Ander stuff out
there that's indifferent to how we
observe
it I mean this is very obvious to
biologists and ethologists who are
studying
animals um that reminds me of something
Rupert sheldrake comic mentioned he said
that he wasn't cool with chopping
animals up to try and understand animals
he thought let's actually just interact
with them and observe them and so on and
so forth and um you know that's that's
quite interesting isn't it you know
totally rather than using them as an
object for for human Advantage actually
right respecting what they are and what
they represent and so on um can I just
while I while I remember I just want to
what what did um White had think about
space was I mean was space a sort of was
it a given in his system or is is it
like an emergent property or what what
did what did he say about
space well he said there's no such thing
as empty space okay um I mean he fully
accepted the
relativistic um paradigm shift he had
some critiques of of Einstein we can get
into those details but in general the
idea of space and time orace space time
um not as like space doesn't exist
independently of the matter which floats
in it for Whitehead space is actually a
it's more like a field of potentiality
it's it's the way in which um occasions
of experience in his terms actual
occasions of experience relate to one
another and so rather than thinking of
space as already existing and then you
have entities that inhabit that space
Whitehead space emerges from the
relationships among actual occasions and
so it's a bit of a figure ground shift
and it's even more I would say it's even
more relativistic than Einstein's
conception so it doesn't presuppose some
medium through which these entities can
relate it's it's more about just the
relationship itself so I mean this
reminds me of some of what Chris Fields
has been doing on um his physics is
information processing because he
assumes nothing as well he just says
look there are these entities
communicating information across
boundaries you know and um right just s
it back to the absolute Essentials and
it doesn't assume space or time I don't
think and so so sorry to please do carry
on I mean also what he say about time
that would be
good well I mean he's a process
philosopher and so on the one hand time
is very important
and irreducible but there's a difference
between clock time that time that we can
measure um and lived time let's say
or a kind of uh creative unfolding so
you know in
physics most of the equations of physics
and relativity Theory and quantum theory
um the the direction of time is
irrelevant the the the laws of physics
work just as well in either direction
and so that's
only the only approach in physics that
where that's where time as a directional
process features would be in
thermodynamics because there's this
movement towards a direction towards
entropy towards disorder and movement
towards
equilibrium um but for the most part in
physics uh time is this is this um you
know parameter that can go in either
direction which stands in sharp conflict
to our perception of time our experience
of time which is um an irreversible
whole forward moving process forward in
the sense of you know the past has
already occurred the future has not yet
occurred and we exist always in this in
Whitehead's terms of perpetually
perishing present which is to say the
present doesn't last and yet there's
nowhere else we could ever be but
there's something about the nature of
time as creative becoming so not not
what we can measure in a quantitative
way but this qualitative unfolding of
time that why would call Creative
advance that um his description of that
would be a process that is um iterative
meaning there's a kind of
cycling um we're always in the now but
the now is always
incorporating uh uh what has perished um
and and repeating everything which has
occurred before but not only is time
iterative in Whitehead sense but it's
cumulative so that no two moments are
ever the same because they're going to
be
incorporating uh the just prior moments
right and so for Whitehead um time is
this like yeah it's it's a it's a
cyclical but a cumulative process and so
no two
moments uh are the same every new drop
of experience every new actual occasion
of experience is is unique in world
history um and there's a there's a a
creative unfolding that for Whitehead is
it's going somewhere it's not going to
um climax in some final moment at the
end of time it's an endless process uh
but McKenna talked about the um what was
it the the ideal object wave zero yeah
yeah yeah yeah so so so so but not not
the case for Whitehead though no and and
it's interesting because
McKenna in talking about his fractal
understanding of time is this time wave
model that he developed and supposed to
end on December 21st 2012 and Terence
McKenna died before he he could see that
his theory was not confirmed on the
other hand things have gotten really
weird since then so maybe something has
shifted but he used Whitehead in a way
that um to support his theory that I
don't think is actually um a fair
reading of Whitehead uh and that's fine
I mean McKenna was a creative thinker
and appropriated from different um
philosophies in a way that served his
own project and that's just what we do
as when we're creative um but Whitehead
doesn't see an end to time um it's
it's if I could put it this way time is
eternal uh and and really his whole
understanding of what's happening in
each present moment he has a word for
this called concrescence it's an
intersection where Time and Eternity
meet right and so we're constantly being
in each moment refreshed by this eternal
perspective um that Whitehead uses the
traditional language of God to refer to
this perspective um there's this eternal
Divine envisionment of Ideal
possibility and each of our temporal
moments as we as history unfolds is
given a little injection of this eternal
perspective of Ideal possibility and
Moment by moment we're trying integrate
that ideal with the real which what has
actually happened and Whitehead will say
like history is a wreck um but we
continue to Soldier on we continue to
have hope in a better future because
we're refreshed by this eternal
perspective Moment by moment and that
refreshment does to the extent that
there is a creative um
organizational uh uh unfolding and when
we look at the history of the universe
there's an astounding amount of
order um and complexity and there does
seem to be an evolutionary movement
towards um ever more intense forms of
Consciousness and so Whitehead would say
even though history
is uh a mess and there's plenty of chaos
and disorder and destruction there seems
to be more of a tilt towards order than
towards chaos in the history of our
universe right okay so that's how he
understands time um more than just clock
time right it's a real creative process
with there are qualitative leaps that
can occur Moment by moment
right just there's a couple of questions
there so number one probably a quick
answer in the same sense that he felt
the time wouldn't end um did he think
would he say had no beginning or was
there a
beginning no
beginning it literally is it's Eternal
and okay continuous
creation so he's you know Whitehead
would his metaphysics would extend
beyond Big Bang Theory this idea that
space and time have some origin Point um
however it he has this idea of what he
calls Cosmic
epochs and that there is
this creative plenum I mean for him the
ultimate is creativity everything comes
out of what he calls creativity which is
very difficult to characterize because
there's nothing that isn't an expression
of
creativity um but that would
exist
uh prior to any
particular Cosmic order emerging and it
could be that there are different Cosmic
epochs uh elsewhere in the Multiverse if
you will you know and so there are ways
of making white 's metaphysics
compatible with a Big Bang Theory but I
think his understanding of
um the Deep structure
of of reality would lend itself more to
an idea of like continuous creation
rather than creation being a sort of
one-time event right and I mean there's
so many options on the table in
contemporary physical cosmology now
different models for understanding the
origin of the universe it's kind of um
the wild west right now yeah um and I
think white 's metaphysics can provide
us with some scaffolding to begin to
make sense of uh of the options in a in
a logically coherent and empirically
adequate
way got to the point where science is
making weird or physics mostly is making
weirder claims than than any mysticism
really you know especially physics yeah
infinite numbers of universes being
generated infinitesimal points in space
you know it's just kind of
mind-blowingly crazy but uh yeah stuff
um so also I'm I guess that within I've
done a bit of reading I'm I'm struggling
on with this and I I you know I know
it's a bit of a cliche but he is quite
hard to to to to sort of read through
and I think there something about the um
jargon and terminology that he uses but
um it is it is actually workable if you
just take the time and put the effort in
take notes revisit it does slowly but
surely soak in and I think some of it
has hopefully but um I mean one of the
things I'm getting from it is that he's
not teop phobic is he so he's perfectly
happy to see that there is a creative
direction of travel for the cosmos right
and and for me in some sense my
intuition tells me that that's kind of
obvious you know when you look at sort
of evolution as an obvious example that
there seems to be a direction of travel
as you hinted at earlier this pursuit of
complexity or as McKenna might say
novelty you know so what are your views
on this stuff and you know is there is
there a sense in which we can join that
Journey or can can we resist it or you
know how how does it bear on sort of
personal uh
decisions and so on and so forth you
know yeah I mean I think there was
clearly a lot of tiop phobia in the
origins of modern science
um the Medieval World very influenced by
a certain form of
theology um was uh
pursuing forms of theological
explanation that were kind of of well
overly
anthropocentric so such that the purpose
of all these different processes in
nature was always to serve the human
being because you know God put us at the
center of creation and um and it was a
very naive form of tileology and the
sorts of uh
purpose
um that medieval theologians and
Scholastics were beginning to imagine as
operative in nature were of the sort
that you might expect from a a picture
of the Divine as a kind of engineer or
mechanic um and
imposing purpose or design on the
universe from outside the Universe um
and on some level even though modern
science went to Great Lengths to
deny um thology and focus only on
mechanical causes there's another sense
in which um for thinkers like dekart and
Newton unless they had this kind of
theology in the background where God was
imagined as a great engineer and a
mathematician they never would have
expected to find mathematical laws in
nature and so there is a real uh sense
in which there are theological
underpinnings or um presuppositions that
led at least these early scientists to
search for the intelligibility of nature
in mathematical
terms um but that
uh is I think a deep conflict in in in
the
scientific um worldview that it comes
out of this form of Theology and yet
very quickly um you know as we enter
into the 19th century really all of a
sudden God becomes a hypothesis that
scientists no longer want to make
reference to and everything is explained
purely in terms of
purposeless um the the playing out of
mechanical processes that have no
underlying purpose and white head's
trying to bring thology back into the
picture here but not of the kind um that
we would describe as Design coming from
um a God who is separate from the world
for Whitehead teeology is is imminent uh
it's um it it stems from the desires
that individual creatures have to to um
intensify their experience and to forge
new relationships to support the
intensification of that experience and
so rather than thinking of say in the
biological realm uh in the way that
Darwin only allowed there's a little bit
of Tey in darwinian biology which is
that organisms want to survive right
that's the one little bit of purpose
that a mechanistic biologist will allow
for that there's a survival Instinct
where does that come from oh I don't
know we'll just assume that and then we
can get uh Evolution and natural
selection going Whitehead says if you
actually observe life in an unbiased way
whether your own instincts or any other
animal or organism there's more than
just a survival Instinct organisms want
to thrive there's there's like
experience is
enjoyable and you know Whitehead says
look if natural selection and this
desire to survive
is the only thing that counts in
biological evolution why is it that we
see uh organisms that are more complex
and more sensitive but comparatively
deficient in survival power evolving
like the human being is
very uh fragile in comparison to uh
bacteria which are nearly indestructible
and have been around for billions of
years and functionally Immortal I mean
they don't they don't sexually reproduce
they just make copies of themselves um
it's a much more efficient form of life
and so if natural selection and the
ability to survive in various
environments is what really matters the
peak of life was bacteria and so why all
this extra complexity why all of this
why all of this extra Sensitivity I mean
yeah we can enjoy our experience more
but we also feel a lot more pain and
suffering and so whad thinks there must
be another principle at play here which
is that life has this in intrinsic
desire to enhance its experience right
to intensify experience and so that adds
another factor it's not that Darwin's
process of natural selection is not
occurring it is and we know that that
applies to the individual organism and
their their lifetime they pursue more
food and more happiness and more
contentment or whatever so so why not
sort of um scale that up you know yeah
exactly um and it's not this isn't the
kind of teolog that determines in
advance what types of forms will be
realized in the living world or in the
universe right it's all it's very
open-ended but there is an internal
drive to
explore that uh I think is not factored
into the darwinian understanding of of
evolution right and so Whitehead says
yes to Darwin and there's more going on
but do you think that that actually
looking at some of the Cutting Edge
science these days we're beginning to
see a more um we to see more sort of t-
loss you know if you consider the work
of Mike Levan for example I mean they're
looking at the you know extremely basic
systems like things like sorting
algorithms that seem to delay
gratification and you know so it seems
to be present everywhere and this leads
me to sort of a metaphysical question I
mean are you a pan psychist and you know
I've heard that there's a sort of
Distinction there's a sort of object pan
or substance pan psychist like the likes
of Philip gof and so on and but you're
more of a sort of processed panus is
that right is that fair
yeah yeah and I'm happy with the panus
label it it can sometimes be misleading
because there are different forms
different species of pans psychism that
are quite different from one another in
their implications but the idea that
some degree of experience um or
mentality uh or subjectivity you know
whichever word you want to use goes all
the way down I think I would affirm that
Whitehead affirms that um and so pan
psychism is a fair label and I usually
think of four basic positions in
metaphysics that are um historically and
contemporarily sort of available to us
there's uh
materialism dualism psychism and
idealism
um and when I look at contemporary
biology Mike Levan's a great example of
this but there are others Dennis Noble
um you know I could I could come up with
a long list of biologists who think um
and philosophers of biology who think
that purpose is a real part of the
Living World if if not the cosmos as a
whole and so there's a major Paradigm
Shift
happening um in biology but the Old
Guard is still you know alive and well
and um Richard Dawkins is very yeah he's
very articulate and still has a 1960s
understanding of what is state of the
art and biology and you know for him
coming of age doing his PhD research and
writing his famous books like the
selfish Gene in the 60s late 60s early
70s molecular biology and this genetic
reductionism was all the rage but it
turns out that that's a dead end um
there's more than than genes going on
but you know I've heard Dawkins quite
recently give his spin on the whole
situation and he thinks none of the
research in the last 50 years changes
anything even Noble doesn't think he
doesn't think Noble changed
anything but lar lamaris is sort of back
in the back in the room now isn't it
really yeah I think so but Dawkins will
reinterpret everything that's been found
to make it compatible with a gene
Centric perspective which he thinks
ultimately is what's going on and so you
know science can become just as much a
kind of certain scientific perspectives
can function just as much like religions
uh yeah you know as as traditional
religions can and so I think for Dawkins
um his scientific
perspective is a worldview and it
functions not just as a means of you
know producing knowledge but uh as a
source of meaning as a source of
morality and um yeah it's a
comprehensive picture it's a
responsibility right yeah and he's a
brilliant Communicator of science but I
think um he's he's his science is out of
date I would say um is there some sort
of an Awakening going on across science
and you know there's a lot more sort of
um integrated work isn't there you know
conver convergences and so on and that
seems to be where the fruit is born and
um any any thoughts you know are we kind
of emerging from the materialist
Paradigm is that happening
now I see a lot of signs of that and I
think that is happening within the
scientific Community it's happen within
Academia a little but more slowly in
those professional settings but when I
look at the culture at large um many
many intelligent
people um
are increasingly skeptical of
materialism and more open to pan
psychism and
idealism um and I think that's a very
positive
sign there are risks that come along
with that
um but there are risks that come along
with adop materialist worldview as well
as uh rert sheldrake's always saying
it's probably really bad for our mental
health yeah to have this materialist
Outlook if you think you're a Mindless
automaton that can't be good for morale
you know yeah yeah and see how does that
how does that view help
anybody yeah um you know there are still
scientists like you know Robert spolski
probably the most famous among them who
will argue for this really hardore
deterministic point of view and that
free free will any sort of will or
effort is Just an Illusion and um where
the victims of um cause and effect
understood in a mechanistic way and the
victims genes and I think that's a
totally
um dysfunctional point of view from my
perspective not only because of its
negative moral consequences and there
there is a lot of psychological research
that suggests when you tell people that
they're deterministic that that
determinism is is a fact right before
they take a test and have an opportunity
to cheat on that test if you tell them
that they're free or tell them that
they're determined
beforehand um those who were told
they're determined are more likely to
cheat is that right that's fascinating
of course of course because that
absolves them of any guilt doesn't it
yeah and in and in mental health
contexts you they've done studies about
the language that psychiatrists use when
they talk about different mental
disorders and if they use more
mechanistic language and make the
patient feel like oh this is your it's
determined by your genes it's determined
by your brain chemistry they tend to be
more uh to have worse mental health
outcomes than if there's emphasis placed
on your own willpower your own Outlook
and changing your own perspective you
know so how we talk about these things
does feed back on on our experience and
um but regardless of that sort of the
pragmatic consequences of how we think
about these things I think it's just
scientifically shortsighted to say that
everything is deterministic and
mechanistic there good it's just not
working anymore we've actually so so you
could say that actually it's some sort
of um Awakening but actually it might
just be a pragmatic thing that science
is saying well actually these old models
don't work and uh you know banging our
heads against a brick wall here and so
um yeah they had to change but um sorry
do do go on that's fascinating
yeah well just to say like the the way
that materialism and mechanism had
classically been
understood um by 19th century science a
that whole perspective was destroyed by
science itself with the quantum and
relativistic Revolutions in the early
20th century so physics itself has
destroyed mechanistic
materialism right and I think a lot of
um scientists
are still catching up to that and
there's been a Prohibition against
metaphysics in Academia for a while it's
it's changing now and dramatic ways but
for the better part of the 20th century
um philosophers were not really um given
the opportunity to engage with uh
quantum physics in a way that would
allow us to do the um metaphysical Deep
dive that you know would provide an
alternative ontology to the old mechanis
ontology Whitehead was one of the few
that tried to do that but he was doing
it just at a time in the 1920s when
philosophy was becoming more analytic uh
more focused on language linguistic
analysis
um POS yeah yeah exactly and so these
Grand metaphysical projects and doing
philosophical cosmology just fell out of
favor but again that's shifting I really
do feel like there is a shift with
Academia within the profession of
science as well as in the broader
culture I um I timed going to University
I studied philosophy as a mature student
as 27 and um I wanted to do my
dissertation on Barkley Barkley and
idealism and just they just said don't
be dared why would you want to do that
that's all all that stuff is solved you
know it's it's
rubbish and um you know they tried to
get me to do one on Vicken Stein is his
early work course um I end up doing
doing some ethics of euthanasia which
slightly slightly dark but difficult
topic but um yeah they didn't they
didn't really encourage anything other
than sort of materialistic or well I
mean essentially logical positive
positivism just wipes any metaphysical
speculation off the table doesn't it and
says if it can't be weighed and measured
or it doesn't have logical cency it's
it's not worth talking about um so so so
you're a whiteheadian but that's not all
you are Matt is it I um because I I've
heard you speak in some detail about can
and so I'd like to get into into the
sort of Canan threshold the limits of
knowledge and how how can we have
metaphysical knowledge um because I mean
while science is perhaps getting a
little bit more amable to non sort of
materialist thinking it's it still
raises questions about the very notion
of identity and and um you know what can
we really know when when we're arguably
trapped inside this sort of perceptual
bubble you know we're in a theater of
perception that's derived from something
but we but how do we know what's out
there and how can we talk about that is
that a fair question yeah no absolutely
um you know kant's critical philosophy
really does challenge this old style um
of metaphysical speculation where um
from kant's point of view these dogmatic
metaphysicians as he called them were
making claims about realities that were
beyond our
experience um you know from K's point of
view we don't actually have any
experience of the Soul as a
substantial reality uh in other words we
we have a psychological experience you
know we have a sense of being uh
subjects and so on but we're never given
experiential uh uh exposure to the idea
of the Soul as an immortal substance
like that's a theological idea that
dogmatic metaphysics um just assume
assumed right and built expansive
worldviews around and Kant says you know
we really need to do philosophy in a
more scientific way let's be grounded in
our
experience wanted to justify you know
necessary and Universal knowledge that
in other words scientific knowledge but
he did so in a way that limited that
scientific knowledge to the realm of
phenomena right to our
experience and what nature is in itself
or what reality is in itself Kant would
just say we we don't know that and we
can't know that um and for Kant it was
good that we couldn't know that because
he wanted to be able to
say uh that human
Freedom will always be irreducible to
any scientific mechanistic account of
the phenomenal world of the way that
nature appears to us there will always
be something in excess of nature for
Kant right which is our own human
freedom
so Kant wanted to justify scientific
knowledge rigorously logically without
relying on any metaphysics that would
make reference to objects beyond our
experience but he also wanted to do
justice
to um
our belief in
Freedom and morality without freedom for
K there's no
morality um and by limiting scientific
knowledge which for Kant scientific
knowledge meant mechanistic
understanding standing limiting that to
phenomena Kant could then say well
behind the scenes somehow our own
Freedom as human beings and the
mechanism of nature as it appears to us
are compatible you can't say exactly why
but because science is limited at least
it's possible that there's some
underlying magic going on Al I mean he
wouldn't call it magic he would call it
some super sensible substratum that
makes freedom and and and the mechanism
of nature
compatible and I just just an accident
of the time that he was born in some
sense that he developed some of these
ideas it was in response to the
scientific knowledge of the day so if he
was launched into into modern times
would would he have a different view do
you think oh I mean undoubtedly I hard
to say what Kant would make of modern
science but um and the Contemporary
situation but yeah he was very Adept at
um Newtonian physics he understood the
math he was an astronomer before he you
know got into developing transcendental
approach to philosophy but it was also
the criticisms of
um rationalism and the criticisms of the
idea that um we could have scientific
knowledge of something like causality
that that came from empiricists like
David Hume that as Kant said awoke him
from his dogmatic Slumber and so he
needed to come up with new
justifications for um causality because
from hume's point of view right famously
we we don't um perceive necessary
connection between events we assume them
we assume these connections as a as a
result of habit and
custom um and so you know Kant had to do
all of these gymnastics the quite
brilliant gymnastics to show how okay
maybe causality isn't something we
perceive but it's an it's a it's a
category in terms of which we have to
interpret our experience so he you know
he he's able to respond to Hume and
avoid the more radical implications of
Hume
skepticism um but he has to sacrifice a
lot to do that which is like I was
describing earlier science is no longer
telling us what nature is in itself it's
only telling us how nature appears to
our kind of
mind and so you know I I really do take
kant's criticism of traditional
metaphysics dogmatic metaphysics
seriously and so how do we do
metaphysics after
Kant well I would say it has to be
experientially
grounded um we can't be making reference
to um that which is by definition beyond
our experience and so our categories and
our Concepts must be adequate not only
adequate to what we experience but I
would say the whole purpose of
philosophy takes on for me a pragmatic
orientation which is to say we only know
and this is coming out of William James
and Charles Saunders purse who are all
important influences on Whitehead we
only know what a concept means
ultimately um because of our awareness
of its consequences for our experience
how does thinking in this way change my
experience how does it change what I can
perceive how does it change what I can
do what I imagine I can do and so what I
can then do um and so I think there's a
there's more more to experience than
Kant thought for Kant you know the forms
of intuition of space and time were
fixed in this ukian way um he
acknowledged the role of imagination as
quite powerful interestingly in the
second edition of the critique of pure
reason he kind of tones down the role
that imagination plays a little bit
because I think he was a little
uncomfortable uh with the implications
there but one of the implications I
think is when we recognize the
imaginative ground of our experience um
the structure of our experience is
actually far more malleable and through
creative philosophical efforts coming up
with new Concepts as white does which is
what makes them difficult to read
initially because he's really
Reinventing um not only a new language
but a
new categorial scheme as he calls it a
new set of Concepts through which to
interpret not only interpret but
transform our experience right and so
when we approach experience not as
something fixed and already
pre-formed but as something more
malleable and open to
experimental uh transformation then all
of a sudden we can engage metaphysics in
a more experimental way grounded in
experience rather than always claiming
as it had before Kant um to know things
Beyond experience all we have is
experience right um but philosophy can
allow us to uh to transform that
experience our minds we can change lit
we can change our minds and we can
change the nature of incoming experience
According to some of that uh sort of
altered frame of reference can you can
you think of any sort of examples of
that I mean I suppose perhaps you could
talk about maybe the sort of practice of
meditation or or the way you respond to
the world you know could you give me
some sort of examples of that some
concrete I mean one of
the powerful examples that comes to mind
immediately is William James in his
battle with
depression he was really exploring these
ideas of determinism and and Free
Will and you know in his book will to
believe he describes his own
realization upon recovering from
depression that um this idea of
freedom is
uh how to describe this it it has
whether or not we think Freedom or
determinism is is real has real
consequences for our mental health right
and so when he would he would be asked
if we were to ask William James um are
we free or are we determined he would
say well if you believe that you're free
then you're free or you have at least
some willpower to change your
circumstances if you believe that there
there's no Freedom then you're you're
determined right and he he realized that
his own depression was only alleviated
by his shift in in belief that I'm going
to take this IDE of Freedom seriously
and thereby become free he literally
invented a new world in which he was
free in some sense in experience is that
malleable I suppose another example
might be your metaphysics would have
some impact on how you respond to death
for example so if you're utterly
convinced that say something like
idealism is is the case then um you know
you're going to say Consciousness is
fundamental and you know these these
bodies are sort of representations of of
some me mentation right and and so the
death of the physical body is not you
know that can't kill Consciousness right
um it's a a completely different sort of
category um yeah and so yeah I mean you
know again it's um I sometimes I have to
fight a bit of a battle with with
friends of mine about the relevance of
philosophy in in the modern world and
it's it's because of things like this
that I that I think it is absolutely
relevant you know and you know just
setting aside the ethics and and
everything else um
so I was going to ask so what are your
views on
death and you know because we touched on
this earlier
and it must it tells us something about
the nature of reality doesn't it um that
it doesn't necessarily care so much for
the the woes of the individual and or
maybe it does you know maybe there
there's some necessity to having anxiety
to perpetuate the species and so on and
so forth part of this Grand foliation
but it does seem a bit mean doesn't it
and you know to to to to give these
entities all this uncertainty about it
as well um why why would that you know
any any thoughts on this
anyway yeah I mean no there's so much to
say about death and the way
that human
culture is so profoundly shaped by our
response to death and different cultures
have different responses to it and I
think so much of what drives temporary
consumerist culture is a kind of denial
of
death um we want we and expect that uh
or many people expect that technology
and medical advances will eventually
allow us to defeat death there's a whole
transhumanist movement that refers to
people who find death to be something
essential to life that we have to accept
they call us I count myself among those
people they call us deists because for
them for these transhumanists death is
just a disease that we should cure um
medical it's a medical problem kind of
thing it's yeah it's a medical problem
it's it's a limitation that increasing
knowledge can
eliminate um but I don't think they've
really thought through what a human
being who lives forever what what a life
that's
indefinite where we're functionally
Immortal what that would really be like
and how much actually
of the deepest meaning that we find in
our lives comes from its finitude and is
it is it is it really possible to to to
love
someone if there's no risk of losing
them or if that time that we have
together on this Earth is is
indefinitely prolonga I mean I think it
really does start to change the Deep
exist existential structure of human
existence when
we consider eliminating death somehow
um I think there are a lot of other ways
that that sort of transhumanist project
can go wrong but I I also think
um if we were to want to develop say a
more um ecological approach
to to ethics um environmental ethics is
a big field in in philosophy um because
we need to reimagine our relationship to
the natural world one of the ways I've
been sort of exploring um another
possibility for developing an ecological
ethics would be to consider
reincarnation um and to do so in in a
you know more or less naturalistic way
just to relate to the whole history of
life on Earth all of the species which
have existed and the lineages that we as
human beings are um born out of of uh we
are The Reincarnation of this continuous
stream of um successful organisms I mean
99% of all the species whoever have
existed have gone extinct but um for
those organisms that are alive today we
inherit uh the achievements of billions
of years of
evolutionary struggle and and joy I
think um and so in a real evolutionary
sense um reincarnation is real right
yeah um kind of eating itself as well
it's like a big restaurant isn't it we
we consume you know that that seems to
be almost foundationally with you know
eating seems to be you know we we embibe
some of the external world into
ourselves and then put some of our own
self out into the ex external world and
that these are the sorts of things that
you can once say they're undeniable in
in some sense the idea of the
continuation of generations and um
continuous Journey towards law yeah and
but to feel to feel okay with that I
think yeah yeah seeing that you're it's
not all about you or or about one it's
about the the grand foliation if you can
call it that yeah no I like that term um
but we need a shift in human identity
that allows us to to not just um
consider as an idea that we are related
to the rest of Life on this planet I
mean most educated people accept this
idea of a common ancestor of all of life
um but if we can go beyond just the idea
of it to really feel that and to
identify with life as a
whole um I think and also to consider
you know this reincarnational
perspective not just as a way of
relating to the past to the history of
life but think about the future in some
way the damage we do today it's not just
going to affect other people or other
beings
like who we really are our true identity
like is continuous with this stream of
life we will be here in the future to
suffer the consequences of what we're
doing today right and so this broaden
sense of identity that I think comes in
comes along with
considering uh a more or less
naturalistic understanding of
reincarnation could be really fruitful
uh for helping us to avert you know
catastrophe ecologically speaking and so
it in terms of relating to death it's
like it doesn't
make death any more um difficult on some
level like we give up a lot when we die
but I don't think we give up everything
like this body everything we've tended
to identify with while alive in this
body will will perish I'm pretty sure of
that but I think that there's this
underlying
continuity that will continue and I
don't have any scientific proof of that
obviously these I'm I'm building
analogies um and you know looking at say
the way in
which it's very odd that we don't fully
consider this but like we're awake for
two-thirds of the day and then for a
third of the 24-hour cycle we're
asleep our bodies are just vegetating
there in bed and um then we wake up in
the morning and continue on with just
and there's this this Gap every day in
our lives in our stream of Consciousness
and we just sort of accept that as
normal but if you really consider it why
wouldn't we want
to imagine some analogy here just as the
Life Death cycle occurs every 24 hour or
the sorry the Sleep awake cycle occurs
every 24 hours maybe there's a similar
Life Death cycle which occurs you know
across uh
lifetimes right and it's just that we
wake up as someone new in instead of as
the same person with that sense of
continuity but from White head's point
of view we're new every moment you know
there's a death rebirth process
happening Moment by Moment by moment and
you can almost feel that sometimes like
sometimes I almost get a sort of insight
think actually you know I've change I'm
changed a certain piece of music or a
film or an experience or a conversation
you you come away a changed person you
can actually sense it and I wanted to
ask you something another metaphysical
question um is everything
alive is there anything that is not
involved in
the sort of the the dance of of life
because I mean just just a DFT um sort
of example you could imagine a planet
with no kind of organic material on it
right um but it's still Milling about in
some sense to you know it may have a um
predisposition towards complexity or
something like that that will eventually
produce these I mean I I suppose what
I'm saying is that there is no problem
of abiogenesis because it seems to me
that there's a continuity as you
mentioned all the way down um so it's it
feels that the whole Cosmos is involved
in this
um unfolding right so in that sense
given that we're continuous with the
rest of it then the whole thing's alive
in my in my humble opinion I'm just
wondering what your view is on that I
agree I I think life is a matter of
degrees and there's there's no zero
point um you know but a lot depends on
how we Define life and the thing is we
have one example of Life on this
planet we
have some evidence there may have been
Life on Mars and maybe on other planets
in our solar system um but as many
astrobiologists will point out because
we only have one example of life we
don't really know if the sort of carbon
based substrate that we're used to is
the only way that um the type of
chemical complexity we associate with
biological organisms can can do the
thing like it could be that there are
many other chemical
Pathways to life and we don't really
know what we mean by life here again
defined in terms of biological organisms
until we have another example of it um
there could be a very different form of
life say in the Clouds of Venus um that
are there could be life here that that
we just can't
perceive that's true yeah you know
Donald Hoffman points out quite um you
know well that um you know we don't well
he thinks he's shown mathematically that
we we don't receive any true information
about the external World um so you know
and we literally
just refine our behaviors and so on
based on what's beneficial to us in
terms of eating and reproducing and so
on so you know there could be a whole
host of things going on right now that
we're and I mean one of the other um
things that comes to mind is this idea
of the collective intelligence and again
something that Levan talks about
extensively is that we're not as really
a single being in a sense that we're a
what do you what do you call it a
community of um um what's the term that
you use Society of soci society that's
that's right yeah and in some sense you
know the human body is is made up of
these different sort of entities the
kidney probably doesn't know that it's
part of some larger system in the same
that way that an ant might not know it's
part of you know what its colonies
objectives are but yet there is this
overarching t- Los of these these
organizations and so um forgotten where
I'm going with this actually but um all
intelligence is collective intelligence
I say right yeah um which is something
that Michael Levan is constantly harping
on and um you know there's there's this
approach in cognitive science that's
called extended cognition where you know
instead of thinking of um just
individual brains as the locus of
cognitive activity uh we could study
intelligence it's better to study
intelligence and cognition in a more
socially extended way so that like um
you know you could use a military
example like like a a battleship
uh which is composed of however many
hundreds of of sailors is is itself um a
cognitive system of some kind that can
only perform the tasks of information
processing and interpretation that it
does as a result of the relationships
among all of those human beings and the
tools and Technologies and instruments
that they're using and so like the
intelligence doesn't belong to any
individual right's sports teams in a way
in a similar fashion could you I think
that's what I was just just trying to
get to this idea that there could be a
sort of meta intelligence of which we
are a part because if we're composed of
these individual components why suppose
that we're that that it stops here do
you see what I mean what do you think
and is that testable I mean I wonder
whether that's actually potentially
testable if you could observe Collective
action that could not be attributed to
the the kind of the amalgam of all of
their individual goals and it's it's can
be shown that there's some other Force
involved maybe I don't know a total
speculation there but with any
thoughts well I think Levan is showing
how cellular collectives can achieve
Feats of um cognitive prowess that no
individual cell could do on its own and
that there is definitely something that
emerges um at the level of whole tissues
and organ systems and the organism as a
whole um that none of the individual
cells seem to know about indiv as as
separate entities but that is achieved
at this meta level and why wouldn't we
continue that analogy up the
scale um and consider the Earth or Gaia
as this kind of uh Collective mind that
we as individuals usually at least are
not consciously aware of participating
in but um the Earth as a whole this
guyan Consciousness could be conscious
of of us all not just humans perhaps but
all living beings in a way that we can
only dimly imagine or perhaps in some
special States Altered States of of
Consciousness we can participate in that
to some degree and you know merge with
the guy in mind for a time um but I
think there's every reason to to take
these analogies seriously why wouldn't
nature work similarly at different
scales um I think the burden of proof
would be on those who would deny that um
because it's it's like it's very easy
for the materialist to say oh well we
know Consciousness is produced by the
neurons in the
brain do we I've never heard of a
mechanism that could explain how neural
activity and neurochemistry again
imagined in a mechanistic way could give
rise to this totally other domain called
Consciousness like I I've never even
seen a hypothesis that could account for
that type of transition right and so why
do we assume the brains produce
Consciousness and that there couldn't be
some higher level Consciousness where
each of us is like the neuron in this
larger brain you know so I think I think
we should take these analogies seriously
yeah in terms of this larger brain um we
could we could put the word God in there
could we I mean what are your views on
God is there some sort of cosmic
intelligence of which we're a part and
perhaps it feels us you know in the way
that we perhaps feel an itch on our
first or something like that you know or
or or it could be phenomenally conscious
of everything that we're doing any
thoughts on this stuff and and how some
of why hadian thinking of you're
thinking perhaps plays into mysticism
and and
spirituality yeah I think it's natural
to move in that direction when you begin
to consider a pan
psychist metaphysics um you know William
James wrote a book called a pluralistic
Universe where he's drawing on a a
German scientist and and philosopher
named Gustaf
feckner and feckner was a pan psychist
who uh had a a sense that we are as
human beings um enveloped within uh ever
widening Circles of Consciousness larger
than ourselves and so there's the Earth
Consciousness and then maybe there's the
a Consciousness associated with the sun
and the solar system as a whole the
whole galaxy I
mean when I think about that reminds me
of Olaf have you heard of Olaf stapled
them oh sure yeah yeah star maker is
that yeah yeah star maker and the the
third and last man I think it was the
first and last man massive fan but that
seemed to be the sort of thing he was
talking about that sort of up eventually
gets to the godhead and understands
what's going on you know trying out I
think I think he read Whitehead too
actually right that doesn't surprise me
actually um but uh yeah he's what a
profound thinker what a be what a
beautiful book as well yeah sorry do do
continue just reminded me there yeah for
good reason um and so it's a view of the
Divine that I think would be again less
about
um a God that would be placed outside
the
Universe um and this is less
monotheistic in a way because there's
more um of a sort of it's like
concentric circles right and so there
are um there's this term holarchy I'm
not sure if you're familiar with it that
comes out of Arthur Ker's work
the have a hole on is like a whole part
you can't it's not just a particle it's
not just a hole because the thing about
the way our our universe is organized is
it's like um our bodies are whole but
they're made of cells which themselves
have a kind of wholeness and so it's
like nested holes all the way up and all
the way down and you could instead of
describing the universe as a hierarchy
you could describe it as a holarchy but
it seems like we're nested Within These
layers of Consciousness that go all the
way up and all the way down and there's
an in increasing
intensity and um depth of Consciousness
you know as you as you go up but it
seems like the human might be perched at
a
particularly um um important middle
place within this whole you know expanse
because like it's very easy and probably
seems to me correct to say that like a
cell in our kidney doesn't know it's
part of a human body it's just doing its
kidney thing but human beings were at
least capable of becoming aware of the
fact that wow I'm made of cells that
each seem to have their own experience
and I'm myself a cell and this larger
Guan organism and the solar system it's
like so we seem aware of the these
layers to some
degree in a way that I don't know that
other organisms are you know and so
there's a new kind
of important role for the human being
even after we get over the
anthropocentrism that led to the
ecological
crisis um and the appropriate creation
of all value and purpose for just the
human being we need to get over that but
there might be a new kind of important
role for the human being when we inhabit
a living Universe where you know as the
Buddhists would say being human is a
very auspicious occasion because we have
this Cosmic
perspective um that might not be
available to to other
creatures see we're talking about us
being at sort of like a midpoint
somewhere between you know we got sort
of partly Vine perhaps and sort of part
part beast and part Angel you you could
say right is that the kind of thing yeah
and it's a very ancient perspective you
know the the human being as a microcosm
um but also the human being being very
much in the middle of things um you know
from like Dante's perspective like the
Earth uh is Right Between Heaven and
Hell um but it's it's quite striking the
way that modern cosmology and our
capacity to measure the very small and
the very large we also seem to be right
at the center of things and you you
might say well how could we not feel
like we're at the center because we can
only see so far in either direction um
but it seems like there are real limits
here it's not just the limits of our
ability to see but that you know the the
capacity for energy as we know it to
organize itself hits a bottom floor uh
and similarly when we look out at the
cosmic um
uh the edge of the cosmos and the
microwave background radiation it seems
like the the scale the powers uh the
logarithmic um scales here have us at
the center and so science contemporary
cosmology has kind of rediscovered this
this ancient understanding of the human
being um being a a fulcrum Point uh kind
of meeting place between yeah the
Angelic and the animal um which gives us
a
unique Vantage point that you know makes
us
interesting um even to say the Angels or
say even to the higher consciousnesses
that there's something unique about the
human being that they're very interested
in um and you see this coming through in
in like um I don't know if you're a Lord
of the Rings fan massive massive Lord of
the Rings fan so the elves are very
interested in human beings because we
die yeah right and they're kind of
envious of this yeah because and I think
again it speaks to the importance of of
death that we we shouldn't rush to
eliminate death when it might be the
most important thing about us um and
instead of just imagining it as an end
and a horrible thing that we would want
to avoid at all costs it could be that
um death is the very source of of the
most profound meaning that that we have
access to you know yeah it's funny I did
have I did have some possible push back
on that I was just wondering there may
be some advantages with people being say
longer lived not necessarily Immortal
but longer live to give you more time to
sort of figure out what's going on and
how to conduct yourself you know but but
well but but if reincarnation is a thing
then we we will have another chance
indeed indeed because nothing's wasted I
mean that's what I like about that
Vision that reincarnation model you you
offered up is that nothing's wasted yeah
everything is significant you know and
that that's that so so so suffering um
you know feelings of inadequacy all this
depression all that has a has a a
function in this in this view I think um
what I wanted to ask you I wanted to
just um because I'm conscious of time um
wanted to just get your views on
psychedelics I mean there's a couple of
um burning questions I mean first of all
I think they have profound implications
for Consciousness because you know some
of the studies that Bernardo castrop has
popularized he's shown that there's
certain sort of states in DMT where
brain activity goes down almost to zero
so you've got a you know a brain not
doing anything and people having the
most profound experience they they could
possibly have um is it a glimpse into
the to the transc you know is it a
glimpse into a higher consciousness of
some sort there's people that have
repeated um sort of experiences on DMT
that are consistent across different
individuals they're doing these kind of
um you know they're putting people on
drips now and having these longer term I
think it's it's happening in Britain
somewhere I can't remember the
university um what are your thoughts on
this stuff and and then why does nature
produce these chemicals or these
compounds that that give us these
insights I mean McKenna obviously talked
about having conversations with a great
other you know you sort of go into that
space and ask them metaphysical
questions and so on and so any thoughts
on this before I Babble on all night
about
it well I mean on that the last Point
why should these um chemicals so-called
they're called secondary metabolites in
in the sense that um mushrooms say cocy
and mushrooms this cocy gen genus
produces these chemicals as a secondary
metabolite in the sense that they're not
a primary part of the metabolic process
that the mushroom and the M have to do
it they don't have to do it no it's for
us that's fascina and so it's a means of
communicating um that an ecosystem has
to communicate between organisms these
secondary metabolites and they're all
psychoactive in various ways the the
traditional psychedelic compounds are
especially potent um to mammals it seems
but there are other animals that know to
find these mushrooms and they have their
experience uh or or you know other
psychedelic uh plants and so human
beings aren't the only ones that like to
alter their
Consciousness um but like why these
secondary metabolites exist it seems to
have a lot to do with or everything to
do with this um evolutionary history and
the ways that tens of millions of years
ago um insects were interacting with
plants
and our own nervous systems and
neurochemistry is intimately related to
the neurochemistry of insects um and
these molecules evolved over the course
of millions of years of
interaction between insects and plants
and then eventually more complex animals
and plants um as a way of I think of the
ecosystem as a whole you could say
gaia's mind of regulating itself um and
that's amazing the fact you can show
that these species
could could manage without this
additional functionality but yet they
they do it anyway as say because it's
perhaps part of some
broader requirement for communication
within the the ground within the guia
you know that's that's amazing yeah and
there's there's dimethyl tryptamine
everywhere it's in grass it's it's not
in tremendously high concentrations but
you could theoretically as far as I'm
not a chemist but I've heard you can if
you get enough grass and know the
chemical process to distill it there's
enough DMT in there and grass clippings
that you could you know so
um you know the psychodelic Renaissance
that's going on is I think exciting I
remember being in college and learning
about the 1960s and the first sort of
psychedelic revolution in uh in in the
west
um and really thinking like gosh um it's
too bad that didn't succeed and you know
maybe all we need to do is Spike the
water with LSD and all the would
suddenly realize the their mistakes and
but yeah I'm I'm less
um I'm less naive about the potential
here it's not automatic the thing about
these
psychedelics um they have bad trip they
could have bad trips it would make them
worse yeah exactly you you know they can
be used to treat PTSD and they can cause
new trauma if if not done in a in a safe
and
enriching um environment and context and
so um they're not a silver bullet
they're I like one of my teachers um
Stannis gra described psychedelics as
non-specific
amplifiers okay non-specific amplifiers
of our existing you know the terms that
Tim lry and Richard Alpert used were set
and setting so our mindset and our
cultural environment and then the very
physical environment that we're in while
we're tripping has a huge influence on
what we experience um yeah I mean used
to go into a dark room didn't didn't he
do five dried cramps yeah and he's like
don't even do it with other people that
brings culture into the room and if you
really want to go you know deeper than
our cultural conditioning you need to be
alone when you do these things and which
you know raises questions about the
research settings where it's very much a
mental health
framework um where these are being
explored right now um which is fine I
think there's lots of application there
but the experience you have in a
clinical set you you know a hospital
room or you know a square room and they
try to make it look nice but you've got
two therapists hovering over you you're
in bed you've got ear earphones on and
they're they've chosen the soundtrack of
usually classical music or whatever it's
very um personally I would feel quite
anxious in that environment yeah um and
much more comfortable either by myself
or with some friends like at the beach
or in the woods um but from clinical
point of view that's not
safe but when and you know there's a i'
I'd say the clinical setting is not safe
not
that's right um yeah I mean that's
that's that's a whole interesting
conversation I mean not to I think most
therapists are are honest professional
people who uphold ethical boundaries but
yeah you know even without psychedelics
involved many therapists end up having
inappropriate relationships with their
clients and when you throw psychedelics
into the mix the transference is much
more intense and so there are risks of
you know being in that clinical
environment yeah that are non negligible
um but just the anxiety produced by
being watched by these professional
psychologists you know who with their
clip pads taking notes like I just when
you're in a psychedelic State that's
like I get alien abduction Vibes you
know it's the last thing you want you
want isn't it yeah um but but mat Matt
do you think these these entities that
people encounter on DM I mean I've not
done DMT myself um but are they
encountering agency other
agents I think
um I do think that we have
to I I have had experiences of what I
can only refer to as
non-physical entities or agencies
um and it's very
convincing and I I have enough you know
ability to take a skeptical stance even
on my own experience to say of course
there are many possible explanations for
this like the brain might be hardwired
to you know attribute
agency um yeah seeing faces for example
and and yeah yeah yeah um but on the
other hand some of the most powerful and
transformative experiences of my life
have been a result of
encountering beings in a psychedelic
state that um have a message you know
and have something to convey and I think
um this is
not this is not unusual in the history
of uh our species um you know now we
this if you're embedded in the
Psychedelic counterculture you might
call them self-transforming machine
elves like McKenna
uh a lot of people are having what they
describe as extraterrestrial encounters
with with aliens or but if you go back a
few hundred years people talked about
angels and demons and um so that reminds
me of the UFO phenomena as well because
they they' seem to have the the things
that people report seeing have moved
with technology haven't they so a
similar kind of pattern there as well
perhaps exactly um and I think
uh you know the you asked about space
earlier and um I
think psychedelics open up this
possibility that we can begin to explore
Inner Space in a in a way that would
allow us to appreciate how vast that
domain is might even it might even be
vaster
than what we think of as the external um
Cosmos and it could be that um all of
intelligent life in the cosmos is
interconnected Ed somewhat like
interdimensionally or so you could say
through this Inner Space of
Consciousness and the best hope we have
for contacting alien intelligence is not
to imagine we might travel through
physical space to other solar systems I
mean it just takes so damn long and um
that might be impractical even with more
advanced technology but maybe again it
might be it might be a technology of
some sort the guia has generated to to
enable this broader right
communication yeah very specul but I
think
um
there's we haven't really we've just
only just begun as with a modern
scientific attitude exploring these
inner domains and I think we have a lot
to learn from indigenous Traditions that
have been doing this for thousands of
years um but I yeah I do think these
entities are real in some sense um and
you
know the fact that brain activity
diminishes even while the intensity of
what the person is experiencing goes
through the roof suggests to us that um
yeah the brain the nervous system is
kind of a filter and it is actually not
in the business of producing
Consciousness but inhibiting
Consciousness um stepping it down to a
level that we can manage and when we
take a psychedelic it just blows the lid
off whereas I'll just tuley but he's
really getting it from the French
philosopher um hre Barone this idea of
the brain as a kind of reducing valve
and psychedelics open the valve and
allow mind at large to flood in um I
think that's what the evidence would
suggest the more appropriate model is
for understanding the mindbrain
relationship mind and Consciousness are
more like this field that we tune into
that the nervous system is a kind of
antenna or R receiver rather than a
local
producer of
Consciousness and it you we wouldn't
come to that perspective unless we had
been exposed to psychedelics and been
able to experiment with these things so
they're tremendously valuable research
tool and I I really advocate for
Thinking Beyond just the medical model
for their application
um I I'm I am quite adamant that all
adults should be able to uh legally use
the classical psychedelics they're way
less dangerous than sugar and alcohol
and tobacco and um and many
pharmaceutical drugs um the only reason
there's there's cultural and moral
reasons rooted in a kind of
panical religious history that you know
originally led to these things being
made illegal I think and the political
implications in the 60s that you know
the it was political revolutionaries who
were using these things a lot
Strangely I think there's a lot of
arguments that psychedelics
depoliticized the more radical political
movements in the 60s because people did
turn inward instead of trying to change
institutions so there's a critique there
implicit maybe in in at least the um
historical um effects of psychedelics uh
I think there are ways that they could
be politically revolutionary but they at
least in the 60s were critiqued a lot
for deoli izing people
um but yeah it's a very promising area
of research and I think as a philosopher
I find psychedelics to be quite powerful
instruments for metaphysical
exploration yeah um this might seem a
little bit left field but um do you do
you think cryptocurrency has anything to
do with this sort of you know this this
idea movement towards decentralization
of power and sort of more kind of
organic system terms of organic
economies and so on do you think
crypto's got anything to do with
that possibly well particularly Bitcoin
you know set aside the altcoins but
Bitcoin you know this this idea that
it's it's something you can actually own
that that can't be meddled with by the
Banks or governments and so on so is
that part of this journey this Awakening
it might be I think we have to find ways
of um Mining and maintaining the
blockchain that isn't so resource
intensive but there are there are
avenues for doing that that are that are
promising but um I think as a way of
decentralizing economic power um taking
some of the uh Power away from
centralized
Banks um I think that's a very promising
Avenue
um it's such a complicated subject I
think this idea of like a trust free
economy like you don't need to trust
people to follow through with their
transactions and stuff because the
algorithm will do it um you know I know
you know Bitcoin doesn't have Smart
contracts but like something like
ethereum where you can just automate
something that you would need a team of
lawyers to do normally in terms of
what's when it aspects Clauses of a
contract are activated by this or that
change in the market or whatever that
can all be um built into the blockchain
in a way and so you don't need to trust
people to do what they say they're going
to do it's soon as you agree to the
contract that's what's going to happen
but like I just feel like I'm not
opposed to using Technologies to make
our
economy um function in a more
transparent and distributed way but at
the same time should we celebrate the
idea that we don't need to trust each
other anymore like I feel like that's a
bit it's a bit
antisocial um and I I think blockchain
technology can play an important role in
helping us reimagine money um but
Bitcoin is weird because it's not really
functioning as a currency it's too
valuable to function as a
currency um and so the
original I think um point of it has been
lost and it's become more like an
investment yeah um and where this is
leading I'm not sure but it could be
that it's not Bitcoin that ends up being
the platform
um but the basic idea of blockchain and
of like a world computer and you know
massively
Distributing um The Ledger to increase
the transparency of economic
transactions I think these are all
positive things um it would be great if
we could uh you know in the us when we
vote when we have our elections um we're
using paper ballots and people say oh
that's safer but it's still so easily
manipulated and if we could just get
this on the blockchain and people could
vote on their phones or whatever it' be
so much I mean I think we'd increase
voter participation and I I feel like
there's so many applications for the
blockchain technology goes far beyond
just Bitcoin or ethereum or a
particular um applications right so yeah
I think this it's a promising
development that I'm curious to see
unfold that's really interesting what
you said there it's kind of it's emerged
from the fact that we have problems
trusting each other right so it's
emerged as a kind of of response to that
but yes it does take away that choice of
being a good person doesn't it so it
takes away the opportunity to do the
right thing in some sense that's quite
interesting um just conscious of time
here Matt um I think you've got a few
minutes left so just to say thanks so
much for coming to talk to me um you
make philosophy cool um you one of a
bunch of guys that do that I have you in
there with castrop and you know Philip
gof you're making it accessible you
speak calmly clearly and intelligently
on these topics and it's it's just a
massive pleasure and privilege to have
you so thank you yeah no it's been fun
Matt you ask great questions and uh yeah
hope it's valuable for your your
listeners thank you very much it's been
wonderful um hopefully we speak again
sometime I'd like that cheers Matt take
care all right happy New Year and to you
