having considered the limitations of
traditional interpretations of sensation
and the role of Association in memory
chapter 3 addresses two other cognitive
faculties attention and judgment and
while the previous two chapters mostly
critiqued empiricism this chapter places
a critical focus on
intellectualism which is meu ponti's
name for idealism with decart and Kant
figuring prominently
as exemplars of this philosophy each
chapter up to this point while filled
with critique has also put forth a
constructive interpretation of
perception perception as ambiguous in
chapter 1 and perception as a unity in
Chapter 2 now in chapter 3 Merlo ponti
will argue for perception as a dynamic
creative
activity we begin with attention one of
of the favored interpretations of this
capacity by empiricism and one that
continues to be taught to this day in
cognitive science textbooks is the
spotlight theory of attention according
to this approach attention is a general
unconditioned power of the mind that can
be applied to any contents that have
entered the perceptual field through
sense data attention does not create the
perception of these objects but merely
shines a light on them Illuminating what
are through a combination of sense data
and habitual Association pre-existing
objects another approach to attention is
put forth by intellectualism which as
already mentioned is meru ponti's name
for idealism whereas empiricism deploys
a bottomup approach placing the weight
of the perceptual experience on the
incoming sense data intellectualism
offers a top- down approach emphasizing
thought's structure and purposeful role
in determin mining the meaning of the
objects that fall within perception
according to this approach and like
empiricism attention merely reveals the
intelligible structures already present
in the object however whereas empiricism
claim that this intelligibility derives
from sense data intellectualism claims
that this intelligibility derives from
the mind's categories and as we'll soon
discuss its judgments merup ponti is
critical of both approaches he finds the
empiricist theory of attention to be too
passive failing to adequately explain
the production of objects in perception
wrongly assuming that those objects
pre-exist their emergence within the
perceptual field conversely he critiques
intellectualism for being too active
wrongly assuming that objects are fully
determined by thought and thus like
empiricism fails to explain the
production of objects in perception
overlooking the contingency and
unpredictability of perception and
eliminating an element of Discovery and
learning that comes from Beyond the
mind's
categories we'll next consider the
intellectualist approach to judgment
it's helpful to Define judgment in the
manner Kant uses the term which is as a
fundamental cognitive act that produces
knowledge and like the classical
understanding such judgments are
formulated as a proposition that can be
evaluated as true or false importantly
in the case of Kant such judgments rely
on a priori categories of the Mind
mental conditions that precede
experience and are imposed upon sensory
intuitions to make sense of them all
judgments are grounded in such
categories with this background in mind
we can consider meru ponti's
presentation of judgment as it is
represented by intellect sexualism
according to this approach judgment is
what transforms raw Sensations into
coherent perceptions filling in the gaps
of perception for the inevitably
insufficient and enigmatic sense data
notably meru ponti claims that the
intellectualist approach relies on
empiricist assumptions namely that
perception begins with discret sensory
points that must be linked together with
the difference being that for the
empiricist it is a matter of a
Association that does the linking and
for the intellectualist it's a judgment
that does the linking both approaches
strip perception of its distinctive role
in meaning making missing its lived
Dynamic nature intellectualism also
ignores an important distinction between
the act of seeing and the act of
reflecting upon what is being seen
instead collapsing direct sense
experience into the reflective Act of
judgment as such perception is merely an
interpretation of experience born out of
a combination of sensation and judgment
rather than a direct encounter with the
world milu ponti puts forth several
examples that illustrate the limitations
of this approach first he critiques
decart's famous analysis of a piece of
wax which moves from sensory qualities
smell color texture to an abstract
notion of wax as capable of infinite TR
Transformations for mlu ponti this
abstraction erases the perceptual
richness of the wax as it is experienced
that is its softness dull color and
potential sounds when touch second he
ask us to imagine holding two cardboard
boxes one large and one small made of
the same material but constructed in a
way that they weigh the same nonetheless
one encounters the illusion that the
larger box feels heavier even though you
know it isn't intellectualism would
explain this by claiming that you don't
actually feel the larger box is heavier
but instead judge it to be so based on
faulty assumptions in this view
perception is reduced to an
interpretation or hypothesis about
sensory data rather than an immediate
experience MTI challenges this idea
instead arguing that such explanations
miss the richness of perception as it is
happening third he discusses the Necker
Cube which appears differently depending
upon how you look at it even if you know
the cube can be seen in multiple ways
your knowledge doesn't immediately
change how you perceive it the shift in
perception isn't simply a matter of
judgment or interpretation it's tied to
the way the figure itself presents
meaning through its structure fourth
meron present presents the zolner
illusion where parallel lines appear to
converge because of surrounding
auxiliary lines intellectualism explains
this Illusion by saying that we
mistakenly compare the whole figure
instead of isolating the main lines in
other words it's an error in judgment
but M ponti asked why is so difficult to
see the lines as parallel in the first
place it's because auxil lines introduce
a new meaning into the figure that
transforms how we perceive it and this
transformation happens before any
judgment occurs it is part of the
perceptual experience
itself now according to Merlo ponti
intellectualism relies on a few
philosophical dualisms first like
empiricism it assumes a world in itself
that is an objective reality existing
independent of Consciousness as such
both intellectualism and empiricism
adhere to What's called the natural
attitude which presupposes an objective
world out there that Consciousness must
correspond to or explain intellectualism
simply shifts responsibility from the
external world to Consciousness itself
imagining a universal subject capable of
organizing all sense data from the world
out there into absolute truth but
according to mer ponti this move only
replaces one Dogma with
another second intellectualism treats
the subject as both an object in the
world and as the world's organizing
principle wherein the subject is a kind
of absolute transcendental Consciousness
standing outside of the world it treats
these two perspectives on the subject as
somehow complimentary truths without
questioning their coherence or how it's
even possible that both can Co exist in
the same subject for merlu ponti these
dualisms speak to the inadequacy of
intellectualism as a philosophical
approach instead He suggests we have to
move Beyond such dualities to uncover
how perception and meaning emerge
through lived experience whereby a
unified subject and world are
intertwined rather than separate or
opposed now just a quick aside on this I
found this part particularly interesting
in light of my readings of lonian
psychoanalysis where we'll see Lan go in
a different route accepting the idea of
a split subject but showing how this
philosophical split in epistemology is
in fact a structural feature of language
as it intersects with the subject so we
find here a potentially notable
departure between phenomenology and
psychoanalysis if you saw the s videos
you may also recall s's own critique of
psychoanalysis concerning the idea of a
split subject he's mostly concerned
there about the role of freedom and bad
faith but the arguments are similar to
what M PTI is presenting here concerning
the split subject and yet it's also
notable that as we'll see that most
phenomenologists end up reintroducing
some notion of the split But ultimately
articulated in a manner different than
how we see in K and
psychoanalysis and that is thought in
such a way as to ultimately preserve the
more fundamental Unity of the
subject former luponte perception is not
about assembling isolated sensory
Impressions or making judgments about
them instead perception creates meaning
spontaneously and holistically when we
perceive something whether it's the
weight of a box the shape of a cube or
the convergence of lines in an illusion
we're not passively receiving data or
actively interpreting it step by step
perception is an act that simultaneously
brings together sensory elements and
infuses them with meaning unlike the
passivity of empiricism and the activity
of intellectualism and their respective
approaches to attention there is in meru
ponti's understanding of attention a
circumscribed ignorance that involves a
balance between knowing and not knowing
and that allows us to engage with the
world meaningfully but without fully
predetermining what we'll find attention
then is a dynamic and active process of
learning that reveals objects in their
unity and ambiguity it creates a bridge
between distinct perception and clear
understanding without reducing one to
the other this function of attention can
be demonstrated with specific
neurological disorders that show that
perception depends on a stable sensory
field which can disintegrate under
certain conditions leading to vague or
unstable spatial awareness for example
in a condition known as hemispatial
neglect there is damage to an area of
the brain responsible for allocating
spatial attention to one side of the
visual field it's not a disturbance of
vision nor perception but attention when
asked a copy a presented object the
patient will only copy half of the
object and yet believe they have copied
the entire object
it's only when the tester points out
this to the patient that they will even
notice what they've done the fact that
the patient can notice the error
temporarily suggests that it is possible
to perceive the whole object when
directed to do so but without this
ongoing capacity for spatial attention
that wholeness will soon dissipate
leading the patient to return to
perceiving only half an object thinking
it is the whole such clinical cases
suggests that attention has an essential
role in perceptual Consciousness it's
not some general capacity being directed
by either sensation or judgment but is
itself a dynamic process that actively
creates a perceptual field where thought
can occur without losing any
coherence it steps back from the
immediate sensory flux to identify the
invariant features emits changing
appearances without such a process or
when it's underlying physiology is
damaged objects cannot arrive to
perceptual Consciousness as integrated
holes regarding judgment merup ponti
doesn't really provide a different
understanding of this mental activity so
much as attempt to show how it is
secondary to perception itself and that
meaning primarily arises out of
perception prior to judgment this leads
to an important point that Merlo ponti
raises in this chapter the inter play
between reflection and perception
reflection which seems to be closely
related to judgment always arises from
within a particular context arising
without fully knowing its origin An
Origin located in perception the primary
phenomenon of perception is often
concealed by reflection that is through
our habitual or second order perceptions
the kind we exercise in daily life and
which is shaped by prior experiences and
operates on what he calls the surface of
being for example when we quickly glance
around to locate ourselves among
familiar objects like identifying a door
a window or a table we don't truly see
these things instead they appear as mere
functional references reduced to their
meanings as guides for practical action
and this reminds me of haider's notion
of Readiness to hand wherein tools do
not appear as objects in themselves but
only in their use function it's only
when they fail to work that we notice
them as objects that they become present
at hand but unlike haiger for whom
Readiness to hand is a more primordial
encounter with the tool mer ponti seems
to be indicating that this immediate
interpretation of the tool in its
utility is itself a secondary judgment
derived from an even more primordial
sextual encounter with the tool though
perhaps not the tool as present at hand
which can be itself an abstracting
reflective relation to the tool as well
I point this out because one way meru
ponti is trying to differentiate himself
not only from intellectualism but also
to some degree from the preceding
phenomenological tradition is the weight
he's placing on embodied
experiencing an element that is Dean
Miss or at least much less emphasized in
someone like haiger and so to truly
understand perception we must look
Beyond these surface level judgments to
uncover its deeper originating structure
a dynamic interplay between unreflective
experience and reflective thought when
we pause to contemplate an object purely
for its own sake something deeper occurs
the object ceases to be just an example
of a general type a tree and instead
reveals itself in its
individuality In This Moment perception
becomes a creative act as if the world
is being seen a new recreating the very
idea of the object from its
Origins this ability to perceive the
unique essence of an object reflects
what meru Pon calls natural judgment
whereby meaning seems to emanate
directly from the object itself this
judgment unlike the Judgment we've been
talking about throughout is not a
deliberate weighing of reasons but a
spontaneous Act of meaning making that
unfolds as we perceive and this idea of
unfolding of meaning making suggests
that there is included in meron's
thinking and perception a developmental
aspect an example he provides in this
chapter is the gradual development of an
infants ability to distinguish colors
from recognizing General contrasts
colored versus colorless to more Nuance
distinctions warm versus cold shades for
example and then finally to specific
colors an implication of the preceding
analyses of the actively creative and
fundamental nature of perception is
merup ponti's emphasis on the importance
of
finitude something that the
intellectualist approach and positing an
absolute constituting Consciousness
fails to do instead viewing finitude as
a deficiency or limitation to overcome
so how is finitude relevant here well
for MTI embracing finitude as meaningful
in itself would allow for a richer
understanding of perception because it
would shift the focus from abstract
Universal Concepts to the lived embodied
experience of being in the world if
finitude were embraced positively that
is Phil as a philosophical concept
perception could be understood as an
originating knowledge a dynamic process
in which meaning emerges through our
embodied interaction with the world for
example when we perceive an object like
a tree we do not simply recognize it as
part of a general category the tress of
the tree or apply pre-existing Concepts
to it instead we encounter it as a
unique presence that reveals itself
through our specific perspective and
context this act of perception is
inherently finite because it's shaped by
our particular location in time and
space yet this finitude is not a
limitation it is what allows perception
to be rich and
meaningful so ultimately merup
calls for a radical rethinking of how we
understand perception he advocates for a
phenomenological approach that sets
aside traditional categories and focuses
on the lived experience of perception as
an active embodied process perception is
not about passively receiving stimuli or
applying intellectual judgments it's
about engaging with the world in a way
that continuously creates meaning
through our bodily presence and
intentionality this approach reveals
perception as a foundational act that
shapes how we experience reality itself
philosophical reflection then should
awaken us to the unreflective lived
history of Consciousness and its role in
shaping our experience next time we'll
address the notion of the phenomenal
field elaborating uh the notion of
perception as an embodied contextual and
Inter subjective phenomenon that resists
reduction to empiricist or
intellectualist
terms well thank you for making it to
the end and if you got something out of
this video and want to support this work
you can do so by liking the video
sharing it with others and if you
haven't already subscribing to the
channel you can also support this work
financially one way is through the super
thanks button below and the other way is
by becoming a patreon supporter where I
offer video transcripts unedited
materials and prioritize questions and
comments here on YouTube the link is
below I'd like to thank the following
for already supporting this work over on
patreon and so until next
time be well
