hi welcome to AA speaks literally the
podcast where I share the random things
and the random thoughts that shape my
personality today's random
thoughts well it is mental health mental
health is a topic that touches all of us
in some way and so I'm excited to have
two incredible guests with us each
bringing a unique perspective into this
very important conversation
first we have Vanessa vandero a PhD
candidate in Clinical Psychology based
in the UK and we have M AA who is a
behav I'm trying to make sure that I say
this word correctly a behavioral
behavioral a behavioral health
technician in the US and a master
student in health psychology or I
believe she's completed her Masters by
now or she's about to complete her
Masters in
Psychology so in this episode we're
going to talk about their Journeys
compare the differences in me mental
health care in the UK and the US and
seeing as we're all ghanians we're also
going to talk about Ghana um mental
health approach as well and then we'll
dive into what the future holds for
psychology and mental health for me I am
going to have I'm going to ask questions
about technology as well because well I
a technology
law
Grant and and so just going to ask how
technology
also um meant itself meant
itself combines itself with mental
health
um treatment in our world today so
whether you're curious about pursuing a
career in this field passionate about
improving mental health care or simply
looking for insights into how we can
better support ourselves and others this
is a conversation for you and I hope you
enjoy it so grab a cup of coffee cuz
it's chilly over here if it's hot grab a
hot a cold soda and let's dive into the
conversation my name is
a well down
hello how are you feeling so glad you
Do's get
talking
speak yes she's
speak things
like the H scary your she have you
feeling very mer she's about to
hi guys welcome to the episode like I
mentioned earlier in the intro we're
going to be talking about mental health
which is a very important conversation
and to to help me with this conversation
are very two very important
ladies Vanessa and mamadra welcome
ladies thank you for joining me on AA
speaks thank you for having us yeah
thank
you okay so before we start the
conversation just just give us a little
you know intro who who is Vanessa who is
momy tell the listeners so that they can
they can learn more about you so I'll
start with
Vanessa okay well um my name is Vanessa
um I'm I went to secondary school so
high school with um
irama um I I um I moved to the UK After
High School and ever since I've been in
the UK I've been studying psychology so
it's been about 10 years now of studying
psychology I'm currently doing my
doctorate my clinical doctorate um in
Clinical Psychology to become a
registered clinical psychologist in the
the UK um already a clinical associate
psychologist which is like the
equivalent of physician
assistant psychologist so I'm already
qualified as that but I'm upgrading now
to
become the proper clinical psychologist
so it's a three-year program and I'm
currently in my second
year well done well done thank you
Vanessa
mommy hi my name is is Mama um sometimes
I go by Mame in the US only though but
I'm aama's cousin on my mom's side and
I'm currently in my Master's um program
where I'm on the health track so I'm
finishing up on my thesis and then after
that I'm trying to find a job before I
get into my doctorate
degree well done mommy in case you guys
didn't know I am my
Bo and I'm going to have this
conversation with these two lovely
ladies so thank you again for joining me
so let's get into the
conversation um hold on let me let me
gather my questions now okay so my first
question is like you guys said you've
mentioned that you're you're pursuing um
either either already started pursuing a
career in
Psychology or you you are still in the
process of it so the first thing is what
inspired you to pursue that career in
Psychology and mental health M let's
start with
you okay um well while I was in
undergrad I was originally a math major
well actal science to be accurate with
it but I switched into psychology
because I wasn't entirely enjoying the
um math curriculum so while I started
taking psychology that's where I started
learning more about it especially with
um Health psychology so from there
that's where I wanted to pursue a career
where I can help others with their
health behaviors
okay um
Vanessa I think I decided to do
psychology in in in secondary school
actually because um I remember on one of
the I think it was a university fair or
something some there was a university in
from in the
UK that shared like leaflets or
pamphlets yeah I remember those
days and then I saw like because I
really I was studying Visual Arts I
really you know I thought I'm going to
be a graphic designer and that's it um
but then I came across psychology and
then the summary for the course was that
it's about helping people so I thought
oh okay that's what I'm going to do so I
came to the UK and decided I was going
to do
psychology and um yeah it's you
know I I I guess my decision to to
pursue psychology because it's a very
long
journey my decision to still stick with
it was also out of um lived experience
of mental health difficulties and my own
personal experiences and wanting to to
be of value to people who have been
through things that I have also been
through okay thank you um so now let's
let's look at it right now we are away
from home basically let's say but coming
from where we
are um obviously as years have gone by
we can we can say that the conversation
of mental health has become a thing and
people actually um you know appreciate
it a lot more than they did let's say
even 10 years ago when we were in high
school so um what do you think is the
most important thing to um to say when
it comes to conversations where they say
you know what this mental health
thing you are just making it a big deal
it's not too much of a big
deal just pray about it you know just
for forget your worries just do this
just do that you'll be okay you'll be
fine what do you think is the most
important thing to say when when people
say
that who else to go first
I I caness
okay I feel it's just important to let
them know mental health is just as
important as physical health as like you
know you see with people who go through
depression anxiety even stress right
like we all go through that with school
work it's important to like you know
remind especially maybe those who are
against mental health that
when you have it sorted or even learn
ways to like um improve on it it really
changes your outlook in life and also
how you are able to like you know
function as a human
being yeah yeah um I agree with you m um
really mental health is also Health it's
it's it's you know it's an aspect of
health so there's physical health which
people think is what health is health is
physical health there's also mental
health there's emotional health um there
is spiritual health so health is very
valid uh sorry varied um but I guess I
understand why people say you know um
mental health is um mental health is um
almost as if
it's it's a luxury you know it's like
well at least from where coming from
it's often View BU as if it's a luxury
and I understand that because in some in
some ways it is a luxury you know you
have to pay for you know psychologist
and th it's note it cost a lot of money
you know so part of changing people's
minds is also perhaps looking at systems
that have made mental health feel like a
luxury rather than just right that
people have the right to Mental Health
Care um and I think think it that much
of the advocacy has to come from from
top to bottom so looking at people who
are in charge of systems Healthcare
Systems policies laws whatever it is
that is where the work has to start from
but then there's also the individual
work that we all have to do regardless
of our financial situation regardless of
our circumstances at the end of the day
it is your health and it is your
responsibility um so perhaps you can
what you have to do is to first of all
deconstruct the idea that Health mental
health is a luxury or that mental health
is separate from health because it's
really part of health and and when you
can start start to sort of understand it
in that way you can try to find ways in
the system to to support you with your
mental health yeah yeah well said thank
you I
agree
yeah um would you say that your your
academic path or your professional path
has helped to has helped shaped your
perspective on what mental Care Mental
Health Care is is that a big um
Factor yeah yeah sorry I like the
Unison yeah I know okay well I I'll go
um yeah no I agree I think it's taking
me years to um really sort of even
um understand mental health within the
African or gaman context it's taking a
lot of time to understand that it's not
a luxury that it's not a rich people's
problem say you know it's taken me a lot
of time and certainly education has
helped me tremendously because now I
don't just I don't just situate the
problem within the person I look at the
systems around them and so you know in
the past I would have said well it's all
on you if if you're not taking care of
your mental health it's all on you but
how can it be all on them when they are
in system in place to help them with
funding to help them with medication to
help them with seeing a psychologist
with you know it's it's all of these
systems so it's really about helping
people to see that I understand I
understand where you're coming from and
why you think it's such a luxury or it's
so difficult to get mental health care
but let's think about what we can do
with what we have while we we we we try
to push people in higher systems or
levels of of authority to change the
system but until then let's sort of work
with what we have is is the approach I
use now
yeah um M about you yeah yeah going off
Vanessa's point about like accessibility
what people see or perceive about mental
health um I was able to learn about
different like Tech Meeks while I was in
school and if I didn't have that
experience I feel I would have not been
able to like you know have that
knowledge and it just reminds me of
people who don't like you know have that
accessibility to you know the vast
knowledge on stress management
techniques and other ways to um you know
help with um mediating any kind of like
depressive or negative emotions so like
one big thing I like is um mindfulness
or meditating like that might seem as
something farfetched depending on your
culture but it really does help just to
sit down for a second like and you can
even pray if you're somebody who's
religious so yeah just the knowledge is
um one way to like help with
that okay thank you both for that as
well um so now my next question
is what do you think about the
differences in the approach in the study
of mental health you Vanessa you're in
the UK M you're in the US how does the
um approach also how is the approach um
important in understanding mental
health do you think that there's a a
real
difference are you do you mean sort of
differences in the way the countries
approach yes yes okay well I'm not
familiar with the American system but I
know that to become a clinical
psychologist um it's it's a very
competitive Pro process because it's
funded by the NHS so it's funded by our
Health Care system so they pay for your
tuition and then you're paid a salary
because you you you do have to work
while studying so it's a lot of Juggle
um but because is paid for it's very
very competitive um I I remember you
said you wanted to do Health
psychology that one is not funded
unfortunately so it's only Clinical
Psychology that's in the UK but forensic
psychology educational psychology Health
psychology is not funded uh so because
of that it's very competitive in the UK
if you want to train as a clinical
psychologist specifically and because
it's very competitive
you have to sort of accumulate a lot of
work experience you have to have done a
masters so for instance I have two
masters because I you know that's all
the work I had to do to be able to get a
space on a very comp program um and then
when you're from a minority it's even
more difficult your journey is longer
you know so um because yeah I can say a
lot about that but anyway let me stop
myself but yeah so
and so because of that
um we have lots of clinical
psychologists who are very competitive
in nature who are very perect you know
come from a very perfectionist
perfectionist approach um and um the
thing about the way we study Clinical
Psychology here is that we're not
restricted to one model or one um um
type of therapy so we have different
types of therapy we have CBT we have em
we have DBT we have CS we have so there
are different types the difference
between a clinic you said so many things
that I don't know if you could explain
those
things so basically what I said was like
you know there are different Therapies
in that there what I mean is depending
on which therapy you go
for um it it would affect the approach
in which they treat you because every
therapy has a way of understanding
mental health so for example CBT thinks
that the way to alleviate mental
difficulties is to think about or focus
on the way the person thinks about the
problem how it connects to the way they
behave and then their feeling so it's
it's that sort of thoughts Behavior
feeling so that's that's way approaches
mental health whereas for
example um cognitive analytic therapy
approaches mental health in terms of
looking at the way people relate with
themselves and one another so that its
philosophy is that to alleviate mental
health is stress you have to first go
into the person's childhood you know
what were the that form to their
childhood um how did that relationship
affect the way they came to understand
themselves and then as a result of that
how they relate with other people and
understand other people so depending on
the type of therapist that you see and
that that type of the type of training
that they've got which specific therapy
they've trained in it will affect the
way they view the problem that you come
to them with and I think that's one of
my issues is that a lot of therapists
don't disclose which particular therapy
they've trained in they just say I'm a
without providing information about are
you a CBT therapist are you because the
the the the patient or the client needs
to know that this is the type of therapy
that the therapist is trained in and
then decide side is this kind of
thinking about mental health is this the
way I want to think about my
difficulties orir a different type of
therapy does it make sense so the
difference between a psychotherapist and
a clinical psychologist or a
psychologist is that a psychologist has
training different types of
therapies okay whereas a psychotherapist
has a training in one particular type of
therapy okay that's the difference so
most people confused the two that was a
difference a therapist and a
psychologist so a psychologist knows
more about a lot of therapies whereas a
therapist or a psychotherapist has just
focus on one type of one thing okay okay
so it's true that your your academic
details has really you know put you in a
a more clear view of what mental health
is yes m m were you going to say
something yeah um sorry I was listening
to so the question the question you
forgotten the question I was I think the
question was about um how studying so
yours will be how studying in the US um
you know the pathway in the US is yes so
um I joined in Psychology my junior year
of undergrad and then I just went into
Master's so I have more like knowledge
of like what's required there they um
expect you to finish a thesis
and um with your courses like they want
you to apply theories and models um
towards like real world real world
applications so you um so the beginning
you start learning about different
models um one big model we learned is
the health belief model Theory plan
behaviors just all these different yeah
theories and
models um and I haven't started my PhD
by was like um researching about it I
know in the US it takes 5 to seven years
depending on which
and they focus more on like conducting
longit longitudinal um research So like
um basically research that is going to
take over um two years or just a long
period of time uh that's why I wanted to
take a break before I went to PhD
program CU yeah here in the US um going
off Vanessa saying that they want them
to work I think some programs like want
you just to dedicate your whole time to
finishing um your the PHD degree so I
know some students have like um
conflicts with that especially with
financial um with their
finances uh and I think in the US
there's been more um resources to like
um towards mental health um especially
in like I can speak on campus for um
students especially um with um like
community health clinics and also
there's a lot of like
um sorry it's a specific name for it but
like basically a mental um health
counselor services like they have
different ones um pertaining to what
students need so like there's a lot of
athletes on campus they give them mental
health um Services they give people
services for
depression um anxiety yeah it's just
like abundance of it so
that's just I guess what I can speak for
the US side of um
psychology okay thank you so
um now I want to understand these I want
to understand emotions let's let's bring
emotions out what exactly does you know
the study of psychology or mental health
tell you about you know anxiety
depression hope sad Ness happiness all
those emotions what exactly does a study
tell you about it when a person is
feeling all these emotions whether at
one particular time or the same things
Al
together I don't know if my question is
helping is but yeah I can try to answer
you let me know if I'm going way off but
I wouldn't
know so um in the health in the health
psychology track they focus on the bio
soci oh I can't even say it
biosocial bioy yeah bioc psychosocial
model it's like a tongue twister but
yeah and it focuses on um physical and
mental health with consideration of
Social and psychological factors so I
believe like um looking at that it helps
to understand people on a different
level as to why they or their um
interpretation of their behaviors
towards like Health um so like one big
thing that like we learned in school
with social factors is Finance um where
people live at like their um their
location or their Avail availability
towards um certain Health Services
people's knowledge that's also another
thing to um consider because some
someone might not know what an insurance
um plan can Co um how it can be useful
for them since they don't have like the
knowledge of it so I like that aspect of
it because you always just think it's oh
like if you're doing something thing
that's like not good for you that's the
reason why like you know you're having a
low quality of life where it's like
stuff you can't control like money and
all that that can influence your overall
health so money is the root of all
happiness maybe
no there's other things to like you know
that can help your mental health that's
outside of Finance but that can be a big
barrier for people so that's yeah
yeah okay and just to add to that I
think you know in in America there's a
insurance system to health which we
don't have in the UK because healthare
yeah you guys got that
good so for us the biggest barrier to
Health Care is long waiting list like
you you're you're just going to be
waiting for a long time it's
free but it's not as quick I have that
experience today like
oh it's not as quick but just to go back
to your question I noticed that you you
you said you know depression anxiety
hope sadness and I was thinking were you
sort of thinking that depression and
anxiety were
emotions yes I I I I believe that yes
well no they're not they're not no yeah
this is you know I I do a lot of work
with the faith community and I love my
Christians I love my
religious but sometimes like when I
listen to them speak about you know
depression and anxiety and they say
things like you know is you are just
deciding to be depressed and you know
God hasn't given you sadness and you
know it's there are two very different
things I I really get upset when people
mean sadness and then they say it's
depression because the two are same
sadness and depression are not the same
thing one is don't they PL in though no
you have depression that's like a whole
different thing than being different
types of depression so depression is a
is a Med medical condition it's not it's
not an adjective it's not a A synony or
another name for depression for sadness
sorry it's a proper mental health
condition that is diagnosable so you
have to be
diagnosed to to say you have depression
and you have to you have to be
experienced a constant decrease in low
mood every single day for two weeks
constantly so it's not like I'm sad
today I get money I'm happy no that's
not depression depression is even when
the good things come in your life even
when everything is available to you even
when things are going well you just
can't seem to lift yourself like your
your mood is just constantly so low
every single minute of the day every
single day for two weeks so if by week
three you are fine that's not de
question If by if by day three you're
fine that's not de if by day seven
you're fine that's not de question it
has to be constant for two weeks see so
you see how that differs significantly
for sadness it's not the same thing and
different types of depression different
symptoms of depression there depression
that can look nothing like what like
sadness some people depressed and they
just hyper they impulsive there's hypers
sexuality drinking alcohol and it's a
form of depression but if we always say
that depression is sadness going to be
missing out a lot of people whose
depression doesn't look like what we
think it is you know it's very important
that we get that right we we we
understand the words we're using and if
we Tru want to sort of advocate for for
mental health awareness anxiety the same
way it's not the same as worry anxiety
is so much than worry there are
different types of anxiety so many tries
it's very you have to be diagnosed with
it you have to see yes there's a strict
criteria in order to be diagnosed with
anxiety there's social anxiety there's
generalized anxiety disorder OCD is a
form of anxiety there are different
types of anxiety so it's not the same
thing I'm just worried all the time or
I'm having a panic attack or it's panic
attack is a different disorder on its
own you know so I guess what I'm trying
to say is that um I just wanted to use
that opportunity to like make it clear
that those are not emotions those are
medical conditions okay okay yeah but on
the topic of of um emotions um I really
like what you said about the biosocial
model because we need to understand that
medical conditions are not just an issue
of emotions medical conditions are as a
result of your biology MH your
psychology and your social factors
interacted so you you first need to have
a biological
predisposition okay so that is the
difference between break break it down
for me break it down for me oh God sound
a teacher Oh no you're here teachers
please your biological predisposition
means that for example in your family
there's a there's a u a history of like
let's say bipolar disorder you know it
means that you have the biological
predisposition likelihood that you also
get bipolar but then having the
biological predisposition doesn't
necessarily mean that you Auto
automatically get it it is when your
psychology and your social factors are
so bad and that's what
does make
sense two people can go through the same
thing and one have disorder and the
other person would in it's not because
the person who gets it is weak and
doesn't believe in God and it's not
because of that it's it's because
perhaps there was a biological
predisposition their social situation
was not helpful their psychological
situation was not helpful and that
brought about the full-blown disorder
you know doesn't me that's yeah
situations sort of emotions sit they sit
in a biological psychological and social
like interaction if it makes sense yeah
yeah actually um Vanessa that reminds me
of when I took a Psychopathology course
we were um talking about like how social
factors or like environmental factors
can trigger people's um like I
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder like
in later years and like you explaining
it helped me to understand
more oh that's amazing that
is and and that's why some mom you're
welcome thank you
yes and that's why sometimes people can
develop mental health difficulties later
in life and like where did this come
from was there it's just that the
situation wasn't as bad enough to
trigger it let's say people I remember
there was a time where there was a lots
of University students Dying by Suicide
and the the story was always oh they had
a broken heart and so they killed
themselves no it's most likely that
there was a genetic predisposition the
broken had just the situation to trigger
that that that biological predisposition
you know so it was always there there
was always a and that's why you know
there's this whole like don't take drugs
because you can end up if you have a
biological predisposition to trigger it
it can trigger yes there are someone who
doesn't have the biological
predisposition take the drugs and
they'll be fine and you'll be thinking
oh me I can take it I and they were fine
but then you take it and then now y you
know and then and then they'll say it's
fearful
exactly momy fearful is like House
people house witches quot un quot oh
yeah
uhuh okay so I Now understand that H
depression anxiety they are not emotions
and the emotions basically they might
they might come out or they might show
themselves in our
biosocial psych
social yes I got it I got it so let me
give Let me Give an example now of a
time where um me I I felt sad when my
when my um environment changed so moving
from Ghana to the UK mhm and I'm sure
you people have heard a lot of things
that
um when people move here and they move
here alone they don't have family here
it can get very lonely so there might be
days that oh I've closed from lectures
and I come back to my room and I'm
sharing a house with strangers so I
can't even go out and start chatting
with them so I'm alone in my room and so
there's a feeling of every time after
school I'm sad I'm lonely the weather is
not even appetizing to say oh let me
look out the window and see the bright
bright Skies no the weather is also sad
so so will you say that um or can that
be um one factor that if I had a
biic disposition yeah this kind of
situation that I'm in will then trigger
whatever you
know bio thing is in mental health is in
my genetic yes that's
yeah it kind of similar to like
Vanessa's example of the students who
started like you know going through
their personal problems and yeah yeah
yeah wow yeah I thank God that there
there there's no
genetic that's a very good point because
you know same thing happened to me I
moved to the UK very lonely
unfortunately there was the biological
predisposition cuz my mom
also and so now it's like I'm also
full-blown like I have lots of diagnosis
and I know it's strange because I'm a
psychologist and you have like yes I do
you know but then understanding that
it's not just a a sort of like a you're
not good enough or you don't have
willpower or you're not you know
resilient enough it's a comination of so
many things biology you know my my my
psychology that is um you know what what
resources do I have available to me to
bring joy you know things and then my my
societal factors do I have a community
do I stay in touch with people do all
these things interact you know so for
some people moving to the UK because
they have all of those things they have
Community they have you know they they
have things that make them happy they
won't be depressed but some people don't
have that you know and then they might
be on the edge of depression but what
saves them is that there's there's not
that biological you know MH yeah yeah
okay good to know hopefully I stay in
the community and you have community at
home too
yes it but it does but lot of people
complain about it on social media they
say people always say well then just
come back home but it's not it's not as
easy as that okay mhm so and gu so now
um this brings me to
um um another question is how do you
approach breaking down the stigma of
mental health with your clients or
within your
community who wants to go first
anybody
um because right now I'm still a student
um over well last semester I volunteered
at um well I had my internship at a
community health clinic and one way um I
was able to like you know um see
different ways to like focus on health
care or healthare sorry Mental Health
Care was like um diversity and inclusion
that's like a big thing especially um
since my campus has like um a big
Hispanic population there is important
to make sure like um you know you have a
l you know knockdown that language
barrier um learn ways that Health um
relates to their um their ethnicity or
their race because that's also important
like something that we're reading about
in the book might maybe pertain more to
a certain type of um population versus
like our own or you know other
neighboring ones but I just think
diversity is very important especially
in the US I feel the UK too but in the
US I can speak for um is like what's
different yeah is
important yeah know I Echo everything
you said like you just hit it you've hit
the the nail right on the head like for
me my work is not separate from um
advocacy it's not don't separate the two
you know I'm not this um psychologist
trained by white people and then I'm
come into my community and be like oh
you know I'm coming to teach you all the
white things that
know kind of psychologist I am I'm the
type that is always questioning that is
always asking so how do we apply this to
people from ethnic minority backgrounds
you know I'm really glad that you're
thinking about that M because we need a
lot of representation in Psychology and
in mental health in and the whole we
don't have lots of black psychologists
in the
UK so the us too yeah yeah it's very
very important um and I think for me
just to answer your question about um
stigma I I I like to always come from
the person's understanding so before I
can I can do any work on stigma I need
to understand why mental health is so
stigmatized to you what is what does it
mean to to to have a mental health
condition what would you lose as a
result of that who would it affect if
you were to identify with having a
mental health until understand the
person's context I can then project like
and say you know this is what you should
do and I don't think that's the right
you know approach to mental health
advocacy we always need to understand
why is this such a big deal to them and
take it from there so yeah for me a lot
of the work I do especially in the faith
community is to understand what is the
fear about being a Christian with a
mental health condition what is the fear
about being being a muslim with a mental
health condition what is it is the fear
coming from judgment from other
Christians is it the fear coming from
your community or is it like
self-inflicted um stigma I want to
really understand and then there I offer
you know you don't have to whatever
they're afraid of losing I I then offer
hope that you don't have to lose that
bit it's just adding more tools so let's
say you're afraid that people will say
that you're a weak Christian well
acknowledging that you have mental
health difficulties doesn't mean you're
weak rather it it shows how much you
need God true yeah you
know yeah reframing as opposed to like
that is wrong don't think that way no
like it's more about let's think about
this
differently yeah that's how I would do
it okay thank you both so much and now
let's talk about some challenges that
you have faced um so mommy for instance
you when you were volunteering what were
some of the challenges that you faced um
while um
volunteering um and Vanessa in your
practice as well what are some of the
challenges you have
faced um during my um my oh sorry I said
volunteering was my internship um but
yeah during my
internship I guess challenges I faced
was like communic
I was like the um new person and there
they seem to know each other well like
the other workers there so like I didn't
want to like you know overstep my
boundary but I also sorry it's really
windy over here if I'm breaking out but
um but yeah communication was a big
thing I had to like learn how to
overcome cuz another thing too is I'm
I'm 24 now and a lot of them are older
there so like how can I come up to and
talk to someone you know that
way older than me like as if they're you
know my Agate but I had to like get out
of that mindset too that like you know
I'm also you know there to help out and
we're basically working Partners but
that was just I guess that's the only
challenge because I had a good
experience there but yeah with the with
a with the students that you were you
were volaran within a school right yes
yeah it's a um community health
education clinic so they give free
service to students and um the school
the school's community so anyone who
lives there okay so but then there were
any challenges were like the students
themselves that you were volunteering
for sorry ER
interning for yes like in terms of
clients or like people I was working
with yeah the clients the clients
patients um there's
different there's different you know
energy some people are like you know
Reser oberved and others are just
willing to tell you any and everything
so just learning how to like you know
apply yourself or respond to them and
apply yourself in those type of manners
where is professional but also like you
know you want to make it in a like have
a good connection with them because some
people are scared to like go to receive
Health Services even if it's free
because like you know the fear of
doctors or not having a good um patient
and provider relationship so yeah
get that
yeah similar things for me as well I
think for me starting um on this journey
the biggest barrier for me was the fact
that I was from Africa from Ghana and I
didn't system um because I didn't go to
their you know their secondary school
and I didn't really understand the
education system so a lot of it I had to
do on my own I didn't know people I
wasn't connected to other psychologist
to be like can you read my application I
didn't I just didn't know people so
everything I to do on my own and then
you get into these spaces and then
you're a black woman who
like can talk a lot and when I talk it's
like I get you to think because I'm
questioning and I'm like I don't accept
things that face values so then you're
like who is this black girl and then she
has an accent so that's also another
barrier um yeah so but you know I'm here
now I'm I'm doing the doctorate now and
is still not easy I think for me the
biggest obstacle is just it's
unbelievable but after 10 years I've not
assimilated into the culture and I'm in
a very white area and all my clients are
white so sometimes they say certain
things about British culture and I'm
like I don't get what you're saying but
let's just like I
do so for me the challenge is I'm not
from here you know so it's very been
very difficult to integrate in that way
um and then again because most of my
clients are white because I'm in a white
area I'm always scared when I'm starting
with a new client because I'm like what
are they going to think when they see
that their therapist is black andent and
she's from Africa you know afan
therapist going to offer me so I'm I'm
always sort of I always have that at the
back of my mind but you know like you
said like being a therapist is like
being a Comon
you change who you're talking to it's a
very relational job like you're you're
in the business of talking and relating
to
people and studying people and making
sure that you're getting the
communication right and sometimes in
know that to have a strong therapeutic
relationship with the client you need to
match their style in that sense become a
chameleon in that you change your the
color of your skin depending on your
environment depending on the client
you're talking to so the style in which
I'll talk to a client changes MH
depending on who they are and so in a
client in a day if I'm going through
four or five clients imagine I've
changed myself so many times yeah it's a
very tiring relational job you
very difficult it's very difficult I
think a lot of people think oh all we do
is just talk to people but it's it's not
that easy it's not just talking to
people you know and especially as
someone with lived experience myself and
then sometimes you have clients who are
going through the same things that you
are also going through that is also very
as well and so yeah those are my
challenges so far yeah okay thank you so
I wanted to ask um a technology question
because I did my masters in technology
law and I've learned that technology is
you know it's not even something that
you have to learn almost everyone can
see that technology is you know weaving
its way through every area of law law
life so my question is what how do you
see the use of technology or is
technology being used in the world of
mental health like is there Tele therapy
are there mental health apps um what are
some of the ways that technology can you
know merge into mental
health um I think what you said mental
health apps that's like something
anybody who has a phone or smartphone
can be able to download um I know like
one big thing is like calm in the US
people like using that c yeah C I think
it's like a mindfulness app um I don't
have that but uh like those type of um
apps help to like you know it lets
someone you know able to practice those
um strategies like right there wherever
they are it might be at work it might be
home so like the accessibility for it
and availability is like really good and
um another thing I want to talk about
with technology was biof feedback I
don't know if you heard of that um
Vanessa like with the wiring and all
that like it helps people to like keep
track of their stress levels and learn
how to adapt to like improving it and
when I learned about that in school I
feel like it's something new so like you
know they're still trying to find or new
Innovations of how to like you know
integrate technology with psych and I
think that's important too because like
said technology has taken over the world
so why not find ways to like help
improve like you know on something that
we
need yeah okay I agree I think there's
been lot of um advancement in terms of
making mental health care more
accessible and like you're right I
didn't even know there was something
like technology law so yeah I'm learning
yeah I didn't know that
so but yeah you're right you know
technology is everywhere and if we want
to make mental health more accessible we
need to think of you know ways to to to
use technology to to reach more people
so I think if you're looking for skills
so like maybe mindfulness skills or
breathing skills or you know just um
basic level one like anxiety management
skills or things like that there's lots
of apps available for that but where the
mental health conditions are complex so
like there's like pity disorders lots of
trauma complex trauma um I don't think
we need technology for that I think it's
it has to be traditional in the sense
that you need to see aist that would be
able to help you regulate and process
those emotions in a a healthy therapeu
way because it with technology you're
not getting that therapist
feedback it's just you and a device so
if it's like I just want skills to to
just COPE in you know just C in skills
technology is perfect for that but if
you want to like process your trauma and
talk about your childhood
no I'm not an advocate for that but I
thought that you know some of these apps
have like you know therapist you know in
them so you can get access to a
therapist over the apps and talk to one
like like how we're talking now you
could probably talk to your therapist
like that over the apps or that's not
how they work I know there's hotlines
here for people who are like I know it's
mainly um suicidal but like it can be
for any kind of like emotion you're
going through or um disorder you're
going through so that's like one way to
do like a t um appointment I don't know
if that's the word but like yeah an
online appointment
yeah yeah I mean like there are lots of
appointments that we offer online so you
can choose sessions online or through a
telephone call and I guess that gives
people like options and you know let's
say somebody is disabled and they can't
come in person offering the session
online is is a is a best way to do it
but then you still have that feedback
because you're seeing your therapist on
screen you're seeing your facial
expressions you're seeing so you're
having that feedback
um in terms of like those platforms I
think it's it's it's it's a way to
connect with their IST I don't think
it's it's like maybe like a it's not
like a replacement yeah no is it a site
to find a therapist I'm not sure but
yeah there are crisis lines so let's say
you're a suicidal and you just need to
speak to somebody in the M there are
lots of Crisis lines you can call and
but in terms of if you want like therapy
like you know one hour sessions you know
this kind of things I'll say for the
more complex side of things maybe
technology hasn't thought of a way to do
that in an ethical way um as of yet um
but we do have like technology for the
more soft skills level one
type um as going off of the online I
think technology definitely helped
during covid time to have online
appointments with your doctors or
therapists but I know old people were
complaining or I saw like results were
complaining
not momy your sound is going can you
hear me now yeah yeah okay yeah um yeah
so I think it just depends on the person
because some people didn't like you know
doing it virtually they liked being in
person with
their but I like it help
with
again oh okay it keeps going up
okay is it the wind I'm sure it's the
wind
yes it's snowing and windy here like oh
oh so um so now we so basically we're
saying that AI cannot take away your
jobs mm no no okay that's good to know
okay so before we wrap up this session
which has also been very informative I
must say is there any other
misconception like now you've told
you've taught me something about um the
depression and the anxiety
not being emotions is there any other
misconception you would like to clear up
to
anyone something you've learned during
your study where you you yourself were
surprised you're like
oh you know I think what has surprised
me so far is the amount of knowledge we
need to have as clinical
psychologist so we do research as well
but not to the level of PhD because you
know with PhD the three the the of the
three four five years is just research
but we do research like for a year um
and then we have the teaching and then
which we have to do essays for and then
we have the clinical which we have to go
to placement for it's lot and we we
cover things like learning disabilities
neurodiversity Health through stroke
fibromyalgia um all sorts of disease and
it's made me I think what I'm learning
is that psychologist can work
everywhere thaty is not just limited to
mental health and because of that we
don't psychologists don't just talk to
people we're we are people that have St
deep to doctorate level well most of in
most countries have St level and so
whenever we're offering therapy it's
coming from a place of what we've
learned what experienced not as simple
as we're just talking to you and giving
ADV and I really want to say this
because there's something in the
Christian Community and sorry that I
keep bashing the
Christian there's something about I need
to see a Christian therapist but there's
no such thing as Christian therapist
there's a thing as a therapist who is a
Christian but a lot of learning we do
isn't just tailored to Christian therapy
it's like I want to see a Christian
doctor because they'll give me a
Christian prescription a Christian type
of medication Christian it doesn't exist
yeah people are saying is that well I
can't go to a a psychologist who has
different beliefs because they just
going to tell me their opinion and I
want their opinion to be but the
Christian but that's not what it is we
not of our opinions like when you come
to me with a mentor I can't tell you
what to do what I can do is help you to
give yourself the answer you need you
know so but it's not we are not trained
to tell people oh I think you should no
that's not what we do okay for the
Christian Community if you're thinking
well it has to be a Christian
therapist there's no accreditation board
for Christian therapist so somebody can
get up and say I call myself a Christian
therapist but who is your registration
body who thinking that what you're doing
is actually Christian there's nothing
like that just want people to be very
careful because you can miss out on very
good therapists because you are looking
specifically for Christian therapists
who will probably end up scamming you
because all they are doing is just
giving you their opinion because they
they've put Christian on their title you
know so we have to be very Vigilant in
that way you know ask questions when you
want to see a not anyone who has put
therapist in their bio is a therapist
you know ask foration ask them what kind
of therapy are you trained in you know
because they may be trained in CBT
different types yeah exactly so ask
questions do your due gen ask them I'm a
Christian therapist okay what makes you
a Christian therapist your accreditation
body even as a Christian what kind of
Christian do you subscribe are you
Methodist are you Jehovah Witness are
you what ask questions you know don't
just accept things that face value
because your mental healthare is so
important you might end up causing more
damage if you go to the wrong person so
to say thank you momy I agree
um yeah me Parts I agree on but I want
to start with like how psychology
there's so many different
specializations oh Mommy your sound can
you hear me can you hear me yes okay yes
yeah there's so many different
specializations to go into um psychology
so um I feel like that's a great thing
um especially if you don't know exactly
like what
no can you hear me
now yes is say you have to hold your
laptop like
this but yeah I'm really happy about um
it having different tracks cuz like I'm
on a certain track right now health and
I believe also to like going off of what
you're saying like it's important that
we instill knowledge to the people
especially because there's a lack of
knowledge oh my go this is like the
worst time okay yeah but yeah it's
important to just keep people educated
about mental health so that you know
normaliz being able to
access
access thank you um so I picked up on
one thing that Vanessa said um which is
learning disabilities and so I'll just
like to take us back to um how I think
that growing up I feel like a lot of our
mates or a lot of our um this is coming
from Ghana I feel like a lot of our
mates probably had some learning
disabilities but they probably brushed
off because you know we didn't have the
knowledge or classmates will be laughing
at the person thinking oh oh you don't
know how to read or you know you can't
pronounce certain words or you are
seeing and numbers you know just
basically we probably didn't know and so
I think that um I don't know if it has
really changed now especially coming
from like the basic
education if people are actually aware
that this child might probably have a
learning disability so how can we help
them rather than say quote unquote w
quote unquote you know you
know you m you know
mean go quot um it means you're dumb
yeah I about to say I think yeah yeah
you so that's just basically my my my is
it my question or my worry or my yeah I
just I just hope hope that is it's still
not the same as it was you know when we
were growing
up yeah sorry oh no I'll speak about
later on because the US side but yeah
yeah no it's still a very big problem at
least well in Gana and my mom so my mom
is a she's in the education sector she's
a well she she well she she's no longer
a teacher she's an assistant head
mistress but she teach she's taught for
a very long time
even now she still comes to me to say oh
this student has this oh and I'm con I'm
educating I'm sending resources I'm
saying like read this do this you know
still a lot of misinformation people
don't understand there's still the
tendency to spiritualize
everything you know everything is a
spiritual problem everything is you know
um so there's lots of Education that
needs to happen there's a lot of
learning and unlearning there's a lot of
like
um I get I guess the people who know
better it's going to it get very tiring
but we shouldn't stop we shouldn't stop
teach shouldn't stop
advocating sometimes it would feel like
it's not rewarding it would feel like
people aren't even listening and but the
more we know the better we become so
that we can help and teach you know
there's no point of learning so much if
you can't help if you can't help yeah
yeah so you know those of us who are
privil AG to have education let's keep
on teaching keep on advocating and not
get tired because we have a long way to
go and if we we we look to the people to
say well they need to change it it's not
going to happen so we need best
yeah okay Mama what were you going to
say no I agree with Vanessa like just
keeping people educated I think our
generation is starting to do that more
especially like you know identifying
different
this we I was in I work as
in they started like pay toward children
who might have like behavioral problems
and um might have like
certain maybe like
certain they have to take consideration
that they have a so like knowing how to
like know not cross that boundary and
but over to like learning how to like um
learning how to implement um the
knowledge of how toach children that
into their um
programs and um I think that if we
continue to keep doing that it will
definitely help um with improving our
knowledge of mental
health you know the funny thing is I
didn't break out when I mute when I
muted my mic
M's sound got
better so I might be the problem I'll
mute myself when you're speaking now
okay so now I think I think this is my
last question actually um is any advice
that you give to students or young
professionals who are looking to enter
the field of
psychology so I would say that
it's a very long journey but it's
rewarding
um don't don't you first need to
understand your why you know it has to
be um more than self- serving you know
you you you you have to do this job
because you you genuinely want to serve
other people and not just yourself you
know if you're looking for quick money
this is not the job for you this this
job is about people listening into
people's you know struggles and
difficulties and having compassion if
you're somebody that feels like you
cannot have compassion and sympathy for
people you have a very short fuse you're
not an understanding person this is not
the job for you so you have to do lots
of inpection ask yourself who who am I
really what are my
weaknesses um am I willing to to to work
on those weaknesses so that I can pursue
a career in Psychology um so it really
starts with you it starts with checking
whether you have the right temperament
and you know characteristics for this
job and then once you you you you you
feel that you can and and you feel that
you have reasons that are Beyond self-
serving then you have to commit to the
journey and it's very long but have your
community um I'm going to put myself out
there connect with me I'm happy to be
your cheerleader along the journey and
but please you know don't be discouraged
Ed we need people like you we need more
representation you're valuable to this
profession if you decide that it's the
best thing for you um so that's what
I'll say
yeah thank you momy I'll mute
myself um I also agree with Vanessa
definitely um understand the field
you're entering because um with psych
like there's so many different ways you
can like you know go about like
depending on your interest and I feel
it's also important to like you know
form a social support group especially
if you're in school because having I can
speak from my own experience uh
experience like having a a couple of
friends around to help keep track of
assignments projects even meeting new
teachers like I met some teachers that I
wouldn't have ever came across if it
wasn't for my friend so like just um
being able to like work on your career
as well as just um gaining those
experience as a student is important and
it's also important to do your own self-
research on like um jobs like for me my
Master's Degree doesn't give us a
license after to like practice but
there's other things that I learned that
you know through while I was researching
that I can like um apply for after
graduation so just make sure you're like
um I think Vanessa said like look within
yourself and and just see how it applies
for you like there's so so many things
to like go from in um the field of
psychology okay thank you both so so
much for your
insights
um again if could if you want to change
one thing about mental health care or
the way that it is delivered would you
change something
oh I guess I'm first person um maybe
just um towards the availability um for
people cuz um I guess it varies because
in the US they're doing a good job in my
opinion to like try to expand it but
obviously there's more work that needs
to be done towards like insurance
coverage and like I said like people
knowing about it so yeah just to keep
pushing it um if to
others thank you
yeah I agree with you mom um I I agree
like what I would want to change is to
make mental health more accessible but
even more is to have quality mental
health practitioners people who know
what they doing people who are following
what they've been thought and not
deviating from it and doing their own
thing um people who are committed to
giving people um um good experiences not
you know being non non judgmental not
bringing their own beliefs and
stereotypes into the therapeutic room so
I want that to be availability but I
also want there to be quality therapist
quality mental health practitioners who
do the job very
well thank you so so much Vanessa and
mommy for joining me on this
conversation about mental health so
today we've
covered um what psychology or the
different types of you know what the
first of all I know that there's a
difference between a psychotherapist and
a psychologist and I've learned about
the differences between um disorders and
emotions and I've learned about you know
the system the way that um it goes in
the UK and the way that it's you know
being done in the US as well and
um basically the conversation has been
informative insightful and interesting
and I appreciate that you spend time to
talk to me and my my
fans on this episode so thank you once
again do you have any last words for
your fans shout outs to your
fans just happy to be here yeah
grateful to be here and everyone
watching AR's videos
yeah oh I
made so thank you once again so this has
been AA speaks literally and today I
spoke with momy and Vanessa on mental
health and psychology what are some of
the misconceptions that have been
cleared up today in your mind don't
forget to comment what are some of the
you know the in Inspirations that you've
gained from this conversation don't
forget to comment and what are some
things that you can do in your own
Community or with within your friends to
Enlighten them about um the you know the
importance of mental health or take them
away from the stigma of mental health
and again remember there there are so
many things that you can do with your
mental health even as you you have your
your faith you also have to take care of
your mental health because your mental
health is still
Health thank you for joining us on this
episode don't forget to follow the
podcast subscribe to the YouTube channel
follow uh listen to the podcast on all
your podcast platforms share with your
friends and tell them about this very
interesting conversation because it's
very important so I'll see you ladies
some other time if if anybody has for
part two I'll call you thank you for
joining me so say bye to everyone bye
