the feeling you get about him and many
many other scientists is that they
really don't want to talk to
philosophers they don't and that's
because they learned early on that there
are certain questions that you just
don't want to address like if you ask
Leonard susin look the fundamental
equations of physics dynamics of physics
they're temporally symmetric aren't they
Leonard and he'd say yeah but look we
look around the world we never see
people coming out of their graves and
growing younger we never see ice cubes
forming out of warm water our world is
all full of temporal
asymmetries just what grounds that where
does that come from but physicists don't
really like to get into this very much
or really delve into it in a way that
really gets at the bottom of
it I've done a a few introductory kind
of pedagogically oriented philosophy
episodes with some of our friends like
David Albert and Tim and I was really
looking forward to am really looking
forward to doing one on the philosophy
of science with you but first something
I always find funny is that when I tell
non-philosophers that I'm interested in
philosophy of math or philosophy of
physics they always give me this
incredulous stare because they they know
what math and physics are but they had
no idea there was such a thing as
philosophy of math or philosophy of
physics and I have the sense it's the
same for philosophy of science so I want
to start just by asking you what science
is what philosophy of science is and how
they're different how they
overlap it's a really interesting
question um because of course there are
many many activities that people engage
in art music mathematics physics and
philosophers come along and they make
philosophies of these things and you
wonder what what are they doing making
philosophies of these
things um so philosophers sort of ask
foundational
questions in the case of
science the question is well what is
science
anyway I mean scientists don't
investigate the question what is science
they do things like find out you know
what mitochondria are something like
that or what are the amino acids there
are um but they don't investigate what
is the nature of
science investigating the nature of
science well that's something that can
be done by different fields sociologists
can be interested in it because it's a
sociological thing historians can be
interested because the history of
science but philosophers can be
interested in is a kind of the idea of
philosophers Bally interested in
normative kind of questions what are
scientists aiming to do what are science
is
after so philosophy of science is
characterizing what science is in
general and then a lot of subsidiary
questions develop within science so
science within
science ideas have developed over the
history of science for example the one
that I'm most interested in is the idea
of a law of nature now the idea that
there are
laws really wasn't part of the way
people thought about things in until
sometime in the 17th century I don't
mean there wasn't anything like it
before but there was the Greeks and the
Romans and Chinese and Indians had some
idea like that but um the idea that
there are mathematical principles to
describe how things move how planets
pendula projectiles and so on move that
only re really took root in the 17th
century the central figures of course
Galileo deart
Newton and so the question is what is a
law of nature that's a philosophical
question scientists will go and tell you
what laws of nature there are but they
won't tell you what laws of nature
are in fact can I go on a little bit
more yeah please all right I mean the
way I got into philosophy When I Was An
undergraduate ammer College uh longer
ago than I care
to reveal right now I was taken a course
in physics and a course in statistics
and a course in biology and the notion
of probability concept of probability
came up in all those
courses and they didn't seem to be
talking about exactly the same thing in
each of these courses they kept asking
what is that what is probability what is
you talking about what are you talking
about and so finally I think it was the
guy in the physics department said go to
the philosophy department so I went to
the philosophy department and that's how
I ended up majoring in in
philosophy and so I've spent most of my
career trying to come up with an answer
to that question and and related
questions what exactly is the nature of
objective probability and subjective
probability and so on maybe we want to
talk about that later I don't
know it's funny as soon as I asked you
the question what is science what is
philosophy of science I realized that
asking what is science is itself or it
can be itself a philosophical question
and I'm wondering then if you think it
might be fair at all to think of
philosophy of science as metascience in
some way like an abstraction from
science and what philosophy of science
might have in common or how it might be
dissimilar from the methods of
philosophers of science can overlap with
the methods of science
so um I in fact think that the way
philosophy of science should be pursued
is sort of
seamlessly with science and that I'm in
a tradition that follows I guess the
Great American philosopher of Science
and my view is is Willard
Quin uh
um so philosophers of science are
interested in giving explanations at the
most foundational and general level
using something like methods of
theoretical science inference to the
best
explanation things like that but
philosophy of science is not an
empirical not it's not you don't do
experiments in philosophy of science
there are philosophers who are
interested in doing so-call experimental
philosophy but that's a whole other can
of worms so to speak or can of something
which you don't want to open um but but
so so it's not the same as it's doing
science
I know because I also was going to at
one point be a biochemist in my life so
I practiced some science I even
published a couple of things in
Biochemistry is an unknown fact don't
you yeah yeah yeah I thought I had your
timeline all figured
out um but
um so I have some idea I mean I I can't
wouldn't really say I am a scientist who
could do science now but but I have an
idea about what goes on really and of
course I've studied physics so I know
what goes on in physics but not as
experiment experimentalist if you would
have put me into a
laboratory you would want to get me out
of there as soon as you
can yeah you kind of have a mad
scientist look especially with the
sunglasses I'm not angry at anybody
actually maybe a happy mad
scientist well I think it would be nice
to start with some of the classical
questions in
the philosophy of science one of the
major ones that comes to mind is I guess
it I've already asked this what is
science but more particularly how do you
contrast science with pseudoscience and
how has this been done
historically uh yeah so that's a that's
really interesting I'm not sure that I
have anything so incisive to say about
it I've been interested in it I've even
taught a course on science and pseudo
science so of course there a lot science
has a lot of prestige allegedly at least
they get the grants so there are people
who want to do science but don't know
the first thing about doing science but
they invent
something that they want to get the
money for or at least want to get the
prestige for and um it's really pseudo
and it's not the real thing let's think
what's what's a really good example of a
pseudo of pseudo science pseudo science
well the obvious examples I mean I was
thinking of popper when I asked this
question I had in mind astrology perhaps
or I mean for popper I understand
psychoanalysis or Marxism might have
also counted as pseudoscience but maybe
we ought to stick with astrology
astrology is a
straightforward example I mean I have
known astrology
a very good friend of
mine someone can I put in a little side
you you can you can edit right yeah I
can edit but I just want you George Ray
have you done George Ray pretty much
every time you're going to tell me to
cut something out I know it's going to
be funny so I'm this is not going to be
for you know George Ray no he's somebody
you should do his stepfather was an
astrologer pretty well-known astrologer
okay wellknown astrologer I'm not up on
the the great a philosopher a very
prominent philosopher of psychology and
philosopher of minded PES in Maryland
he's a little bit sick right now so I
don't know if you'd get him to do
anything
but so let's see so astrologers claim
that by
examining where the positions of the
planets and the stars were at various
times when you were born or when you had
your B Mitzvah or something like that
that they can tell you things about your
personality your nature who you want to
marry and things like that and now these
claims are wild there's no real
understanding real theoretical backing
for why this should be the case why
should when you were born have anything
to do with um what your personality is
about what the where the planets would
do and the planets don't affect your
personality in that way um
furthermore no no if you subject claims
by made by a olers if they make really
clear claims often they don't make clear
claims the claims are vague so that they
can be be they can say they really
didn't get it wrong because they didn't
really mean that or something like that
they uh but but to the extent it can be
pinned down it it just don't pass the
test so one of the things about science
is that scientists try to put forward or
they should try to put forward clear
hypothesis I mean this is a good thing
about poer poer emphasized this that
scientists should put forward clear
hypotheses which have clear predictions
and then subject them to severe
tests I think that's the good part about
poer he just went overboard with that
well maybe we should talk a bit more
about poer just because he's he's
crucial to most introduction to the
philosophy of science
courses maybe falsification and its role
in his philosophy of science might be
something worth covering okay okay so
let's see I I'll try not to be too glib
about this when I first started teaching
I had a colleague who was a paparian
student and in the department that I was
teaching then I got to be known as the
popper stopper the poer stopper I like
that course I think Papa went just too
far and he's very he oversimplifies many
many many things in my view on the other
hand I think it was a very good it was a
good event that he that he was there and
it happened and he he he he he was clear
about things I think it was a very good
thing that he was there so poer was
famous for putting forward a view called
falsificationism the idea that
scientists should put
forward theories or claims about the
world and then attempt to falsify them
and that you can never confirm a
hypothesis according to paper or some
parts of poers he's he modified this at
certain points
um uh so you should never say you have
good reason to think that this
is closer to the truth than that well he
did try to develop a conception of
closer to the truth actually which was
one of the interesting projects that you
might do in philosophy of
science
um and uh this was very very
influential idea I mean so very
important it influen one place we might
to follow up it influen a whole way or
very much connected to a whole part of
the way statistics is done and stati
statistics is very important in doing
science and uh I don't know if you want
to get into this later but now there's
something going on called the statistics
Wars it's been going on for a while but
it's being the wars have been starting
up again apparently from some emails
I've gotten recently oh yeah well
probability is certainly on my list for
a topic that we need to get to
especially in conjunction with something
you've already mentioned which is laws
of nature but you're right that I would
like to hold off on that for a little
while okay about POA and this so I I was
very much brought up at the the uh at
the graduate school I went to one that
you know about well at at Stanford um my
one of my teachers is Patrick supes who
I'm sure has a big influence even though
he's been he still does for a while um
uh uh as a
beian I learned about uh the approach to
understanding scientific inference via
something called base theorem now that
also can be oversimplified a lot maybe
we want to talk about that a little bit
more later on but when I first started
doing philosophy of science at the
department I was at then it was sort of
beans versus
paparian I'm not sure this is even the
way anybody would think about things
nowadays but in fact I edited it
addition of cintz I think called is the
very first thing I did I think in
philosophy beans versus
paparian and um basically basian thought
of scientific inference as people
scientists start out with certain
degrees of belief or amounts of
confidence in various hyp hypotheses
they then do experiments they get
evidence and they update the degrees of
belief in accordance with certain rules
which seem to follow from the from rap
principles of rationality which we can
talk about why they make sense paparian
really didn't like
this and so that was what the fight was
over in those days and in fact in
statistics the two approaches to statist
the broad approaches to statistics I'm
oversimplifying are so-called Orthodox
or significance test testing on the one
hand and basan on the other hand and
really this that's kind of like a a
following of the dispute between basion
and paparian and philosophy of
science before we move on from poer
there are two specific things I'd like
to get your takes on even though they
might not fall under the philosophy of
of
science one is with regard to
falsification you probably know I've
done a number of episodes on string
theory with some very famous string
theorists like Leonard susin or Von
malesa and one of the major criticisms
of string theory which for our listeners
who might not be familiar with string
theory in a nutshell though it's
obviously much much more complicated
than this String Theory reimagines the
the point particles and and Fields of
quantum field Theory as Tiny
one-dimensional oscillating strings
along with some other sort of
fundamental but what people allege is
that it's UNF if iable in part because
there are currently no conceivable
experiments that could be run to test it
and what I am wondering is whether or
not you think Allah poer that this
should preclude us from viewing string
theory of
science so the two reasons that
something might be
unfalsifiable one is that it's present
it's the theory itself is so developed
so that no conceivable
experiment thanks for qualifying my word
conceivable I mean you you used it much
better than I did um I should have said
no practical experiment can be done no
conceivable experiment could falsify it
if that is really the case then it's not
science but if that there's no
experiment that could be done now they
can't falsify it that doesn't mean that
that if you work on the theory and you
develop things and you develop new
technology and so on you couldn't
falsify it there also sorts of of
hypotheses in cosmology that can't be
falsified now but are very interesting
and important and people there were ones
at times which couldn't be falsified and
later were able to be falsified or or or
I'm not sure verified is the right word
but they past tests falsification tests
so um so that's a very important
distinction as far as I understand I'm
no expert in string theory I understand
it to an extent but no expert in it far
from it um uh there's a problem within
the foundations of physics that's super
super important and that is that the two
basic
fundamental theories really
one really really fundamental Theory and
that's Quantum field Theory and then
there's an account of
SpaceTime that's um general relativity
and it's basically the the theory with
within cosmology is mostly done and and
and stuff in astronomy where where uh uh
strong gravitational fields are involved
but it's still it's definitely the
structure of
SpaceTime uh but these theories do not
fit together very well as it's a
question of how to make them compatible
with each other and there number of
ideas floating around have you done Carl
relli actually i' I'd love to speak with
Carlo but Carlo's going to be
around starting in October oh really
giving a bunch of lectures at Princeton
right so so he has an approach not
String Theory but different kind of
approach and a number of other ideas
that are around and I think at this
point yeah this is such a tough
difficult interesting problem let people
think about it I mean it would be
ridiculous for someone to say stop
thinking about it because you can't
falsify it
now um and if there are people who say
that screw them yeah I'm entirely
inclined to agree with you on this point
even if there might be other good
criticisms of string theory I don't
think falsification is the way to go the
other thing I wanted to ask you about
just because out of intellectual
interest I've done a number of
episodes on the show about Marxism and
since Marxism is is one of Carl Popper's
pet PE this again isn't necessarily
related to the philosophy of science but
as a philosopher as a philosopher of
science how do you feel about Marxism
I'm afraid I have a lot to say about
that oh the first thing that comes to
mind is a philosopher whom I knew
personally and when you talk to David
Albert David knew him much better than
me actually but is one of the most
important figures in the history of
contemporary philosophy he's published
almost nothing
this is Sydney Morgan besser I'm sure
you've heard about him absolutely and
when Marx comes up Morgan bess's famous
remark about Marx comes to mind which is
that up until now people have studied
Marx the time has come to change him I
I've heard Morgan besser had a lot of
really good lines many many many many
many many too bet he's not around for
you to interview he'd be the best I ever
knew about he's the call me up once in a
while I I didn't know that person when I
mentioned before I got into philosophy
when I ammer when I was an ammer this
the teacher I had who a philosopher a
guy you probably never heard of the Joe
Epstein who actually was a friend of Pat
suies incidentally one of the things
about philosophy is you get to know a
lot of great people in philosophy really
interesting people I'm sure you've
noticed this because you've gone out of
your way to get to know them it's a I
never had any idea when I when I was a
little student at ammer college that I'd
get into such a fantastic field and get
to know so many interesting people so
Epstein was my teacher there was also a
co-student with um Sydney Morgan besser
who was a co-student with with Pat supes
too I don't know if you knew that or not
Columbia
um so I didn't know Morgan besser early
on I got to know him when I moved back
to New York and David knew him a little
bit and I got to know him through
David and Morgan Bess knew that I was a
guy he could call up and and bend my ear
on the phone so he'd call me up from
time to time and every once in a while
my wife would say you would not say
Barry's not here because she knew she
knew I'd be on the phone for an hour to
um anyway so Morgan best said a lot of
great statement asked David about
more we could spend the we're just talk
about let's let's leave back to Marxism
and you don't have to say all you have
to say on it but I love your thoughts
okay my wife I just mentioned now she
she's from Budapest her family were were
Communists at one point parts of her
family were uh were also Holocaust
Survivors I mean it's it's a long story
you don't go into that but they also
became anti- Communists uh and so she
was brought up uh um and she was you
know born after 56 but she was her uncle
was one of the leaders of the 56
Rebellion he had to leave Hungary he
lives in Paris now he's still alive in
98 um and um uh so she was brought up on
sort of
the Soviet style thing until the 19 the
early 1980s when when communism fell so
she really hates that stuff and she was
brought she went to KL Marx University
and when we went when I visited her when
I first got to know her and I went and
we sort of fell for each other there she
took me to K marks University and there
was a bust of Carl marks in the middle
of there and of course knowing me what
did I what do you think I did I
separated it from its where it was and I
turned it upside down and put him on his
head that is a very bu thing to do okay
that tells me all I need to
know any I don't know really what Carl
papa has to say about Marx I know he I
know he he dumped on it a lot cuz that
was what was in the air when he was
writing I think now you know that's in
the past I think Mark's had many
interesting things that should be
studied and thought about more seriously
now one last quite general question
about science and the philosophy of the
same is scientific realism what is this
debate of scientific realism
so there's a debate within philosophy of
realism
versus idealism or various other things
that are modifications of realism for
while Hillary putam held something
called internal realism or sort of weak
need realism I don't know something like
that and then there's a debate between
scientific
realism and or or something it's called
construct
empiricism and scientific
realism full-throated scientific realism
say what scientists are aiming at is to
finding out what the world is really
like I don't know why you'd want to be a
scientist unless that's what you wanted
to do unless you wanted to be one of The
Tech Guys in paloalto and you just
wanted to get rich then you might want
to be a
scientist um so I think if you're
interested in science you want to know
what is the world really like and the
next question is
can you actually find out what the world
is really like well I think that if you
look at the history of science it's
reasonable to say that scientists have
found out what the world is really like
or or close to really like to a large
extent for example at one point it was
not really clear that the world was made
up out of little things which lots of
degrees of freedom you know got to be
called atoms now Elementary particles or
something like that I now think that
it's definitely that's the case in some
sense of made up out of I mean maybe
that that's not at the very bottom of
the of the story but there definitely
are atoms and and molecules I've even
seen molecules in a in a microscope so
not that that's the test
but um so I think we found out more
about what the world is really like we
found out that the Earth really moves
that the moon moves around the earth
that the Earth moves around the Sun so
scientists have found out what the world
is really like so scientific realists
think that side the scientist can should
aim to do that and can succeed to its
extent whether it could succeed entirely
that's an open question so-called
constructive empiricist and the famous
name there was a very important
significant figure boson frosten who
I've spoken with on the show yeah he's
he's great significant uh he um for a
while held I'm not know where he is
right now about this but uh I haven't
seen him in 10 years or so and he um
held that all science should aim to do
is to find out what you would see if you
would to do experiments of various
kinds I think science should aim for
that but the reason you should aim for
that is should find out what the world
is really like and finding out what you
see when you do experiments of various
kinds tells you something about what the
world is really like so are you a
scientific realist do you believe that
yeah science can tell us what the world
is really like yeah yeah what is the
best argument that you've heard for us
not being able to believe that science
can in principle tell us what the world
is really like maybe in particular about
unobservable entities like water
molecules or strings or something like
that we can never get to the bottom of
it well there's an idea that you should
only believe in what you could
see now I'm very nearsighted so this
would be very limited to me yeah okay I
assure you I exist
okay um I'm often unsure about myself
but I'm glad to hear that you exist um
so yeah so but I think that's ridiculous
we can also believe the things we hear
about and you know I
mean just when you understand what it is
to be a human being we know that we
couldn't even believe in what we see
unless we believed about a lot of other
things
too okay because we can only see the
front sides of things we believe that
things have back sides too okay okay and
and they so I I
think and the whole and one of the you
know in in the 50s and 60s there was a
discussion about whether they can be
it's a sharp distinction between what's
observable and what's not observable I
think there isn't the sharp distinction
between them and the Notions are not
that clear and they're really Notions
that should go into psychology that
should be studied by
psychologists
anyhow
so I I think the idea that you should
only believe what you can see is a
really bad
argument for not being a scientific
realist the argument for not being
scientific realist which has a little
bit of uh strength I think is that
scientists have often made mistakes is
this the argument about the pessimistic
meta induction yeah could you explain
what that is and what those words are I
think that that might be interesting for
our listeners I wish I had a good line
to say about a pessimist and Optimist
but I think a little bit something will
come to mind but uh Norman finlin
yesterday said something interesting
about Noom chsky which kind of relates
not really but he said that
at the Chomsky was not a a glass half
empty or half full kind of guy he was
just the glass is empty I thought that
was funny oh I see I've met people who
said where's the glass oh that's a good
one
too um yeah the the pessimistic meta
induction what is it what does met meta
induction mean okay okay so the idea is
you're doing an induction just an
induction what's an induction okay an
induction is you got some evidence you
dra some conclusion from the evidence
the conclusion doesn't follow with logic
validity from the evidence but you but
but you somehow thinks that the evidence
provides reason to believe the
conclusion now when induction is is good
and when it's bad that is one of the
most fundamental and important questions
in philosophy and philosophy of science
we can come back to that that's really
Yum's problem and and Goodman's Paradox
fascinating and interesting things for
discussion I don't know if we wouldn't
get into that or or not but I'm quite
interested in both those things
um so that's what an induction is it's
pessimistic because with respect to his
scientific realism because you think
that the evidence we have is that
scientists have come up with lots of of
proposals for what the world is like and
then later they've shown that they're
wrong so maybe anything we come up with
the the conclusion that the induction is
supposed to lead to is anything
scientists ever come up with it's going
to be wrong but I think that's a
completely mistaken inference here first
of all the things that come up with
while I shown to be wrong they show to
be wrong in places but right for the
most part so for example the early
quantum theory was wrong but it had a
big part that was right that led to
better quantum theory
Newton's to make the most famous example
Newton's classical mechanic
isn't
right but Newton said that he was
standing on the shoulders of others so
you could see
further now I don't know that anybody
would have the goal to say that standing
on Newton's shoulders those shoulders
are too high up to get to yeah okay but
certainly in some sense the one person
who could say that would be Albert
Einstein and he certainly was doing that
okay so while Newton was wrong he was on
the right track so poer noticed this too
you know poer earlier and he wanted to
come up with the ideas that well
theories that people have come up and
have been falsified maybe they were
approximately true and he tried to come
up with an account of when a theory or
doesn't have to be anything as fancy as
a theory just a claim a view is not true
but it's close to being true that's a
really interesting idea used the word
ver similitude for
that
um there have been attempts to come up
with PR more precise and formal accounts
of R similitude some of them are better
than others I not sure I'm really on top
of that literature right now um but
that's an interesting project because we
certainly have an idea of when you know
we certainly think that if we watch two
Debaters uh we think both of them saying
a lot of false things I won't name names
because we're not on a political
discussion now but in a recent debate I
would say one of them was a lot further
from the truth than the other one yeah I
have the sense maybe we've spoken about
it before that you knew Hillary putam
who's another big titan in 20th century
philosophy and another Titan who is
quite connected to this debate about
scientific realism and you know what I'm
going to ask you going to ask you I mean
the pessimistic meta induction is an
important argument for the scientific
anti-realist but another argument this
one that is in favor of the scientific
realist is the no Miracles argument and
that is attributed to Hillary puam so I
want to ask you about that one yeah okay
and afterwards if you want I can tell
you a story about Hillary P you don't
want to do it on the
air well you could it can be on the air
because almost Nobody Knows the story
I'm going to tell you okay great and
since I'm going to I'm going to retire
soon that I'm left knowing that this
story that I the story almost no one
knows the story okay
yeah okay all right um for our listeners
Hillary putam really is one of the huge
Titan he one of the great philosophers
he somehow the great philosophers now
are thought to be I believe Saul krykey
David Lewis and Willard Quin maybe
there's some other names you want to
throw Wilford Sellers and putham is up
there but I think putam should be right
up there with those at the very top in
my own view the and sellers should be
too the problem with putam is he changed
his mind often about things and said he
did he was very very some of the things
he wrote about some certain areas like
in quantum mechanics he was a little bit
screwed up about David you know I don't
know if you know this that David was his
Source in quantum mechanics so
scientists have come up with theories
they look like they're right their
experimental results are right I mean
take some examples genetics is an
example of that when it first came up
people didn't know anything about genes
when mendle was coming up with his with
with his his account uh of of of um
inheritance nobody knew what DNA was or
anything like that it took a while for
people to develop that um it would be a
miracle to think that someone could come
up with this Theory and for it to work
out the way it did if it weren't on the
right track mhm okay that's the no
Miracles argument and surely putam is
right about
that putam was a scientific realist but
he was not a full-blown philosophical
realist that's maybe for a metaphysics
discussion not for
now uh here's the story about putam so I
didn't I wasn't the student of Putnams
and I only really I knew him a little
bit before but I only really got to know
him because I spent a summer at a summer
seminar that he ran in
198 six or
seven or eight I don't remember exactly
the year and um and I got to know him
quite well in this summer seminar we
hung out a lot and I learned a lot from
him I really think I absorbed my
philosophical views at as much from him
as from anybody all I didn't realize it
at the
time so here's the
story it's a story about how I almost
killed Hillary putam oh my God like I
said you may not want to you want to
maybe want to edit it out of this so in
Boston Harbor I got into the Habit you
can rent these boats I used to go kaying
in my youth and now I don't sure I
couldn't do it a little bit but you can
rent these boats which are kind of like
kayaks I think they're called wearies
they're much bigger this is starting to
sound like an attempted murder in Boston
Harbor late at night I wasn't attempting
the murder my character you and I didn't
wasn't nothing intentional is the
statute of limitations up on this he's
dead
anyway I didn't I didn't want to kill
him I think he was a great human being
actually you know to the extent I knew
him I mean I wouldn't say I know him
really really personally but I knew him
from this thing and um so I told him
about this that I was going there and he
said he wanted to go out on a weary cuz
he hadn't done this know one of these
boats I took him out on the boat we went
on the boat you you rented them in the
harbor rent them we were going out a
little ways and he decided to stand up
but you can't stand up in a weary
because what happens if you stand up
tips it tips the capsizes so he fell
into the Boston
Harbor so I had to fish him out of the
Boston Harbor if I didn't fish him out
he wouldn't have made it it's good thing
that you were there and you didn't have
ill will for for Hillary putam so that's
the story the last thing since we've
already talked a bit about String Theory
which I find quite fascinating I know
that a lot of philosophers don't think
the time is right yet to be doing
philosophy of string theory or they
think the time has passed because string
theory is dead and we shouldn't really
be doing philosophy of string theory at
all but there is a relevant question
related to scientific realism so I've
spoken with Tim modlin plenty of times
on the
show he says we're not getting rid of
H2O one way or another no matter what
happens with science it's almost
impossible that water as H2O is going
anywhere but he certainly wouldn't say
the same thing about strings he would he
would say either uh he's very certain
the world is not composed of strings or
stringy things or if anything it is very
far from certain that the world is
composed of stringy things I'm wondering
if there is a Criterion or some set of
criteria that you as a philosopher of
science or philosophers of Science in
general would use to make this
distinction of when we want to accept an
unobservable entity or class of entities
accepting the caveat that unobservable
is maybe a nebulous term into our
ontology of what the world is like M I
wouldn't look for a Criterion for such a
thing it's just sort of got to be on the
ground and and and and see what's going
on in the field I totally agree with Tim
about H2O um um you
know if there's not a worldwide drought
H2O is here to stay certain okay okay
we're going to have H2O String Theory I
just don't it's not clear enough and I
think the reason that philosophers there
aren't very many philosophers think
about it is because hard to learn about
it I've attempted to read some of this
the working streen Theory Brian Green is
another guy in New York I don't know if
he does interviews or not but he's a he
a string theorist guy um and you know
I've heard him talk about it I I think
to get into the mathematics of it is a
the mathematics is very
very difficult and fancy that's why
philosophers are not doing it I think
it's just
hard um there are some philosophers who
are doing it um Jeremy
Butterfield Sebastian dearo Nick hugget
your student Craig calender there are a
lot
of yeah another Topic in the philosophy
of science worth broaching and mind you
I we're going to get to Natural laws to
probability to your cup of tea is
fundamental and what is fundamental
fundamental entities fundamental
theories but maybe this is a
good place to ask because fundamental
also has a metaphysical ring to it and
there are lots of debates within
metaphysics about what fundamentality
even is if if it is
a univocal term at
all what is fundamental but sorry first
how do philosophy of science and
metaphysics interact or connect
you're smiling is that because it's a
good question or a really good question
okay and it's something really central
question
um so I think people in metaphysics
divide up into
those who think that metaphysics is its
own
subject and science is you know
something there but but you do
metaphysics based on
intuitions and a history of metaphys
physics and maybe theology I don't know
something like that and there are those
who think that really all metaphysics is
is understanding what the world must be
like for science to be a successful
Enterprise that's my
view now I might go a little bit further
than that because I think there are
other Enterprises that people engage in
like art and music and you might wonder
what the world might must be like or
what human beings must be like really in
those cases more than the world world or
reality must be like for those to be
successful
Enterprises but science especially is
what must the world be like for science
to be a successful Enterprise so I think
metaphysics is very closely connected to
science but there are people who
disagree with that for sure and in the
history of metaphysics you know for sure
so there were there were uh I was just
think talking to student mind the other
day about MC tager interesting guy do
you know MC tager at all okay well I
don't know him but me no I didn't know
him either but I did study with a
teacher I'm not sure she knew him but we
studied MCT tager because he was the bad
guy in the course again just just a
story I'm not going to tell you the
story are you sure I'm sure I'm not
going to tell you to you yeah you you
you're interested in for what you do
I'll tell you who the teacher was when I
was an undergraduate teacher was Alice
Ambrose do you know who she was she
Alice lazerowitz Alice Ambrose she was
the person who knew Vicken Stein and
transcribed the brown book and took a
great course she taught at Smith college
then a course in which we read Russell
Moore and Vicken Stein she knew Vicken
Stein personally she knew all three of
those well that's pretty crazy that I
studied with her is super crazy and the
five people who took that course all of
them became philosophers in one way or
another well they're two degrees removed
now from the Titans
that I had anything I mean I I I just
recently taught a history analytic
philosophy course and I began by telling
the students that I I don't really I
don't really feel that I don't feel that
I know enough to really really feel that
I I'm not a expert on that stuff at all
but
um so anyway
so mcgard mcgard thought he could go and
demonstrate that time doesn't exist
with arguments about the nature of
time or another philosopher that at the
time not in this some some been studied
in this in this course we read sorry I'm
I'm all over the place here we read MCT
tager and Bradley another example he
wanted to prove that nothing existed
okay we read them to understand why
Russell and Moore were reacting against
these guys um I found actually Bradley
and mcgard more interesting than I found
Moore I thought was a bore
uh Russell I think is one of the greats
and vien
Stein talked to some Vicken Stein person
that's interesting what I don't know
where Vicken Stein is now there was just
a I know there was just a conference
because a student of mine came back from
that conference at
Harvard where viin Stein is still held
in high esteem uh about what about
called the future of
vikin that was the conference he came
back
from anyway but MCT tager and Bradly
with bad guys they did metaphysics in
this old-fashioned way they didn't
bother to study anything
about science in order to do their now
some people in the history of his
historians of science like Kant he knew
something about science but he didn't
really studied science or yum I actually
Yume certainly knew something but I
actually went to Yum scholar recently to
find out what is known about what yum
knew about Newtonian mechanics and it
seems to be not a clear answer to that
question from what I could see you may
they may I may be wrong about this and
may be um Scholars would know better
about what to say but yum certainly knew
about it it was all over England did he
really know about
about
um newtonium mechanics did I I think
lr's stuff was already developed in
France by the time you was writing I
think I'm not positive about that um but
newon mechanics was developed so I I
don't I don't know so most philosophers
did not study science carefully in fact
even some of the greats of the 20th
century like Quin Quin did not really
study Physics very much or David Lewis
who was a
chemist actually learned chemistry and
knew something about quantum mechanics
and relativity wrote a little bit about
relativity wrote one paper on quantum
mechanics but they're not they were not
his main interests now
you mentioned Ted cider Ted has recently
gotten very interested in the
foundations of physics because he knows
that if he's going to be a metaphysician
he's got to understand physics to an
extent and I think that's 100% correct
that's something that our friend Tim
says and he said it on the show that if
you want to understand the metaphysics
of our world you need to look at the
physics Tim wrote a book called The
metaphysics within physics now Tim and I
draw very different conclusions from
what metaphysics you find within physics
but that's I think it's a good place to
look since you mentioned MCT tager the
philosophy of time or just questions
about time seem like they might
constitute a good casaste study for
helping us distinguish a bit between
science and
metaphysics interestingly a lot of
scientists that I speak with about
philosopher where philosophy comes up as
Leonard susin anything that they don't
like they call metaphysics so they lump
in questions about that we might ask
about time with astrology or or ghosts
or fantasms so they they have a for a
philosopher a non-standard use of of the
word metaphysics but what sorts of
questions about time would constitute
scientific questions and what kind might
constitute metaphysical questions that's
a really good question just
parenthetically I've never met lonard
suskin personally I gather you have i'
I've thought sometime when I was at
Stanford something about finding his
door and knocking on it if he has a door
still at Stanford I could lead you right
to it because I through his lectures his
lectures are great but the feeling you
get about him and this you might find
interesting for what you're asking about
the feeling you get about him and many
many other scientists is that they
really don't want to talk to
philosophers they don't
cuz philosophers not not all not all
scientists are like that Sean Carol who
you probably have talked to is a big
exception or or I can think of other
scientists like that I mean Shelley
Goldstein is another example he's a
mathematician but he he's um but there
are others who are not like that but um
and that's because they learned early on
that there are certain questions that
you just don't want to address like if
you ask Leonard
susin look the fundamental equations of
physics dynamics of physics they're
temporally symmetric aren't they Leonard
and he'd say yeah Short's equation is
temporally symmetric and you might have
to specify a little bit more what you
mean by that so that any sequence of
macroscopic events that happen in one
temporal direction that are compatible
to laws they can happen in the opposite
temporal directions compatible with the
laws so you have to say yes but look we
look around around the
world we never see
people coming out of their graves and
growing younger we never see ice
cubes you know um forming out of warm
water our world is all full of Temple
asymmetries and of
course what grounds that where does that
come from now there's the idea and
you'll talk to David I'm sure about this
because he's the world expert on this
that it it it it somehow is connected to
statistical mechanics in some way that's
right um but physicists don't really
like to get into this very much or
really delve into it in a way that
really gets at the bottom of it as I
think it's just susin wouldn't I'm not
sure he probably knows more about this
than most but many wouldn't or in
quantum mechanics is the famous example
as you sure you know as you talked to
Tim and David and I think even me a
little bit about um is the famous
measurement problem in quantum mechanics
well that's a problem it was pointed out
by a physicist originally by Schrodinger
and Einstein originally physicist wanted
to sweep it under the rug and it took
philosophers to keep taking it out from
under the rug and saying we got to think
about this we got to think about this
and it really is actually Central and
important to understanding what quantum
mechanics is
about so here here there's a a a smooth
connection between physics and
philosophy of physics where the
philosophers of physics were doing what
the physicist should have been doing
really in my
view a few minutes ago you used the
phrase fundamental equations and that
brings us back to
fundamental what does a philosopher of
science have to say about fundamental
what sort of
things might a philosopher of scient of
science discuss regarding
fundamental theories equation and
entities let's talk about let's talk
about entities in first and a little bit
about history please from the very
beginning from the Greeks there was the
idea and it's a very common idea that
you explain complicated things in terms
of their parts simpler things in some
sense of parts so you know the idea of
the Earth is made up out of Earth well
the world is made up of earth air and
water and fire was that the or atoms or
or or everything is
water uh is that what the said
everything is water I think it was made
of misprint he said it said everybody
after my daughter I never really
understood what that was about anyhow I
heard that he fell into a well fell into
a well that's what it was everything's
water that's right that's the story
anyhow so
um so that's a that's an idea and it's a
it's a very attractive idea that the
world is made up out of reality is made
up out of fundamental Parts it's an idea
in science now my idea if we get into my
ideas about metaphysics I'm going to put
them more for a while ideas about
metaphysics are a little more subtle and
more complicated than that but the idea
in science is certainly there that we
want something at the bottom in terms of
which we can explain other things so we
start out with something that's we might
call basic or fundamental at least for a
while we may find something more
fundamental than that we with something
that's we think of is fundamental maybe
they're atoms and maybe atoms are made
up out of electrons and protons and
electrons and protons are put together
in certain ways we get atoms of certain
signs and atoms are put together in
various ways accordance with certain
laws of physics we can get molecules of
various kinds it explains why they can
be water why they can be acids why they
can be bases and so on and so on like
that and these explanatory Frameworks
work beautifully I
think um so that's the
idea okay of why this fundamental now
the as far as laws are concerned of
course there when you you have
fundamental things you only can explain
what they're doing if you have certain
principles or regularities that they
conform to these are thought to be the
laws about them we haven't talked about
what laws are we can come to that in a
while but there are certain regularities
about them these would be the
fundamental laws that about the
fundamental things when you get more
complicated things there'll be
non-fundamental laws or sometimes called
special science laws and there's a
question about how the non-fundamental
and the fundamental are related too
that's a kind of metaphysical or
scientific metaphysical question also a
very important question in the
philosophy of science I'm glad you bring
up the special Sciences because one of
the other topics I wanted to talk about
and now maybe is a good time is the
reduction of the special Sciences to
well the reduction of some special
Sciences or special science in
particular biology to chemistry and then
physics and how this relates to laws and
also to falia because there are laws in
biology for instance like scaling laws
that presumably reduce to chemistry and
then to physics and I'm wondering how
this works and how you think about
reduction and fundamental in this
context so the whole business about
reduction often brings people up into
fighting modes really it's that cont the
reductionists and the
anti-reductionists I think this is not
the right way to look at things
exactly um somehow how the the
anti-reductionists think gee if you're
going to be reductionist all the money
will go to the physics departments so no
no no but that won't happen because the
biologists are they actually the ones
who finding cures for diseases and and
and better uh uh uh ways to grow corn
and stuff like that so that's not going
to happen
anyway um
look either you
think that the world is made up out of
fundamental physical things
and that's all the fundamental things
that are or you think in addition to
fundamental physical things they're
fundamental biological
things so the question about life that's
one really interesting thing for a a
certain time in the history of science
it was thought that there was a
certain I don't know a substance or a
fluid or I and I know what something
called Elon vital that got sprinkled
onto certain physical
things that made them
alive now I don't think anybody thinks
anything like that now of course there's
some people who think that there was
just somehow there was just dust and
then it took a deity to wave a wand or
whatever deities do to make the thing to
be alive there may be people who think
that now too I don't really know about
that but I don't think them okay
um but people do think this about
Consciousness now for sure
uh you know I mean Dave chers is an
example of someone who's
argued you know strongly that given all
the physic fundamental physical stuffs
in the world is that's not sufficient to
account for why there's Consciousness in
the world too so when the world was made
all the fundamental physical things had
to be put in place then also
Consciousness had to be added to the
world now I don't think that so I'm a
reductionist to the extent that I think
all there is is the fundamental physical
stuff there are some people who think
that no this is there some people who
Nancy cardr is a good example of someone
who thinks this is just taken stuff way
too far they think there's a lot of
different stuff in the world at
different levels and that and that the
whole idea of building up the world out
of fundamental physical
stuff uh parenthetically he was spoken
to Nancy card she no but we might at
some point she's a fascinating person
just I don't know her very well but I
uh I'm not going to tell the story I
know about her okay you're not
darn
um but I think her her work is very
interesting for sure but but she'd be on
the opposite side of this for me and you
know she wrote at times things like she
said the world is variegated it's a mess
it occurs to me now that reductionists
like me tend to be people who in their
offices their office are a mess my guess
is though I don't know this that Nancy
carard is a very neat
person and her philosophical views is
that the world is a
mess you mentioned David Chalmer and
Consciousness a moment ago and
Consciousness might not fall under the
typical umbrella of philosophy of
science because it falls under typically
the philosophy of mind but since we've
been talking about metaphysics there are
some
metaphysicians who take a very robust
view of metaphysics that have
interesting views about Consciousness
and I'm wondering just since it's come
up what your views are on Consciousness
given that you're a particularly
science-minded
philosopher I'm not expecting your
theory of Consciousness but maybe how
you view well you might not know this
because it never came up but my my wife
is actually an expert on this subject
and she has I think written the paper
that refutes Charmers arguments oh great
if you ever ever looked at it and I was
in Phil review years some years ago and
she works works on it has written stuff
and she's writing a book on this stuff
now but anyway
so and her teacher was a person who
taught at ruter who was a colleague of
mine named Brian lore he died some years
ago sadly but I think he had the key
idea to show how to defend physicalism
against the kind of arguments that Frank
Jackson and then David Charmers taking
Frank Jackson's arguments developed
into his dualist
views and of course this interacted with
philosophy of science and quantum
mechanics in a big way because for a
while in the history of quantum
mechanics people were making claims like
Consciousness collapses the wave
function in fact Charmers just got into
a long conversation with Charmers at
dinner a few nights ago about uh he has
actually developed a kind of version a a
so the more sophisticated contemporary
version of Consciousness collapsing the
wave function uh view you've heard of
grw probably it's is a spinoff of grw
view um so so the two you can't separate
these things philosophy is all over the
philosophy covers everything that's why
one goes into philosophy because you
can't keep your mouth shut have you
noticed
that yeah
but my question is more about how you
think conscious needs to be investigated
let me just add one I bu my my wife's
View and Brian laur's view I think
Consciousness is a physical
phenomena I also think that because of
the way we encounter our own
Consciousness we will ever never come up
with what we think of as a satisfactory
explanation of why it how it is can be
the case that neurons doing whatever
neurons do can result in something like
it's it's there's something it's like
you know to whatever feel a tickle in
your nose or a a pain in the butt or
whatever what it's like is supposed to
be while we're on the topic of
Consciousness which might be a good case
study to use that phrase again for this
and
fundamental the word emergence comes up
often in discussions of physics and it's
and metaphysics and and it's a heated
and charged word people use it in
different ways mhm what is emergence and
what's an emergent Theory what's perhaps
similar in kind an effective Theory well
as you said it's used in different ways
so if one means that certain kinds of
things didn't exist at one time and
later on those things came into
existence sure they
emerged at one time there were no
mammals they
emerged okay okay but sometimes what
people mean by that is that there's no
explaining how those things emerged in
terms of what there was
beforehand if that's what they mean by
no explaining well again explaining
means different things if you mean by no
explaining we got to get we haven't
discussed explanation what it is that's
another big area in philosophy science
but if they mean by that that you can't
come up with what you might think of as
a satisfactory thing that you say ah now
I see that might be the case but if what
you mean by that is that the world had
to have more stuff in it in order to get
that then I don't think that's the case
I don't think there had to be anything
in the world other than what there was
before there were any mammals for there
to be
mammals mammals emerge very slowly
incidentally we know that from natural
selection Evolution six long time for
everything to happen so it's not an all
or none matter I'll leave this up to you
but since you mention
explanation I think that is a good area
for us to transition toward but I wanted
to ask if you think it might be better
to start by talking about causation
because these two things are
interrelated and I don't know which
direction you'd like to start
from well they surely are interrelated
bertron Russell was sort of like the
Sydney Morgan besser of his times in
philosophy and that he's great for
quotes his quote about causation I'm
sure you
know I'll wait for you I probably can do
it for btim I can do it for beta
right the concept of causation is like
the British Monarchy it should be
retired but it's not because it's kept
around because it's mistakenly thought
to do no
harm now that's what Russell said I
didn't get it exactly right but that's
what Russell said I I I don't think
that's right I think the notion of
causation as as Nancy card rde came up
before wrote in a paper is very Central
to how we think about the world but I
don't think it's
fundamental I don't think that when you
get what physics says is fundamental the
notion of causation will be there and
that was one of Russell's points so but
you want to keep it around you want to
explain how it emerged not in the sense
of it having to be added like someone
had to come along and say oh let's say
had some causation now but just explain
how the whatever the physical stuff in
was there how it getting into a certain
situation LED there to be causal
relations among things and I think
giving an account of that is like one of
the great tasks of contemporary
philosophy now that is not something
that science will engage in but it is
something that people in philosophy and
to some extent in computer science and
decision Theory and other things will
enter into and Stat statisticians I
don't know if you have you talk to David
papano I have a couple of times so he's
writing on this on on his probabilistic
approaches to causation as have Judea
Pearl and Clark lore and various other
people in computer science and
philosophy of science and and um Jim
Woodward is another interesting person
who's written on this in the St oh
there's a whole other approach that
comes originally from David Yume but um
from David Lewis in particular which is
sort of a counterfactual accounter
causation
so uh the throwing of the rock caused
the breaking of the window because if
you hadn't have thrown the rock the
window wouldn't have
broken the first account which is a
probabilistic statistical account
it says that when occurrence of one
event raises the
probability of another event or some
other kinds of probabilistic
relations and there isn't something like
we might call a common causal
explanation of why there's a
correlation then there's a causal
relation now what I just gave was
circular because I use causation in the
account but the people who do this have
a way in which they can get rid of the
circular po ity they think these are the
two main approaches one of the projects
if I live long enough that I want to do
is to connect these two projects those
two approaches so they're connected
because I think if you're going to do
counterfactuals and cause counter
counterfactuals right you got to make it
a probabilistic account canaural you got
to get rid of David Lewis's approach of
canaural again that's for a metaphysics
or logic discussion not for today but
something also something else I am
interested in but eventually you're G to
want to give an account of account of
factures in terms of conditional
probabilities and I think when you do
that you're going to have an account of
causation in terms of conditional
probabilities too but it's going to be
an account of cations between particular
events the throwing of the rock on this
occasion the breaking the window on this
occasion whereas the correlational
accounts associated with papino and
Woodward and Judea Pearl is a type
quation
account and I I think these two need to
be fit together in some way I don't know
how to do it
now I don't know anybody who's done it
but maybe that's just cuz I haven't
looked around enough I just haven't I
just haven't had the time to do it but
that's a really interesting project you
have your own dissertation project right
now right or maybe you're could just a
famous film director but if you want a
dissertation project this is what I
would direct students I think it's a
great area you just said many words that
I think will be foreign to some
listeners who aren't familiar with the
literature on causation I'm sorry no
problem so counterfactuals one of them
conditional probability I think we
should skip the conditional probability
for now but it would be nice to hear
what counterfactuals are and how they
relate to causation quite broadly okay
so conditionals in English is something
that logicians studied factual or
conditionals I'm going to talk about
conditionals first conditionals are
statements in English that logicians
have studied for long long time the
Satan's like if this happens then that
happens and obviously we're very
interested in conditionals because
they're the bridges between a this and a
that right
okay so and an ordinary logic that every
student who has to take of logic course
studies they study material conditionals
counterfactual conditionals are not
Material conditionals they're a little
more complicated there if this had
happened then this would have
happened if
they had
counted the votes correctly in a bore
Bush election of 2000 bore would have
been bore Gore G Gore would have been
president I don't know if that's true or
not but somebody might say that Bor bush
has a nice ring to it
too let me take the example that Us in
the literature all the
time if oswal had not shot Kennedy
Kennedy would have run a second term
I that's plausibly true or something
like that is true and the neighborhood
is true um we understand that now it's
not an ordinary material conditional
it's not what's called Truth functional
a truth functional conditional is a
conditional such that if you know the
truth values of the each part the
antecedent and the consequent you could
know the truth value of the whole
counterfactual is not like that
counterfactual say something about how
the antecedent and the and the
consequent are connected with each other
they are very interesting kinds of
statements if you're interested in
science because scientists are
interested in these all the time when
they're doing experiments if you were to
do this that would happen if you had
done this this would have happened okay
this this in the SC Sciences all the
time um quation seems to be closely
connected to counterfactuals in the way
I said
before the throwing of the brick caused
the breaking of the window because if
you hadn't thrown the brick the window
wouldn't have broken now that's not
exactly right it needs to be refined
that's the basic idea and the idea that
Yume suggested at one point he has two
definitions of causation this is the
second one he gives but this is the one
that David Lewis picked up and he
developed an account of it and he
realized it needed some refinement he
gave refinement and a big literature
developed out of that within what's more
properly metaphysics but it's closely
connected to this to
science um it needs to modified because
I think Lewis's account counterfactuals
is no good he bases account of
counterfactuals on possible World
similarity I think that's a big mistake
but we're that's off on a side topic so
I'm not going to get into that right now
I think it needs to be done in terms of
conditional probabilities which we can
explain in a moment but that's what
counterfactuals are and that's how
causation is connected to
counterfactuals and causation is another
thing that I think Russell said too but
other people picked up like um uh guy
called Macky another philosopher is that
it's the cement of the universe the glue
of the universe quation relates one
event to another and I don't really
think it's glue or anything like that
that's ridiculous but I do think it's
the concept we use in order to connect
events that are connected to explanation
we explain why one thing happened in
terms of another by finding the causes
of events at least that's one kind of
explanation it's not the only kind of
explanation but it's the one kind of
explanation
the way that you talk about causation in
terms of
counterfactuals it makes it seem very
much like just a description a verbal
description of what's going on with
causation in other words it doesn't
sound particularly physical or to use
the term that you just use it seems more
conceptual in contrast to what you just
attributed to Macky where he described
causation as a sort of glue which makes
it seem more tangible and real and
physical in a certain sense I'm
wondering if you think that this is at
all correct and if it is correct what
some other accounts are of causation
that might give it a more physical feel
even if you don't think they're right
well I understand why you said what you
said now the idea which is sort of
suggested but I don't think Macky
believed this but it's suggested by the
macky's phrase is that
the world has events in them the events
are loose and separate and you got to
add some glue to connect up what causes
what now there are philosophers who
believe something like
that uh it would be a grave
oversimplification to say that Tim mlin
believes that so don't attribute that
I'm saying that to Tim Morin but he
believes something in the neighborhood
ultimately but not wor about causation
but about laws okay um but there are
other philosophers who definitely
believe that I don't believe that
I don't think that's right because of
the reason that Russell said if you look
in fundamental physics you won't find
causation any place as one of the stuff
the fundamental relations in physics you
find spatial tempor relations maybe you
find entanglement relations in quantum
mechanics or something like that but you
won't find causal relations you got to
they sort of emerge in this sort of
non-metaphysical sense of emergence that
I was using
earlier okay
so my counterfactual account is supposed
to be like that now I do think that
there's something physical that makes
those counterfactuals come and that's
these conditional probabilities these
conditional probabilities are in the in
physics that and and uh now you're
opening up I wouldn't say this is a can
of worms this is a paradise for me this
is the main project that I'm Into You
want to show your your shirt yeah this
is something called the mentaculus okay
yes looks great okay and this is
something that's a is that your
cat is that meant to be your cat I do
you still have a cat I think his name is
bertran Russell it's a little
complicated here okay so the cat
Bertrand Russell was given to me and I
guess when I talked to you last I did
have him as a cat by a student of mine
he named The Cat I would never name a
cat anything so go as ber and
Russell um but
unfortunately bur and Russell dug a plan
I loved him he was great he left on my
set on my neck all the time but when he
got off my neck he'd get off my neck I
could show a picture of my my iPad he'
get off my neck and he look around the
apartment to dig up plants or to go
knock over we have a lot of things in my
my my wife said he cannot stay in this
apartment so he went back to the farm he
lived on I had a cat before that whom I
really loved named Loki and this is I
think supposed to be Loki
thisd was made by a friend of mine with
whom I used to go spend time at a place
called Paradox Lake we went had a
vacation isn't that a good place for
philosophers to go yeah do you believe
there is such a place I like my you look
it up it's in Upstate New York it's not
that far from what's the closest
town oh I don't know tyoga is not some
distance there are other places but look
up Paradox Lake it's a beautiful
beautiful Lake I I can show you pictures
of that later if we stop to having on my
iPad and it's a wonderful place to go
and it's called Paradox because it has
two parts and the middle part there's a
a a a what do they call it little thing
that connects to like a can I know not a
canal but a channel and and the water
goes in opposite directions into two
parts of the channel and it was thought
to be a paradox okay it wasn't because
there were two docks on the lake as some
people there many docks on the lake and
it's a great place to go swimming and so
my we all we had a big gigantic family
uh reunion at this um place a year and a
half ago and this friend of mine made
this
shirt uh for people there on Paradox
Lake and this is supposed to be a
picture of loky the cat doesn't look
like loky the cat this supposed to be a
picture of yeah well anyway you were
speaking about probability and you're
going to get okay and the mentaculus
yeah is a thing again you're going to
talk to David Albert about this more
details so I'm not going get into it
yeah but it' be nice to hear how it fits
in with with okay that's more my that's
my part of it okay okay so what the
mentaculus is is it takes an idea from
physics that we came up earlier in our
discussion and that is
in during the 19th
century it's related to Central things
we've talked about actually in ways I
could emphasize more physics studies the
special Sciences the macroscopic it also
studies the more
fundamental one of the main special
Sciences in physics is
thermodynamics thermodynamics
concerns gases liquids solids and how
they
evolve um but physicists knew they must
be connected to the atoms or molecules
that make these things up and the
question was how are these connected so
the the physicist who thought about this
hard in the 19th centuries with James
Maxwell another one of the greats in
physics and Ludovic B boltzman one of
the greats so for me if you would to
have physicists being like mountains
like in the Himalayas or something like
that you know uh Mount Everest would
might
be Einstein or and Newton would be right
up there but boltzman and Maxwell would
be right you know sub Peaks right yeah
there other in Galileo other
so so they were great people they were
interested boltzman in particular in how
to relate thermodynamics to more
fundamental
physics and in fundamental
physics thermodynamics can studied laws
like uh regularities like this ice cubes
when you put them in warm water
melt gases when you let them go steam
when you let it go diffuses into the air
water when you drops Ice uh ink dropping
into water spreads out in the
water people when they're born grow old
and die all these are thermodynamic
developments it was discovered that
there was a quantity called
entropy we'll leave it to later for a
technical description of what entropy
is um but that all of these s in some
way fall under the general root rri
of if the entropy of some system is not
at a maximum if that system is isolated
from everything else its entropy will
increase over time that's called the
second law of Thermodynamics boltzman
wanted to show how this emerges from
more fundamental physics in the sense of
emergence that we talked about earlier
but he did realize he had to add
something ultimately the physics in
order to do this because he realized he
couldn't show that as a exact regularity
it emerges because it doesn't follow as
an exact regularity what follows is that
from most of the ways of which atoms or
molecules are arranged in an ice cube
when you put it in warm water and the
way that water molecules are arranged
for most of those
ways the Ice Cube will melt over time
but there'll be some very very atypical
ways in which it won't melt so what
boltzman said is I have to introduce
probability so he introduced a
probability um uh assumption over
how the fundamental states of
the atoms or molecules might be arranged
for him for fun classical physics
fundamental state had to do with where
the particles are or relative distances
from each other and what their relative
velocities are relative momentums are
relative to each
other okay if you have the fundamental
States well there are lots and lots of
fundamental states which look exactly
the same with respect to having an ice
cube in warm water in fact infinitely
many um for most of them in some sense
of most the Ice Cube
will melt for atypical ones they won't
but it turns had through to try to count
up with how many atypical and how many
typical states there would be well and
here's a somewhat technical things which
your listeners might not know but you
certainly know there are infinitely many
of each of these in fact there are
continually infinitely many of each of
them so you got to do say something more
than most you got to introduce a better
notion than most boltzman introduced
probability there are other ways of
approaching this again this is not what
we're going to talk about now but um by
probability he thought well he say a
probability distribution such as the
probability that the Ice Cube will melt
is going to be very close to one and the
probability that it won't melt is going
to be very close to
zero and if he made this assumption as a
probability assumption and he made this
assumption over the whole universe he
could give a very good argument or kind
of argument that the second law of
Thermodynamics would very very likely
hold for isolated systems throughout the
whole universe
for ice cubes and and put in water for
ink drops dropped into water for um
gases seams underwater for people when
they're born it is the case that there
are certain Arrangements of your
molecules compatible what you look like
when you're a
baby such that you will never
die you never will die H there are
Arrangements like that wow but they're
very
atypical I hope I got that one you
didn't get it no probability of it is
you know minuscule actually you don't
really hope it it wouldn't be not a very
happy life if you never died and there
are also ones in which instead of i as
you mention it there're also ones in
which after a little while you end up
suffering horrible pain for the for a
long time and there also other ones
which you end up looking like you know I
don't know like uh like like
um Donald Trump okay well I don't want
that one but uh maybe I'll take the one
where I live 10,000 years that sounds
like a safe bet I could handle that I
have a happy life there those to because
look if you have continually many things
as also know what what a big number that
is quite bigger than infinity or the
second it's at least the second order of
infinity maybe there are many orders
Infinity in between um it's a lot and uh
so um there's a lot of room for there
all sorts of things to be since we're
talking about aging I'm wondering and we
since we' already talked a little bit
you brought MC tangard up so we talked a
little bit about time I wonder if you
view time travel as a question for the
philosophy of science and whether it may
or may not have any bearing on the
mentaculus or vice versa so Tim mlin as
you
know has thought about this and David
Lewis wrote a famous paper which he
tried to make sense of time traveling
with his counterfactual account of
causation and he tried to show that
there's no real paradoxes you know
there's a famous Paradox the grandfather
Paradox about time travel where it says
that look if you could time travel you
can go back and kill your grandfather
then where would you be okay well the
answer is of course if you went back in
time you just wouldn't kill your
grandfather okay
um uh so um which also course brings up
the question between how physics and
free will is are related I don't know
you want to talk about that or not but
that's it's another thing I've written
about this interesting subject but
um so with in general
relativity general relativity looks like
it allow certain solutions to the
Einstein's field equations which allow
for the possibility of the being
so-called cause Tim like
Loops I believe Tim thinks that while
these are allowed by the equs Tim's own
view about what time is should rule them
out I think this should embarrass Tim
that uh but I I those are fighting words
I'm sure he look Tim and I get along
well he can beat me up in any argument
that we got into any day of the week he
could beat me up about what I had for
breakfast he's just good that's right
right he is the clearest thinker I
revering into but he's not right about
everything that's a very good compliment
who
it's really true I mean it's definitely
the case and the best Expositor of stuff
that ever run into we've reached another
bifurcation where I'll let you decide
where to go from here but we initially
got into causation to talk a bit about
explanation I'm not sure we've quite
gotten there yet so we could talk about
explanation or you mentioned earlier
your project with David about
reductionism maybe I should go back to
that because we almost got to that let's
do it okay okay so back to boltzman
boltzman introduced this probability
distribution he didn't really know what
to think what probability is what is
probability that's a really interesting
question quote from beron Russell again
this I think I can do verbatim because I
love it so much Russell said probability
is the most important Concept in
contemporary science especially since
nobody knows what it means
another very good one right Russell was
great at this thing and um my favorite
which everyone knows is it has all the
merits of theft over honest toil
something good too
right uh and if you can get away with it
yeah
uh try to keep
your let should be philosophy policeman
though to keep you from getting where so
anyway so Tim is one
okay
um philosophy policeman that
is
um so he didn't know what probability
is I think that one of the main
contributions in the history of
philosophy in the 20th century is people
thinking about this question there been
a lot of attempts to answer it there's a
very interesting entry in the in the
Stanford encyclopedia philosophy done by
Al Hayek who'll also be visiting New
York soon who's another close associate
of mine so I have gotten to know a lot
of people who are important have you
done an interview with him I've not you
should get him yeah I need to look at
your pocket book he's he's a good
interviewer too good person a good
interviewee very good person and he
knows everything there is about
probability I'm not sure I've drawn him
into my Camp about this completely I
think I've done it a little bit but not
completely but so you might read his
article in the San FR Encyclopedia of
philosophy it's very
good um basically there are a lot of
different views of probability is I
think the really great idea was thought
up by the person who I think is the
Towering figure in 20th century
philosophy and that is David
Lewis um and David Lewis had a view
about laws that's connected with his
view about probability so we going to
connect the two in a little while if you
want to talk about laws we be running
out of time I when David's going to show
up um but
um Lewis had a view about probability
that's part of his best systems's
account of laws and probability that I
think when you take really seriously is
a view about what objective probability
is now another very great idea about
probability concerns another Stanford
person or at least he was at Stanford
for a while connected to Nancy cartrite
for a while they separated I'm sure you
know him is Ian hacking does he I didn't
know him personally I didn't meet him
once but I didn't know him very much but
I think his book emergence of
probability is also one of the great
things written in probability and in it
he says probability is a Janus faced
concept so two faces two faces Janus was
the Roman god with coin on a coin with
two faces and by two faces it meant one
face is what hacking meant one face
looks at the mind the other face looks
at the world probability has an aspect
that looks at the mind because it tells
you something about what your degree of
confidence or degree of belief or degree
of ignorance should be in something but
it should be based what the world is
really like Lewis's account of
probability in the best systems account
is an account that says here's what the
world is
like for these to be the right
probabilities Lewis Lewis also
recognized that Jane's face and he also
had a principle that connected up the
objective connected the objective
objective probabilities with what your
degrees of belief should be like about
what your degree of ignorance should be
like he called this the principal
principle again this is a whole other
thing to talk about with somebody
who's maybe another
occasion
um but basically he thinks that to put
it very roughly it needs to be refined
that if the objective
probability of a certain event is
6 other things being equal your degree
of belief and that happening should be 6
as well now I think this principle works
much better if you're doing conditional
objective probabilities and conditional
degrees of
belief so if the objective conditional
probability of it raining tonight given
such and such facts about the world now
maybe contemporary weather conditions
and other situations now raining tonight
is 7 then your degree of belief given
all of that stuff should also be 7 I
think that principle is basically
correct but where those objective
probabilities come from well I think
they come from boltzman's statistical
mechanics now why do I think that well
boltzman's conditional probab boltzman's
probability distribution
was probably distribution over all the
fund possible fundamental states of the
world and so they give conditional
probabilities over everything now there
is something we're going to have to
conditionalize in order to get the right
conditional probabilities and the person
who gave the right name to this thing is
David Albert he called it the past
hypothesis but it's an idea that floated
around boltzman in some sense had this
idea but definitely uh Edington had it
and finan had it and other people had it
and that is that the world Penrose has
it that the world had a very very low
entropy State it's a pro thing in
cosmology um near the beginning of the
universe and when we conditionalize on
that then we'll get the right
conditional probabilities when we
conditionalize on other stuff later on
now that we got that we got conditional
probabilities over everything now
frankly I'm sure David knew this
but you know I'm an older guy than David
I don't know how he he would want to
view it but in some sense David became a
philosopher in part because he met me
and I was already a philosopher and he
was a physicist and we got to be
friends but I learned more from him than
I did from anybody
else and because he's a uh I wouldn't
say he's the clearest thinker I wouldn't
say David is the clearest thinker David
is not as he's very clear but he's not
way that himim is but David is the most
creative thinker I know I've
known and um uh so I learned a lot and
he was very willing to teach me and and
and I I I think a lot of what came from
David he came and interacting by me
saying yeah do you really think that or
well look if that's so then what about
this so I don't know how much he would
want to bring me into this I shouldn't
bring myself into his views he should
let him do that but I said certainly
learned a lot from him so I do know that
when we were talking about when he was
writing his book time and chance we were
talking about it a lot and um uh I came
to see and like I said I probably
realized this all along that look if you
had this view about statistical
mechanics that the view about
statistical mechanics is that when the
world began it began in this low entropy
State and there was a probability
distribution over all the fundamental
the possible fundamental states of the
world that the world could be in you
would end up with probabilities or
conditional probabilities over
everything including the conditional
probability
over uh Harris winning the current
election given such and such facts about
the universe now okay and if you think
about it for a second well of course
because if you knew the whole
fundamental physical state of the world
now you would know whether Harris would
win the election or not right as llas
pointed out to Napoleon they say a long
time ago okay
but of course we're never going to know
the fundamental fundamental it's not not
a possibility it's not even a physical
possibility
so um so we call this the
mentaculus as it the shirt is about and
this is a project that we've been
working in and now if you Google
mentaculus the word of course as you
know comes from the film by Ethan and
Jonathan con called a serious man where
there's a minor character scribbling in
a book and someone says what is that
book and he says it's the mentaculus and
someone says what's that he says it's a
probability map of the world and that's
what this is It's a probability map of
the world so we just took this reman
cone now I quickly add that the
character in the film is clearly out of
his mind and is meant to be depicted
like that and we thought that when
people when I tell other people that I
think there's objective probabilities
over everything the first thing going to
look at me LS said people looked at him
with an incredulous stare when they tell
them about all the possible worlds I do
think they'll look at me with an
incredulous stare when I tell them they
probabilities over everything but I do
think a good argument can be made for
this next thing I want to say that it is
that um David and I got to know Ethan
con because of this because I had Ethan
con's emails I email him and he said he
wanted to talk to us so we talk we used
to meet him regularly at a a cafe not
far from here and talk about physics and
we emailed with him
until recently I'd used to get two or
three emails a day from him about stuff
we'd argue about I don't want to get
into that okay but I do think the
metaculus is a serious philosophical
project whether it'll it'll survive
philosophical scrutiny or not that's a
question it's come under some criticism
by some people and some rep replies to
it and there is issues that's closely
related to reductionism because I do
think it can be used to
support the my kind of reductionism the
kind of reduction which which there's
emerence without adding anything more to
the to the universe other than this
probability distribution and the past
hypothesis and those are really
scientific things that you're adding to
the
universe I tend to lose track of time
during these conversations so I'm not
sure if it was 15 minutes ago or half an
hour ago that you mentioned free will
but I would be very curious to hear
whether you think Free Will is a for
philosophy of science or for science in
general or and how you just think about
Free Will in general well many many
scientists have thought about free will
I know that I just talked to one who did
who came to a lecture I gave about Free
Will and so they're interested in it
they have an inkling feeling that maybe
what they learn about in science somehow
has some incompatibility with their
being free well and there have been
metaphysicians a famous one who's wrote
a couple of books about this named Peter
Van inwagen I don't know if you know his
work or not
okay was given an argument a famous
argument not sure he's the first person
who thought up this argument but he
definitely gave it clear formulation
called the consequence argument which is
supposed to show that Free Will and
fundamental physics are incompatible
with each
other and the idea is that if there are
laws over everything whether they're
deterministic or whether they're
probabilistic there's no room for free
will why is that how does the consequent
argument okay I'll do it for determinism
things are a little fancier for if the
fundamental laws are indeterministic but
there's good reason to think that the
fundamental laws even if quantum
mechanics are deterministic whatever you
may have heard about quantum mechanics
okay there another Well Tim's somebody
who thinks that they're deterministic
think Tim thinks they're deterministic
let him people can listen to our
episodes on Boman mechanics yeah okay so
I I would I'm with Tim about that okay
okay so um the basic idea is this it's
really simple very straightforward easy
to
explain
look if you have free will it's got to
be the case that your actions
will make a difference to what happens
so what does that mean well we're back
to counterfactuals now which means that
if you were to decide to do this that
would happen if we to decide to do
something else something else would
happen
if you have free will that's got to be
the
case but now Peter Van inwagen comes
along and says but
look you're not free about what things
that happened in the distant past are
you if you would have started to do this
wouldn't make a difference to stuff in
the distant past would
it most people would respond and say of
course
not I mean I I know can't do anything
about makes sense to me can't do wait
wait wait a few minutes okay okay you
can't do anything about you can't no
crying over spilled milk and you can't
do anything about the laws right laws
are the laws you can't decide to break
the laws if you jump or you know someone
pushes you off the building you can't
say i' I'd like to to suspend the law of
gravity now so I fall gently to the
ground it's not going to work right
can't do that but the laws in the past
if determinism is Right entails what
will happen in the future so it looks
like it validly follows and I do believe
it does as V wagan said
that you can't do anything about the
future therefore you have no free will
that's the argument I think the argument
is a valid
argument now logicians or philosophers
say well a valid argument is only good
if its sound as well as valid the
premises both have to be true so let's
look more carefully at the premises one
says you can't do anything about the
laws the other one says you can't do
anything about the um
ped now David Lewis wrote a famous paper
about this in which he said
well when you look at the right way to
evaluate counterfactuals it'll turn out
to be the case that if you had decided
to do something different then in fact
you would have violated a law but in the
past you would have violated a law so
you're not going to be able to suspend
the law of gravity in the future I think
Lewis's way of doing counterfactuals is
wrong so I think the right right way to
evaluate counterfactuals is that when
you evaluate counterfactuals nothing you
do would ever violate
laws okay we going to get into more
details about counterfactuals if just
people who listen to this podcast really
understand going to understand it I do
think that if you were to have decided
to do something if you were to decide
something differently from what you
actually decide then the past would have
been different way back to the big
bang and effect statistical mechanics
shows how that could be the
case but be careful about it because you
won't be able to affect anything
macroscopic in a way that you care about
what you was the case is that had you
decide something different than the
microscopic history of the world would
have been different microscopically
while the macroscopic history of the
world would have been exactly the same
and that's because of something that
everyone who studies statistical
mechanics knows about I I'll I'll do it
in a vivid way it's called something
called The Butterfly Effect and it's
said very small differences in the
microscopic State could make for a very
big difference in the macroscopic state
later on the butterfly effect means
that a very small difference in the
macroscopic thing that determines
whether a butterfly flaps its wings or
not in Africa might make for a
difference whether that's a storm off
the coast of the United States you know
sometime later and that's right
okay so I I illustrate that with a with
a I'm not wearing the right t-shirt to
illustrate that my other t-shirt you've
got a lot of t-shirts like stuff right
but basically if you were to give a
history of the universe if you write
history of the universe microscopically
and determinism it would just be a
straight line if this is the fundamental
microscopic State the world started and
that was
way go on forever but if you did it
macroscopically it would be brand ing so
at the macroscopic level the world is
full of
chanciness and the chances come from the
statistical mechanics and this bolz
manian account that I told about earlier
that's where the mentaculus comes from
and the idea that this is so like I said
I think David had this idea when he was
writing the book but the idea that this
has such consequences for
philosophy that I really just stumbled
into because I knew
David uh uh
is fantastic I think it's incredibly
powerful idea for philosophy has
consequences for how to think about
counterfactuals
causation
knowledge epistemology all over the
place and so on so I think it's a it's a
total great field for philosophy so the
mentaculus and I'm writing a book now
the book is called the mentaculus vision
and it's basically about how you take
this idea and its consequences are for
philosophy all over the place uh like
again you know like people when they do
in philosophy they write a book and
other people come along and they tell
you what's wrong with what you doing I'm
sure that'll be the case here and maybe
it's wrong from the very
beginning so for example Tim's way of
approaching statistical mechanics
doesn't use probability it uses
typicality and he might object from the
very beginning but his way is not the
typical way of approaching quantum
mechanics of we approaching statistical
mechanics of I could say that to use the
word typicality back on Tim most people
just statical mechanics use probability
not typicality but Tim belongs to a
tribe which uses
typicality that was an excellent story
now I would love to talk about laws a
bit more they came up at the beginning
of our
conversation and they've come up a lot
now so it might be a good time to get a
bit clearer about them I think a good
question to start with is
just the landscape of views on what laws
are and I'll give you two options about
views so one takes laws to be maybe more
conceptual their descriptions of
generalities of things another takes
laws to be something more robustly
metaphysical something baked into the
fabric of the universe something that
might be commanded by God I'm wondering
if there are words or terms of art to
describe these views what these views
are if you could elaborate on them more
and if I'm right if the these are two
good polls in the landscape yeah
absolutely right it's a good way of
describing it and it connects up with
two things we've talked about earlier
namely chances and
causation so let me say a little bit
more about views here and a little bit
about the history of the concept of law
is that okay we have time for that
absolutely um in the history of the
concept of laws like I said much earlier
that the Contemporary concept really
didn't come up until 17th century with
Galileo decart Newton and Z some other
people in cende De Bole and basically it
was very theologically connected laws
were thought of as the principles that
described how God moved matter around
that's definitely how Dart thought about
laws so he did connect it with theology
God gradually fell out of it I think
Newton thought about it like that too
frankly uh that's more subtle question
um
so uh but God fell out of it because you
didn't want God into science so much not
to
everybody and in fact another quote I'll
tell you about uh that two people who um
I guess I use this quote it's my quote
from me that's a good personal quote
Yeah the best is that um but both Nancy
Cartwright and a philosopher called John
Foster held it and that
is if there were no God there'd be no
laws John Foster used it and he used it
as an argument for the existence of God
because he thought there were laws Nancy
cite used it and he used it for as an
argument for the not for the existence
of non for the non-existence of laws of
this
sort I think it's
wrong I think you can have laws without
God but not of the robust sort that you
were talking about before and the person
who had a view about law are of A
non-robust Sort that I think works out
pretty well and closely connected to his
view about probability or chance was
David Lewis so here was David Lewis's
idea or maybe I tell you about the other
idea first a little bit so in philosophy
there wasn't much written about what
laws are that's a philosophical question
in the history of
philosophy
um
uh Kant had some Canan View but while
there are people at Stanford I think you
understand what Kant has to say I've
never really had a conversation with him
about this I would like to at some point
in my life I I've ever really talked to
Michael fredman but I'm sure he knows a
lot surely knows a lot more about Kant
than I'll ever know about
Kant so so Kant wrote about this but he
had a go a k view but in the 19th
century people just didn't write about
this much Pur says a little bit about it
uh um uh and then the positivists were
very down on
metaphysics so then in the late 1970s
1980s some philosophers were more
metaphysicians when when the when the
logical positiv were thought to be been
killed off by I don't know who killed
them more popper and Quin in different
ways or something like that
okay
um they
um were free to have metaphysical views
so Armstrong had the view that what he
had a robust view laws are had to be
added to the universe over and above the
ordinary facts in the universe you have
to add connections between universals
for there to be laws he called them con
connections of contingent necessitation
swallow that if you can laws of
contingent necessitation that was
Armstrong's view uh you can't ask him
about it cuz he died some years ago uh
um Tim has the view that laws are just
what they are they're just extra things
that you add to the universe and they
make things happen in the universe I I
think this
is what you say should I say bananas
bananas
works I think you just can't make sense
of how this is supposed to be but Tim
disagrees with me about this and Tim's a
very smart man
so um here's David Lewis's views all
there are the ordinary facts here's more
what you said as the conceptual side
although I don't not try to go along
with that quite way of doing it but it's
non-rust in the sense you meant robust I
think that's how it should be you should
be robust about the things that really
exist you shouldn't be about robust
about the things that you don't think
exist so what are laws well his view
about what laws are is that look there
are the ordinary facts there the whole
history of ordinary facts and what we're
interested in laws are are finding out
the best
systematization the best ways of
organizing systematizing unifying all of
those fundamental facts that's what the
laws are entailments of the best
systematization of all of them that's
what laws are now I'm just I'm just so
close to it I'll add this what chances
are is we introduce probability as a way
to help us systematize the ordinary
facts you can see how that might work
might work because if for example the
ordinary facts consist of the outcomes
of head of cord horses now we don't
think that's FS of fundamental facts but
the httt HT httt HTT we might see gee if
we were to describe that in a
fundamental way that would be very very
complicated but probability might enable
us to describe that in a simple
way uh and give us a lot of information
about it that's what Lewis's idea so
lewis' idea is the best
systematization optimizes is Simplicity
informativeness and other criteria that
science is after and laws are what's
entailed by that best systematization of
the world now I think that's pretty
robust you know this phrase is a very
interesting question we've already
talked about Leonard susin so let me
just bring him in here for a moment
you're obviously aware of the string
theoretic Multiverse where there are
upwards of 10 to the 50 10 to the 500
pocket
universes and in each of these
ostensibly There lives a different
physics this is how the string theorist
like Leonard suskin accounts for the
fine-tuning problem and the reason that
there are different physics in these
different pocket universes has to do
with the fact that each of these
universes corresponds to one of the say
10 to the 500 ground states of the
string or or different fluxes things
like this so there are different physics
laws of physics ostensibly in these
different pocket universes does that
mean for you that the laws of nature can
vary across time and place look first of
all in ssin's view is he thinks that
there is are laws that hold in all these
universes namely the laws of string
theory so what he's doing is modifying
or say changing some of the parameters
in these laws to get these different
universes the same is true in newon
Newton's universes too change the
positions and um uh uh
um momenta of the particles in the
universe and you get different universes
now Newton had no reason to say they
really exist in the same sense I'm not
sure susin does either for that
matter cosmologists you know everybody
has their favorite Multiverse susin gets
him out
of uh String Theory
uh Alan Guth gets him out of uh
inflationary Theory which maybe he can
connect the string theory or maybe not
in some way and David Lewis gets him out
of his metaphysical Multiverse and there
are some philosophers uh aliser Wilson
if you talk to him he tries to connect
up uh he's a British philosopher tries
to connect up the um Lewis with the with
the uh with one of these I'm not sure
which one he does it with actually I'm
not a fan of any of that stuff but
anyhow okay but I I think susin has gone
off the deep end here a little bit
because first of all his many verses us
say you could do the same thing with
Newton now why does he think they really
exist does he say that does he answer
that
question because he doesn't think that
there's any better explanation for
solving the fine-tuning problem I think
but I think also it has to do with the
cosmologic iCal constant I think that's
a very big part of it well that's one of
that's the fine-tuning problem I know
but it I it's a bigger part of it to him
than the other con or the Conant why
better than God sorry why do you think
it's a better explanation than God
because he thinks that God is
metaphysics and he doesn't go in for
supernal expanation metaphysics okay or
or something in theor what do you bad
metaphysics or bad physics okay okay
okay I mean I not i' will to say that to
Leonard suskin if he's in the room
because he's a real physicist but but
look I understand what he's saying I
think the fine tuning problem is a very
interesting problem but I think the idea
that you're doing this as an explanation
is based on a mistaken view about
explanation in fact and in fact fine
tuning is will be the last chapter of my
mentaculus book oh that's terrific I
mean I find it a very fascinating
problem I do think it's a fascinating
and interesting problem and and have you
talked to Dean Zimmerman and all he's a
colleague of also ruers he's more
philosophy of religion but he's also a
metaphysician who also I think knows he
should be paying attention to physics
stuff and he does a little bit about and
he's a great great human being is what
I'd say about him he's currently the
chair so he may not have no time to talk
to you about anything but um uh he um
he's run he's has a whole big project
from Templeton on the fine tuning
problem that both David and I have
talked in and I've interested in
fine-tuning problem and I think there's
some philosophers who've gone in totally
the wrong direction about the
fine-tuning problem also John Hawthorne
is one talk to him or not no okay
because they're not philosophers of
science but I do think they're making a
certain Elementary philosophy of science
mistake as I think Leonard s seskin is
making so maybe you should talk to
philosophers of science a little bit
more frequently in order to think that
he should go in that direction to come
up with an explanation of the
cosmological Conant right but as you
mentioned he's not interested in talking
to philosophers at all he talk to you
you see I don't know what where did
where did he get that from did he know
Pat suies well my guess is that it comes
from and some people don't think that
this distinction holds water anymore but
it comes from Continental philosophy and
people like
lur somebody I have has he read lure I
have no idea nobody at Stanford probably
has ever read lure nobody nobody in
philosophy that I know has ever read
lure I know a little bit of Lor because
I live in France but um uh he's not in
analytic a lot of people analytic
philosophy there's some people who do
philosophy of science now want to bring
in Continental philosophy a little bit
but I don't do that because I don't know
that much about it and HS MOS I think is
a ho Ms yeah well you I take it think
that there is a distinction between
continental and analytic philosophy uh
there is in a sense yeah but you know
the you know uh if you've looked at
Continental philosophy now it's being
taken over by analytic philosophy or
what I think of is analytic philosophy
of science so I'm giving a talk at LMU
Munich in December where is a great
department and in fact somebody from
California a friend of mine also I'm
sorry to say that I'm bringing up people
I know because I can only bring up
people I know Alyssa nay if you talk to
her so she just took a position she was
at Davis which just took a position as
the chair chair of metaphysics but she's
a philosopher of quantum mechanics she's
edited a book on the W on W function
realism with David actually maybe or
maybe she was the only the editor I'm
not sure
well Barry we have run the gamut on the
introduction to the philosophy of
science of course we couldn't cover
everything in this period but it's been
absolutely excellent thank you so much
for taking the time and so thanks I'm
sorry we didn't do a standard course I I
put out a syllabus of a standard
philosophy of science course there a lot
of standard things we didn't talk about
because I don't teach it in quite a
standard way and we did talk about a lot
of things I'm interested in I had a time
so I'm looking forward to the next
round okay fun
