the the book uh Consciousness explosion
in a way is a similar theme to my friend
Ray cell's book The Singularity is near
right the sequel to his 2005 book
singulari is near and I guess at some
point KW or his mind upload will come
out with the singularities here right
and then and then then next will be like
Singularity passed by and here we are
doing the same old right but with
better gadgets so what I'm talking about
in the Consciousness explosion is
basically the path to the singularity
and Beyond but I'm I'm trying to take a
point of view more focused on states of
mind and experience than on the gadgets
and and and the underlying algorithms
and and Technology we've spoken a number
of
times um and yeah I wanted to hear about
the book although I saw on Amazon it's a
hundred bucks so well this paperback is
cheaper I think but yeah the the color
version is more expensive but there's
also there's a free pdf you can download
from the Consciousness explosion.
website so you can get the book for free
and the Kindle version is 10 bucks or
something so there's a there's that
information the information is made to
be free but if you if you want a big fat
book with a lot of pretty color pictures
it just still cost money for ink that's
all could you start by introducing
yourself and give some of your
background and a list of the various
projects sort of in the order of their
importance yeah I'm uh Ben gzel I'm
originally a mathematician but I've been
doing AI since the Late Late 1980s since
long before it became such a popular
thing to do I I introduced the term and
concept of AGI in I guess 2005 in a book
titled artificial general intelligence
and I I've been working on both R&amp;D
aimed at building general intelligence
and applications of AI in diverse
vertical markets over many decades among
various other things I led the software
team behind Sophia who was the first
robot citizen humano robot made from uh
Hansen robotics in Hong Kong where I was
Chief scientist for for a number of
years since 2017 I've been CEO of
Singularity net which is the the leading
blockchainbased platform for
decentralizing AI and we've recently
done a toonomic merger of Singularity
net with two other blockchain AI
projects Fetch and ocean making me now
the CEO of the ASI Alliance the
artificial super intelligence uh
Alliance so that's a a sampling of
sampling some of the things I'm I'm
engage engaged with now I'm also dealing
with a lot of applica AI application
projects we see uh behind me on the wall
the desd Demona robot who uh is the lead
lead singer of The desdemona's Dream
band where where I play the keyboards
and we've got a lot of uh AI generated
singing and uh music and and so forth
going on so now yeah it's a incredible
time to be in the AI field right both in
terms of AGI R&amp;D and and in terms of
just applying AI to all sorts of
practical things yeah I I you know we
have spoken before I don't know if you
remember but I'm I'm a bit of a skeptic
on uh on
Sophia's contributions to AI I think
it's uh it creates more confusion than
anything but we we talked about that
last time um it on the I'm interested in
the book because um I've I've been
talking to people I had Stuart Hammer
off you know who's working on
microtubules uh with Roger Penrose or
wrote a book on it with Roger yeah yeah
I I know I know Stuart moderately well
I've met Roger a couple times and also
James tag and others from penr Institute
and so I fairly
familiar yeah of thinking yeah yeah I
wanted to hear uh your thought on and
and uh unfortunately I haven't read the
book uh but I wanted to hear your
thoughts on well first of all the
premise of the book if you can tell us
the premise of the book uh but then uh
on on all of this talk about uh
Consciousness uh
surrounding uh artificial intelligence
which has caused a lot of excitement and
again a lot of confusion
yeah I mean the concept of Consciousness
has caused a lot of
confusion even setting aside artificial
intelligence it's hard it's hardly
surprising the intersection of
Consciousness with with AGI should
confuse people even even more I mean we
don't have a solid
understanding scientifically of what
Consciousness is right so we I mean we
don't we don't have a scientific
reputation of solipsism of the idea that
only I am a conscious being and all the
rest of you are just simulate put here
to alternatingly amuse and annoy me
right so I mean when we we we don't have
Consciousness even nailed down in the
human or animal or plant realm right so
I mean does a does a tree hurt when you
chop it Down Right does a fish hurt when
you hook it the best definition and I
can't remember who came up with it but
uh that it's Consciousness is what it's
like to be something like what is it
like to be a bat I think that right
right but then you you had quite
renowned people like Daniel Dennis
saying well that's all a bunch of
rubbish and the whole concept should be
should be thrown out right so I mean
it's a I'm just
saying it's a deep topic I have my own
fairly strongly held views on it but it
is it is an resolve topic from the
standpoint of scientific consensus even
outside of the AI domain so then when
you introduce AI I mean all the
confusion about
Consciousness propagates over to the ai
ai domain right so I mean you you have
people like dennet was who who who are
like well the human
brain is in essence a biological
automaton and it uses his language of
Consciousness to describe some things
that it's doing but this whole notion of
Quia and
experience is a bunch of blah blah blah
pretty much and then you have folks who
are pans psychist which is more the
direction I go in who think everything
in the universe has some right element
of of Consciousness which is just
manifested differently in different
kinds kinds of of systems and then I
mean then then you have folks like
Hammer off and Penrose yeah they think
conscious experience is a real thing
it inheres only in certain kinds of
matter and not others and then they have
a
particular rather outd their theory of
What kinds of matter can can
manifest Consciousness like you need
special quantum gravity Dynamics to
manifest itself in BIO nanot yeah say
the philosopher Galen straon who you're
probably familiar with he he is has a
book called physicalism and tals pan
psychism where he's arguing if you
believe the world is physical and
everything is physical then you should
believe everything is conscious and he
tries to argue that any other position
is logically untenable which on the one
hand I like his argument on the other
hand I'm not that much a materialist I I
don't believe everything is is is
physical in like a strong met
foundational sense anyway but all that
confusion propagates into the AI world
so then people are like well no robots
are just machines just like people
people are machines they have
Consciousness in the exact same
meaningless sense that that that people
do right then then you have other people
saying well all particles are conscious
so why aren't the particles inside
machines just as conscious as the
particles inside humans then you have
other people saying no only certain
kinds of matter can be conscious and it
just happens that humans have that kind
of matter and computers in their current
form don't but maybe a quantum computer
or quantum gravity super computer will
and all
this all this is interesting pretty much
all that philosophizing goes on off to
the side and Meanwhile we're building AI
systems with greater and greater levels
of of of
capability but
then even once you get to an AI system
which appears to have human or
superhuman
capability that won't necessarily
resolve all these questions either right
but there are many views on it it's like
what Roger Penrose believes is that you
will never get human level creativity
and insight based on a digital computer
Penrose believes that requires some as
yet poorly specified quantum gravity
Voodoo manifesting itself in in in in
how the brain works now many others
believe you could get superhuman
creativity in a digital computer but it
would still have no experience right and
so these these are all points of view
that are are out there and
I have my own positions or
intuitions but we don't have scientific
proof of any of it yeah and I'm more
confident I know I'm more confident I
know how to build a thinking machine
with superhuman capability yeah then I
am that I understand the nuances of how
Consciousness interacts with or
manifests itself from from matter like
it seems like we're going to discover a
lot about that in the next few decades
yeah well what what's the book about
then the the conscious explosion yeah
well that's a different topic yeah yeah
yeah so all this is mentioned in the
book but it's not necessarily the theme
of the book so that the book uh
Consciousness explosion in a way is a
similar theme to my friend Ray cell's
book The Singularity is
near right the sequel to his 2005 book
Singularity is near and I guess at some
point Kur wild or his mind will come out
with the singularities here right and
then and then uh then next will be like
uh Singularity passed by and here we are
doing the same old right but with
better gadgets so what what I'm talking
about in the Consciousness explosion is
basically the path to the singularity
and Beyond but I'm I'm trying to take a
point of view more focused on states of
mind and experience than on the gadgets
and and and the underlying algorithms
and and Technology I mean the underlying
technology for building AI of course is
what I spend most of my time on right I
mean it's important it's highly
technical but it's it's it's it's key
but I mean you could look at the
internet similarly in both ways like
there's internet technology I mean
there's all the amazing Gap agry inside
this phone that lets it make a nice
screen and and lets it send information
to him from satellites there's satellite
technology right there's protocols on
the other hand there's the
internet as a social and psychological
thing as an experience for people to
interact with and and build cultures in
and that depends on the underlying Tech
but it's also in a way a different topic
than than the underlying Tech right so
what what I'm trying to look at in the
conscious explosion
is what kinds of Mind systems are we
building what kind of mind systems are
they going to grow into what kind of
mind systems are we becoming how does
our own State of Mind individually in
culturally how does it influence the
artificial Minds that that we're
building and and and the path of the of
of the singularity as it as it unfolds
right and so this is this is really a
perspective on a bunch of things that
I've talked about at at Great length in
in in in media over the over the last
few years including AGI versus narrow AI
super intelligence and decentralized
versus versus centralized Ai and so
forth because if you if you look
at current commercial AI systems being
built by big tech
companies as mines it's pretty scary
like we're building a bunch of
Proto AGI autistic Psychopaths pretty
much which are like they're concerned
with only one thing maximize eyeballs
maximize Revenue ma maximize profit they
don't care about anything else besides
that they interpret all data relative to
their one particular goal they're also
built without much focus on modeling
themselves and understanding who they
are or understanding who they're
interacting with or like building an ey
thou bond with who they're interacting
with right so we're building some very
particular kinds of Minds in big tech
companies now they're where they're
autistic
Psychopaths focused on
spying selling people stuff they don't
need killing people who happen to live
in a different country plag plagiarizing
stuff and helping Wall Street to steal
people's money right so I mean we're
we're building digital autistic
Psychopaths focused on a few
particular ways
of accumulating certain sorts of of of
resources and we're doing this mediated
by corporations which are also probably
autistic Psychopaths if you if you
psychoanalyze the corporations but I
mean most corporations are psychopaths
by Design right I mean they're only
concerned with maximizing shareholder
value and and everything else you
have the notion of a b Corporation
in the US which is supposed to balance
benefit with profit maximization and
China is quite different I mean big
companies by Design are supposed to
benefit the common good as interpreted
by the CCP as well as making money for
themselves
so yeah Andes to that right but then you
can look at what states of
Mind people are in when creating these
sorts of AI systems and what sorts of
Mind interacting with these AI systems
put us in right like it which is
quite sort
of resonant with the State of Mind in
the AIS themselves like if you look at
AI for running social networks I mean
they tend to fractionate people they
tend to focus you on buying stuff you
don't need and on rallying Up Your
Righteous in indignation and like
whatever emotion will keep you glued to
that Facebook page for for for as for as
long as possible so that's
that's psychology of the current AI
industry and the people in involved in
it so then you can ask what sort of
Singularity will this lead to what other
sort of AI could we be building
resonating with what other states of
human consciousness and what other sorts
of
Singularity could be evolved yeah well I
mean you you're talking about building
minds and that's why I was I mean your
book is about the conscious there's it's
titled Consciousness explosion that's
why I was asking about yeah yeah
Consciousness I mean why are you using
the word mind if you don't believe that
uh a neural network no matter how big
could become conscious I personally
believe
that every elementary particle has its
own spark of of Consciousness so I I
tend to be pretty strongly
P pan psychist and I I I believe Sten
and other philosophers that this is
pretty much the only consistent and
coherent way to think about
Consciousness and of course it's a line
of thinking with a long history you can
look at say the Buddhist logicians Digga
and dharmakirti from the Middle Ages
laid out a whole theory of Mind based on
the rational psychist view a a long a
long time ago so to me that's sort of
the only coherent premise I know how to
begin with but it doesn't solve
everything like it could still be that I
mean okay if if a coffee cup has its own
species of
Consciousness okay but it may be a very
simplistic species of Consciousness
that's boring from relative to a human
being right so so then that still
doesn't answer you in what sense does a
coffee cup feel pain when you cut it in
half because you could have some forms
of Consciousness that don't feel pain
like like a person with pain a symbia
right or a very muted sort of pain and
it does that pan psychism in itself
doesn't tell you whether a digital
computer that appears to be more aware
and generally intelligent than a person
is having the same sort of experience
that that a person is right so I mean
the I I I I do think everything is
conscious but I think that's only a
starting point to to in invest
investigating Consciousness right it's
not it's not in the finishing point but
I also suspect
that if you have a digital system that
has the same sort of emergent patterns
in its structure and Dynamics as a
person has I suspect it will have the
same flavor of conscious experience that
that that a person has I mean it seems
Seems like by far the most
straightforward hypothesis I I'm just
saying
that's an intuition of mine I could I've
written a bunch about it in this book
and elsewhere I wouldn't say it's nailed
down scientifically in the way that
we've nailed down that like okay the
stars are probably not Angels flying
around they're probably giant balls of
fire right like we or plasma at least so
I mean we we
haven't we haven't nailed down theories
of
Consciousness to that to that level yet
so I mean there may be there may be some
some big surprises right and it'll be
interesting to explore them I think
we're going to do experiments with brain
brain interfacing and brain computer
interfacing which should be quite
informative like what happens if you
literally wire your brain into the
digital neural network of an AI system
versus wiring your brain into a neuroid
grown in a vat right like what's the
different subjective sense that you get
while carrying out these these brain
machine interfacing experiments I mean I
think this this should be quite
informative in a sort of mix of an
intuitive and and and scientific way and
we'll be able to do that during during
the coming decades right so that there's
going to be a lot of
new input coming in to form our our
particular theories of of of
Consciousness and
that's well yeah yeah yeah go on well so
of I mean the the the question of
Consciousness aside because I have to
say if you say a coffee cup has some
form of Consciousness I think pretty
much drain the word of any real meaning
well why I mean a coffee cup is in
everything around us is in space and
time space and time spatial and temporal
properties are imminent in everything
that doesn't mean space and time have no
meaning I look at Consciousness just
like spatiality and temporality the
these are aspects that each thing in our
universe has I they can have different
something has different spatial
locations has different positions in
time different things their
Consciousness can have different aspects
it doesn't mean it has no meaning I mean
at least that's how I look at it yeah uh
so on your AGI work um what what kind of
uh Paradigm are you pursuing I mean
there's been right now it's everything's
being built off
uh uh Transformer algorithms and and
neural Nets and back propagation and and
uh and all of that is that are you
following that model or not at all no I
mean
we're I'm using those systems but
they're not Central to my my AGI
architectures I mean I think I I I view
current large language models and other
deep neural Nets trained on huge bodies
of data as extreme ex interesting and
useful cataloges of human knowledge and
I mean the fact that you can synthesize
stuff out of these knowledge cataloges
is is amazing right I mean I mean I mean
I I I I I love working with with with
these these systems on the other hand I
I think they're doing something very
different than than a human mind is is
doing when it's thinking or or than a
AGI system really worthy of of the name
we'll be we be doing when it's when it's
thinking so I mean I think on the other
hand my intuition is you could automate
80 or 90% of the human economy using
using llms and and cnns and similar
technology so I mean I think it's a
there's a huge economic Revolution and
humanitarian Revolution that can happen
from these systems I don't think these
systems can ever be creative or original
in the way that people are that's just
not not what they're doing they're
combining a whole bunch of knowledge on
a surface level
on the other hand most economic activity
does not involve a great amount of
creativity or originality either right
most economic activity is RO and is
doing small variations on stuff that's
been done before so then I mean you can
automate it with these Technologies as
Hardware gets optimized and the software
is optimized that'll become cheaper than
having humans do this so from from a
business view I can totally see why
businesses want to focus on this
technology because it's there it works
you can scale it up you bring the price
down you can improve reliability and
then you can automate almost all of the
world economy so then in that sense why
would you worry about doing R&amp;D aimed at
automating the last 10% of the world
economy or or transforming Humanity in
some way right there's so much money to
be made and so much good to be done
right I mean I I think you could
automate so much medical research using
using llms and then I mean you can you
can automate Supply chains to deliver
deliver food to the impoverished like
there there's great stuff to do them
bottom line is though I mean they're so
far they're not agents like they don't
try to understand who they are and who
you are and what is their position in
the world and they don't abstract
knowledge very well they abstract
knowledge a little bit but they're
mostly just building surface level
indexes of detailed knowledge and I
think that making leaps of creative
generalization and Imagination making
leaps beyond your knowledge is done by
having abstracted your your knowledge
and and and and these systems aren't
doing that and agency and abstraction
come together in human Minds right like
we we form
abstractions not arbitrarily but we form
the abstractions of our detailed
knowledge that will help us achieve our
goals as an agent in in in the world and
help us maintain our boundaries and
existence as an agent in the world help
us grow and develop as an agent in the
world right the the need to grow develop
survive achieve goals is what drives us
to make mostly appropriate abstractions
we then use these abstractions to drive
creative generalization right and all
that stuff is missing in current llms
and you can't just wrap an llm in like
an agent rapper people tried that with
baby AGI and so forth right after gbg3
came out you can't just wrap an LM in an
agent architecture and have it be an
actual agent in in in the the way in the
way that that people are I mean you need
a whole different way to think about
knowledge and the representation be
knowledge memory and and and and
learning and so forth so yeah we're in
the opencog hyperon project which is my
main attempt to build
AGI we are taking a quite different
approach I mean we start in way from
Human cognitive science and the
different kinds of memory and reasoning
that the human mind seems to have like
epep EP episodic memory declarative
memory procedural memory
working versus midterm versus long
long-term memory and the different sorts
of goals and different time scales that
we have but then we we're not trying to
emulate precisely how the brain works
instead we're taking the different key
types of memory and learning and
reasoning and processing seem to be done
in the human mind and we're realizing
these using a diversity of mathematical
and computer science algorithm so on the
software level we have a large
distributed Knowledge Graph or knowledge
metagraph more properly and we we
represent both perception action
reasoning learning different types of
memory as different sorts of
organization within this large
distributed Knowledge Graph which can
then rewrite and modify itself in the
course of its thinking and we then we
then have a blockchain software layer
that lets this whole Knowledge Graph run
on a decentralized network of machines
without any Central owner owner or or
controller now you you can have
Transformer type stuff in there as as
part of that because these networks are
very good at recognizing patterns in in
data right but but in our approach
recognizing patterns in data is not the
whole thing and you can if you look at
something called the common model of
cognition that was put out there by Paul
Rosen Blum and John L and others who
have been sort of good oldfashioned AI
guys even longer than me they try to
articulate what are the key aspects of
human cognitive science that we need to
put into an AI if we want to be
humanlike and you can see that current
deep neural net systems being used in
the commercial world I mean they cover
only a quite small percentage of the
different kinds of things that seem to
happen in in inside inside the human
mind but we are so relative to this
deepener on net
approach we're pretty far out there
relative to penr and Hammer off I mean
we're we're building stuff in digital
computers so in I mean in in that sense
we're relatively close to the mainstream
we're acting under the premise that by
putting s on a large distributed
decentralized network of digital
computers we can create something that
thinks better than people now I mean
I've done a bunch of work in Quantum
Computing Theory too so I think once we
have like qpu we have Quantum processing
units to plug in on our server Farms I
mean I think we can upgrade many of
these algorithms in in a very
interesting way like it's not that I
think that won't contribute something
but I I think it's probably not
necessary to get superhuman general
intelligence and probably not necessary
to
get intensive subjective experience in
in in in the AI either although the
latter part again is is a bit less
certain since we don't have a real
theory of of experience yeah so uh
the knowledge let's start with the
knowledge graph how do you build this
knowledge graph your business is ready
to launch but what's the most important
thing to do before those doors open
getting more social media followers or
actually legitimizing and protecting the
business you've been busy building make
it official with Legal Zoom as a
business owner traditional Legal
Services come with major stick shock
getting registered or talking to an
attorney shouldn't have to cost you so
much well thankfully today's sponsor
Legal Zoom created a better way to start
and stay in business from initial
formation to one to1 legal consultation
I've used Legal Zoom for over 10 years
and it's kept me compliant they have
everything you need to launch run and
protect your business all in one place
setting up your business properly and
remaining compliant are things you want
to get right from the get-go but you
don't have to strain your brain or
wallet Legal Zoom saves you from wasting
hours making sense of the legal stuff at
legal zoom.com you can take care of
business legal needs in just a few
clicks and if you need some Hands-On
help their network of experienced
attorneys from around the country has
your back launch run and protect your
business to make it official today at
legalzoom.com and use promo code Smith
10 to get 10% off any Legal Zoom
business formation product excluding
subscriptions and
renewals this offer expires at the end
of the year get everything you need from
setup to success at legalzoom.com and
use promo code smith1 that's SMI
T10 legalzoom.com and use promo code
Smith 10
smi1 oh for me I mean there are two ways
or three I guess the number one way has
to be from experience just from
perception of of the world I mean
percepts come into the graph patterns
are recognized in in those percepts and
you have the formation of a hierarchy
and hierarchy of patterns inside that
Knowledge Graph but you can also form a
knowledge graph from Reading text and we
use llms for that so we we uh we use
prompting and fine-tuning of Open Source
large language models to build knowledge
graphs from existing text and from
existing structures data so we have a
huge like bio Knowledge Graph that we
got from a bunch of biology data sets
and bio ontologies and so forth and you
can you can cross link all these all
these things together I mean you you
could build a purely experiential
Learning System that just buils its
Knowledge Graph from low-level
perception and we we're we're
experimenting with that a bit actually
but it seems like if you take the view
that there's an AGI race going on and
your competitors are trillion dollar
companies you may be able to advance
Faster by taking direct experience and
combining it together with with h graphs
you can download and sort of cross
linking it all in the distributed system
yeah and and so how how are you
uh on the on
the direct
experience uh
accumulation uh you're talking about
cameras yeah yeah yeah actually let me
uh let me let me briefly introduce you
to one of one of my friends here
here here in the office so we've uh
we've got this little guy here for for
example so this is a this is a in
progress version of one of our one of
our mind children robots that that we're
we're building here in our little office
in in in this seatt area so I mean we
I've been working with Hansen robotics
for uh for for a long time as as you
know so we had the Sophia robot des
deona and so forth and we're we're we're
still working with with with the the
larger humanoid robots from Hansen
robotics which is great but I I wanted
something smaller and simpler that I
could just have in my house or classroom
or and recharges itself when it runs out
of power like like a Roomba and is a a
little smaller and simpler to deal with
than the Hansen robots so yeah I I don't
think you need a humanlike robotic and
Environ embodiment necessarily to get to
human
level AGI I mean that robot I just
showed you we'll have a human-like face
somewhat similar to a Hansen robot when
when it's when it's all all put together
but I don't think you need that for you
don't need that for human level AGI on
the other hand it's very convenient
right because we're trying to teach the
robot ourselves as humans so to the
extent that the robot is embodied in the
same world that that we're embodied in
on a sort of pragmatic basis the
communication pipeline you know both
content wise and emotionally and self
and other modeling wise like it's clear
if the robot is right like right they're
in your house while you play with your
kids and and and your your your dog and
right there right there in the classroom
so I think there's something to be
gained from that we also have a virtual
environment though called sophiae and
we're building a sort of AGI preschool
in there so some things you can get from
robots that are hard to get in the
virtual world some things are easier to
get in the virtual world because virtual
characters are more capable than than
than current robots and then there's
there's a lot of learning Ani system can
do by proving math theorems or analyzing
biology data sets and doing doing other
things that are not so so much similar
to the way human interfaces with with
the world right but U for the direct
experience so you you have a robot has
cameras for eyes it presumably it's got
microphones for ears yep some some
hoptics we got some htic yeah some skin
too that's right yeah yeah uh for for
touch and and as it U manipulates
objects or moves around within an
environment what's happening with that
data stream that's coming
in well what what we're doing right now
we're feeding that data stream into into
deep neural networks and then those deep
neural networks are connected with the
the open Cog
hyperon Knowledge Graph so we can and I
mean it gets technical but I mean we can
we can
represent parts of the torch compute
graph for the neural net as nodes and
symbolic nodes and links in in in inside
the the opencog atom space Knowledge
Graph and then patterns of activation
patterns of activity in the Deep neural
network are then represented as nodes
and links in the symbolic system so the
the approach to perception is heavily
neural symbolic and similarly on the
action side so to train a particular
action like a hand picking up some
object we're using deep reinforcement
learning to train train a neural network
but then that that reinforcement
learning network is linked into this
symbolic Network which deals with higher
level planning so like if if the robot
is planning to go into the other room
and get something and bring it back to
you that planning happens on the
symbolic level but the specific
movements in the arms or the head is is
done by a neural net trained by Deep
reinforcement learning and then we have
some unique ways to connect what happens
in inside these deep neural networks
what happens inside the symbolic
Knowledge Graph and which is I think you
could do the perception and
action purely symbolically also if if if
you wanted to I mean there's no reason
that the you know the luminosity and U
on a pixel can't be represented as a
logical atom in a logical Knowledge
Graph it's just there's a certain degree
of matism here right like we we have
nicely working systems for arm movement
and visual and auditory perception due
to the amazing work of other people
these are deep neural networks right so
so why not why not just link these into
our symbolic not Knowledge Graph which
can do things that deep neur Nets are
not now good at and use deep neural nets
for what they are good at and I mean
this this comes as highlights the point
that there's going to be a lot of
different ways to make AGI systems right
like I while I'm not working on neural
net centered systems now I totally think
you could make a human level AGI putting
together a bunch a bunch of different
formal neural networks I mean that's
what Deep Mind is trying to do I I don't
I don't see why that wouldn't work it's
not what interests me most for a couple
reasons like I I I think that you know
neurons and neural networks evolve to be
very efficient on biolog iCal wetwear
and they're not necessarily the
cleverest way to leverage modern
Computing Hardware which is quite
different than biological wetwear I also
think humans are not that good at
reasoning in in the end we're not that
good at ethics either we're wildly
inconsistent so so I mean I mean I mean
I think it's interesting to make a
system
that empathizes with humans and
resonates emotionally with humans but
can do science and math
at a much higher level than human human
beings can and this this this is a big
disagreement with me and penro we
mentioned earlier in the conversation
like he thinks the quantum gravity
Voodoo in the brain makes us better than
any digital computer at doing
mathematics and I I'm almost sure that's
exactly opposite from the truth like I
think what's happening in the human
brain is really cool but I mean I I
think that digital computers are going
to be tremendously better than us at
mathematics in the same way they're now
tremendously better than us at at chess
and and and and go right I mean math is
also a formal manipulation game I'll be
a much bigger and and and more more
flexible one so I I don't I mean
emulating exactly how a human brain
works is really really interesting right
it's a computational neuroscience
problem and I think we we'll be better
off to have some advances in brain
Imaging before we full on attack that
that that problem building a super AGI
doesn't necessarily require us to
emulate EXA exactly what's happening in
the human brain I mean anym than
building a jet requires us to exactly
emulate what happens in in in an eagle's
wing which we still don't fully
understand yeah uh so so you you've got
this this data flowing in and you're
you're building this
ever increasing Knowledge
Graph uh of of representations these are
are vectors in effect that that that
you're getting from the data stream that
are that I would calling them vectors is
not is
not quite right although you can you can
embed them as as vectors but I mean it's
it's weighted labeled nodes and links
right and that they can
be
there's links going between nodes you
have link going between two three four
five or 100 nodes you have links going
to Links or subgraphs you can have Types
on the links in the sense of functional
programming languages you could also
have Victoria labels on links but it's
it's not primarily a vector-based model
though and then what happens so you're
building you are building that now that
that gra you have that yeah yeah and
then do you have a a a model then that
that queries that graph and
and and calculates answers out of it and
what's that model it's it there there
are multiple but yeah I mean so we we
have
a we have our own AI programming
language called meta with two T's me TTA
which is meta type talk and know also
means loving kindness and some species
of Buddhism so this programming language
is basically isomorphic to the knowledge
metagraph itself right so and then so
you can use that as a query language
like like uh neo4j Cipher graph query
language or something but we have a
probabilistic logic engine called PLM
probabilistic logic networks and you can
you can make queries of the knowledge
graph and it will do some probalistic
and fuzzy high order logic reasoning to
try try to come up with with with
answers to your queries now if if it
can't find the answer though then your
it scks for creating new Concepts Say by
blending together existing Concepts or
you can do evolutionary learning like a
sort of probabilistically enhanced
genetic programming you can use
evolutionary learning to learn new
patterns and and procedures the data
that feeds the evolutionary learning is
in the knowledge graph the the programs
and patterns learned by Evolution are in
the knowledge graph The evolutionary
algorithm itself is just another chunk
of of Knowledge Graph also right so you
can you can do problemistic fuzzy
reasoning to answer questions then you
can do various sorts of concept creation
and pattern recognition things to try to
build new knowledge to to be accessed by
the probalistic reasoning engine that
tries to answer your questions and then
there's there's an explicit motivational
system where there's a certain set of
goals and the system is expanding a
certain percent of its resources trying
to learn procedures that it
probabilistically Ally believes will
help it achieve its goals in the current
context and not all of the Dynamics is
goal driven some of it some of it goal
driven some is just spontaneous node and
Link building and act activation
spreading and so forth so at that level
we're roughly trying to
emulate human and animal motivational
systems but not not in every precise
detail because I think in some ways that
will be undesirable I I don't I don't
want a super AI that behaves that
behaves ex exactly exactly like a human
right and then yeah there's subtle
questions here like do you let the
system replace its top level goals as it
gets smarter or not right I mean I mean
the system
certainly would allow that the top level
goals are just cognitive content in the
knowledge graph along with everything
else and what's the interface that
you're using uh to to interact with this
system is it is it a a
web-based uh text box is it at the most
fundamental level the
interface is programmatic right I mean
the interface is meta code is is code in
our own language and then you have a you
have a shell and you you can you can
interface via that programming shell
much like in in in list or something on
the other
hand of course there's a variety of
other interfaces you can you can build I
mean you can have you can have a natural
language interface which is is basically
chatting with an llm which is then
connected to the knowledge graph on on
the back end right and so you can you
can do that and or you can have a robot
robot interface or or or V virtual
character virtual character interface or
something so I mean again fundamentally
for a Transformer neural net like
a chat gbt or l or something the
fundamental interface there is you feed
a sequence of tokens and then it outputs
a probabilistically weighted set of next
tokens right and that's the core
interface then on top of that they use
instruction tuning to build this this
this dialogue system right so our our
core interface is not next
token prediction our core interface is
just running scripts in The Meta
programming l language which is
isomorphic to to the graph but then you
can build a lot of different end user
interfaces on top of that have you are
there I mean is this something that that
um that that people can can interact
with that you have we've not rolled this
out as a product yet no that's it's alha
I don't mean as a product but as a as a
you know as a something that that that
people can see can see and and intera
act with uh just not yet I mean it's
open source code so for developers yeah
developers could download it download
and interact with the system but we we
haven't made a public end user interface
to the
thing yet mostly for performance reasons
so we have the Alpha version of the soog
hyperon system and we don't most of the
work between Alpha and beta is massively
speeding up and decreasing the resource
utilization of of the back end because
right now it just runs slowly and takes
huge amount of resources so if you open
it up you would need to dedicate a
server a number of servers to each
person who's interacting with it but we
we're we're making good progress I mean
our current current
uh new prototype version of The Meta
language interpreter is like a million
times faster than than the public Alpha
version right so I mean I think we're we
should be by early next year we should
have a vastly more performant version of
all this infrastructure which will then
obviously like that's when that's when
the research gets super super
interesting right because then then
because right now we can either have a
large Knowledge Graph or we can have
fast interaction but we can't have both
and I think we will have solved that by
sometime around the end the end of this
year and then then we're sort of off off
off to the races right and it's been
like two years of work just building
this infrastructure for this new version
of of O of opencog because we had an AI
project like we started opencog in 2008
based on code that was around since 2001
or
something we did a lot of interesting
research about the backends of some
commercial systems including parts to
the back end of the Hansen robots and
some stuff in biology and financial
trading and blah blah
blah but you know we couldn't scale it
up to the level that Transformers are
scaled up yeah so we we like we've been
spending two years working on building
scalable infrastructure so we can
explore the
hypothesis then when we take this open
Cog flavor of AI and run it at a gp4
like scale like then we can get amazing
unprecedented things to happen because
because that is one of the big lessons
from LMS right like you take some old
stuff tweak it a little bit R it massive
scale and it does way better things
so we have some reasons to believe that
could work with our flavor of AI also
that when you just start running it on a
massively bigger scale it will start to
do a lot of more interesting things also
yeah and how are you uh financing all
this I I remember you guys did
a a uh
token sell yeah yeah back in
2017 or
something yeah we're financing all this
work primarily via tokenomics and and
and the and the cryptocurrency world so
yeah I mean we we still have the the
liquid token that was the AGI token we
did we did it I4 in 2017 we've now
merged Singularity net token with the
tokens of fetch.ai and ocean prot the
new a ASI token and then we have some AI
Services running on Singularity net
platform that you pay to use them in you
pay to use them in in in the the ASI
token and we we then have some spin-off
projects using this decentralized AI
platform for things in decentralized
finance and medicine and so forth we do
also we have a traditional for-profit
company called true AGI which has raised
a bit of equity investment and is is
aimed at wrapping up open hyperon for
for the for the Enterprise so there's
there's some of that like
traditional Venture investment aimed at
the SAS products but the majority of the
financing is from the cryptocurrency
world and then of course all this is
open source and we have some element of
just random AGI Enthusiast contributing
to the to the code base also but yeah
we've we've managed to do this all
open source and fully decentralized by
sort of bypassing the putting Silicon
Valley VCS and and and such at at the
center of it which was was important to
me like I'm I'm an old school open open
source zeell
it yeah and the how how big was that Ico
and then of
course you know cryptos crashed shortly
after that and I I've never I remember
thinking of you when
when uh cryptocurrencies uh sort of
deflated uh well they've gone up and
down many times since then it's a very
volatile Market yeah yeah I mean I mean
all all AI crypto tokens went up in
price considerably when chat GPT came
out actually so since since that time
has been a more favorable time for for
AI oriented cryptocurrencies but I mean
we've we've basically kept our AI team
fed and productively working through the
ups and downs of the of the of the
crypto markets I mean that was that was
a like $36 million token sale in in
2017 I guess but I mean that that's
that's ancient history we've had a whole
lot of other other crypto token things
both good and bad happen happen since
that point in time yeah but then do you
uh do you you when as you need Capital
do you uh
convert uh your your crypto currency to
US dollars or whatever we can do that I
mean not that many US Dollars involved
because our team is mostly not in in in
us and many many developers are happy to
be paid in crypto tokens for the work
they do so you you don't you don't
always need to convert to to to to Fiat
money either yeah that's fascinating so
yeah I mean what do you what do you want
uh listeners to to take away this
there's one one
other brief point I didn't get to make
about Consciousness which I'll take 30
seconds or a minute to make so I outline
what I see is the state of consciousness
of current corporate AI systems and and
the human State of Consciousness that
they tend to lead to so my perspective
is if to the extent that Humanity can
shift to a more open peaceful and
compassionate State of Consciousness
which we humans manage to do sometimes
right I mean you can you can meditate it
can help you get there but there's
there's there's no magic bullet for it
but of course humans at our best we can
be compassionate lovable open-minded
nonattached wonderful creatures right
and the extent to which we can Verge
into these states of Consciousness and
Infuse this into the AI systems that way
we're building I think this will lead us
toward a happy Singularity to a far
more with a far higher probability like
we we want to infuse the AIS we're
building with our best selves with our
best states of mind with the most
wonderful joyous state of mind we can
get into when we gather together we
don't want to infuse the agis we're
building with the states of mind that we
get into when we're trying to defeat the
defeat the other team and deprive them
of all their resources manipulating them
into doing stuff that's not for their
own good right so we we we need to be
guiding ourselves into our best states
of Mind individually and collectively
and then interacting with AIS in in in
in this Vibe as we improve the the AI
technology and rolled out in different
applications and this is going to be
very very important for making the first
agis and super intelligences warm
compassionate beneficial open-minded
creatur I mean very much like when you
raise children and I've got five
children and one granddaughter like when
you when you raise children what you
tell them is one thing but if you if you
sort of emanate sort of an Ambiance of
kindness compassion and openness when
you're interacting with them when they
watch you interacting with others when
you're doing things together with them
this makes way more difference than any
rules you lay down and way more
difference than what you're telling them
to do right and that that's not what
we're doing in the AI industry right now
it is very much what what we should be
doing and uh I talk a lot more about
this in in the Consciousness explosion
like how do
we guide the AIS we're building into the
most positive sorts of State of
Consciousness that that we as as as the
human
species understand and that's the kind
of thing that's not being thought about
enough really because the AI industry is
is all about how does one company make
more money than than than another one
right and and that's
uh something to think about and you go
to the Consciousness
explosion. you can download the book for
free in PDF if onu way to the Kindle
hard cover or paperback versions also
take a look at my website ger.org or
singularitynet doio superintelligence
doio plenty of information uh on to to
follow up on other themes we've been
discussing today
