uh it's it's really exciting to uh have
the opportunity to chat with you
Bernardo uh so my background is in
computer science originally but I've
spent my time thinking about
evolutionary
biology and uh the algorithm of
evolution by natural selection that D
described and whether that is sufficient
to explain the biology and complexity of
life that we
observe and uh how that interacts or
doesn't with the agent of living
things
um so the
uh Mike and I have been talking recently
about the need for science to tell
better stories stories that don't
eliminate
meaning
uh they should be uh able
to uh describe the things that we're
interested in in a way that doesn't
eliminate the things which we were it
doesn't explain them away but actually
um you know allows them to um play
causal roles in things that
matter uh and the you know we don't want
to try and rewrite all of reductionism
and materialism we would leave that to
the philosophers but the uh the
particular areas where we potentially
have something to some knowledge about
is in Origins
stories what's what's the scientific
origin story at two different time
scales one origin story being over the
evolutionary time scale where evolution
by natural selection it's all about
survival of the genes it's all about
survival um and reproduction is one
origin story and it turns out that it
doesn't mean anything it's just that if
you survive then you do and if you don't
survive then you
don't um what persists exists and the
other time scale of development of a of
an individual organism coming into being
over developmental time I you when
that's it's all just one organic
molecule pushing and shoving another
organic molecule and there isn't really
any organism or you know at
all and then the other area uh is um
cognition um
where the reduction is the count is that
well you know there's nothing to see
here that's just neurons firing or it's
just algorithms
turning um but there's there's no um
holistic cognitive self that has any
agency any real
agency so we're interested in scientific
stories scientific narratives that don't
do that that don't eliminate what was
interesting about those those uh areas
of science that we were interested in
but also do a better job scientifically
of you know explaining the agency of
living things right right explaining how
development Works explaining how
Evolution works
right um in particular for example the
self-referential aspects of evolution
where evolutionary processes modify the
mechanisms of their own um their own uh
axioms like variation selection and
inheritance Modified by the organisms
that were supposedly created by the
process and changes in the level of
individuality where evolutionary units
are one level of organization become
Parts within an evolutionary unit at
another level of
organization and the higher level
couldn't exist if it wasn't made of the
lower levels but the low levels seem
sort of subservient to the high level
what's going on right we don't have good
scientific accounts of
that now I'm I'm interested to see to
hear your thoughts about how to connect
those areas in
particular cognition and
evolution with the idea
that um that the nature of reality isn't
material that the nature of reality is a
universal Consciousness a selective
field and that individuals are fragments
of
it um which totally makees sense to me
at the level that I'm able to understand
that um and in particular so like what's
the relationship between those um
fragments of universal Consciousness
those dis disassociated selves which has
a sort of cognition first aspect to it
or Consciousness first aspect to it
that's that's the
fundamental and then on this other kind
of story where we say yeah well although
the materialist world is just a that's
just an interface that's just what you
know a limited ability to perceive
what's there and the real stuff is
behind that
actually the Machinery
of molecule genes natural selection and
the rest of it evolved organisms with
their limited cognitive apparatus which
so far as they can tell um is interested
in things like survival and reproduction
and um sometimes that Machinery produces
entities which are cognitive which can
then reflect back on that which seems
like it was created out of the material
stuff as though cognition was a product
of the The evolutionary process so how
can we how can we reconcile I'm
interested in reconciling that story
where cognition is a process is a
product of a materialist process where
our cognitive selves are you know built
by the process of evolution by natural
selection versus a cognition first story
where um that's the prime mover that's
the thing that was there um Forever and
Always and and uh this materialist
instantiation is just
um a projection or an interface or
something onto that reality and does
that does does any of that perspective
make a difference to how we actually
understand how the biology Works within
that materialist framework that we share
when we do right or you know is this
just a just doesn't really make any
difference when when an idealist says um
Consciousness first
um the claim is that U it's the type of
existent Consciousness that is primary
it doesn't mean that um every higher
level cognitive function that we have
cataloged was there from the beginning
clearly an amoeba or a single cell
organism does not metac cognize does not
self-reflect does not
deliberate um and what that empirically
shows I think undeniably is that
not every cognitive function not every
higher level mental function is there
from the beginning otherwise amibas
would have existential
crisis they don't seem to do that so the
claim is not that all cognitive
functions were there from the get- go
the claim is that the ontological type
that we call Consciousness mental stuff
experiential stuff that is what was
there at the
beginning and then dissociation or life
happened because it can happen so given
enough time it was bound to happen now
dissociation is this process in mind
space that can happen and and so sure
enough it did and and the first living
beings or the first first dissociated
alars um the ones that could reproduce
are the ones there that are still around
and amongst those the ones that could be
more effective at surviving and
reproducing the ones that had higher
Fitness are the ones that are still
around and low and behold higher level
mental functions are very useful for
Fitness so they have evolved over time
so for me uh U um Evolution holds and
and evolution does account for higher
cognition for higher level mental
functions uh what it doesn't account for
is the
miraculous appearance
of experiential stuff out of stuff that
wasn't experiential to begin with it is
this ontological jump capturing the
heart problem um that uh that I think is
fallacious not uh the evolution of
cognition itself or the the the level of
cognition I think that clearly evolved I
don't think nature in its primordial
State before the evolution of Life had
features like metacognitions
self-reflection self-awareness
deliberation uh and all that I don't
think these were there from the
beginning I think these evolved because
either they were directly useful for
survival and reproduction or um they
compared with a side effects of other
things that were useful for survival uh
and
reproduction so there is a sense in
which I at least analytic idealism is
quite reductive
it's reductive in the original and pure
sense of the word which is how do we
account for complex things in terms of
simpler things what it doesn't do is two
things that our culture has come to
associate with reductionism but which in
fact have nothing to do with
reductionism which is the
misunderstanding that reductionism is
from the large to the small as opposed
to the complex to the simpler
um and the other thing we associate with
reductionism is what Jung called the
nothing but meaning that when you manage
to account for something complex in
terms of a simpler thing we have the the
tendency to say and that's all there is
to it there is nothing more to the thing
I'm accounting for than the properties I
have just accounted for in a
reductionist manner from the complex to
the simpler accounting for something
thing doesn't exclude the other things
accounting for one thing doesn't
automatically imply that you have
accounted for everything that is Salient
so uh I think this is what um an
idealist would be careful about not
mistaking what reductionism means and
not falling for the nothing but uh trap
that that Jung
described other than that it is pretty
much a reductionist evolutionary
approach to things m
so that so that
still leaves open the question for me
about whilst it might be whilst we might
um be happy with the idea that saying am
but don't have existential crisis and
that there are there was an evolution of
higher level mental functions which not
all living things
share um nonetheless the at the origin
of life
and before it all of the things that
we're talking about are part of uh
Universal Consciousness it's just that
they were tiny fragments that can't do
the same kind of cognitive gymnastics
that larger fragments can do right so
they're um they're you know of the same
Essence right if we imagine that they're
not like like they just don't have it
right that they um then as you say when
we get to the the the entities with
higher level cognitive functions that
are having existential crisis and
wondering about the nature of their
experience and pondering the hard
problem um you know we end up with this
hard problem where we can't connect
those two things but still how does the
how do the high level cognitive
functions that evolved which doesn't
require any experientialist right we can
tell a story about higher level
cognitive functions evolving because
they were useful for survival we can
tell that story without any experience
of
how does that connect with the
experience that we have as organisms
with high level cognitive functions have
an experience that does that have
anything to do with that story about
high how the higher level cognitive
functions came into being well the the
idealist would say um this problem
doesn't exist for us um because we do
not postulate anything other than
experiential States so if the starting
point if the states of the universe
immediately prior to a biogenesis were
already experiential States because
that's all there is then of course these
higher level cognitive functions are
built out of experiential States because
that was all there is there is nothing
else to ground these higher level mental
functions we can
abstractly uh conceive of cognitive
functions that do not entain
experiential States but that's a
theoretical abstraction um the point of
the idealist is that you do not need to
invent theoretically any state that
isn't experiential since experiential
states are nature's given it's what we
have before we start
theorizing um and and and that is enough
to account for everything so why are we
going to postulate something else to
account for nature when we can do that
based on the only ontological given the
only pre theoretical given if you accept
that the problem you're alluding to just
disappears this cognitive functions are
sensient because sensient is is all
there was is all there is everything
else is a theoretical abstraction that
may or may not be justified and the
idealist would say it's not justified at
all it creates an insoluble problem
doesn't explain anything and is
inflationary I think I think I'm I think
I'm what I'm reaching for or asking
about isn't just the hard problem it's
that
uh let's try given that we
are given given that our higher level
cognitive functions and the experience
that we have are not um not different
things there was there was never any way
to to have described high level
cognitive functions or anything that
wasn't built out of an of a subjective
field what does that knowledge mean
for I'm thinking about things like how
do agents How do organisms act as agents
how do we got that mechanistic
materialist
story for example that um we end up with
a story where it was our uh simpler
parts that caused our complex holes
instead of the other way around that our
complex holes were orchestrating our
simpler
Parts um and that
our reason for being comes from an
evolutionary process rather than we
created an evolutionary process as parts
of that uh subjective field created The
evolutionary process rather than the
other way
round I think I know where you're coming
from um most people
who uh hear about idealism and start
thinking about it against the background
of the mainstream
worldview immediately or tend to
immediately make the jump towards this
notion that um there was some plan
behind uh evolutionary history that
since it All Began in the mind in mind
space then evolution is somehow the
product of the deliberations or the
planning of that mind um but idealism
doesn't really need that that this would
be a form of
theism um under
idealism one at least under analytic
idealism one would be perfectly content
to say there was no deliberation at all
there was no plan at all um the the
original state of this field of
subjectivity did not entail any kind of
metacognition any kind of higher level
mental function that would allow for
deliberation
things just happened spontaneously just
like materialism would say things
happened because they could happen and
given enough time they were bound to
happen and so they did so it it's
entirely reconcilable with analytic
idealism to say there was no plan there
was no explicit
intention um not in the sense of
intentionality which just means
perception but in in the colloquial
sense of the word there was there wasn't
necessary barely any intention any
explicit motivation uh for what happened
um it could all have been entirely
naturalistic and
spontaneous and we have evolved higher
level recognition and the ability to
deliberate and plan and all that because
these things either were directly
relevant to Fitness or were side effects
of other cognitive abilities that were
relevant to Fitness and not because
there was some kind of universal tilos
now that said I personally suspect there
might have been a universal tilos but um
not a deliberate one a rather
instinctive one um you know um a
crocodile will instinctively look for
the sun when it needs to warm its
blood um is that a product of
deliberation I think most biologists
would say no it's an instinctive
theological thing
the crocodile does it because it has
evolved to have the mental dispositions
it has um so I am open to the
possibility that um mind at large or
that Universal field of
subjectivity um which is all there is
still may have had certain dispositions
because to be to have properties right
you are what you are instead of
something else you could conceivably be
so your being is defined by the
properties you have so that field of
subjectivity would have had properties
in psychological language you could have
you could say um there
were implicit archetypal templates
inherent in that field of subjectivity
in other words red dispositions to
certain behaviors certain mental
behaviors instinctive and spontaneous
and as they were and part of that may
have had a hand in evolution a blind
hand but a hand nonetheless a a bias a a
um a preferential Direction instinctive
and spontaneous I am personally open to
that but even if people who who even
people who aren't open to that analytic
idealism is still perfectly reconcilable
with a purely naturalistic unbiased
evolutionary process because essentially
what you have is a world made of States
just like materialists say uh but those
states are experiential as opposed to
being
abstract and and those states have
inherent dispositions they have
properties because they are what they
are as opposed to something else they
could conceivably be and therefore they
did what they did there is no higher
plan no overarching goal or theological
Arch it could have all been entirely
spontaneous and and this isn't
completely reconcilable reconcilable
with analytic idealism
I just happen to be personally open to
an instinctive Global tillos but that's
me the um did I hear you say that the
kind of deliberative deliberative
cognition that we
do one wouldn't
imagine that the universal subjective
field is doing that kind of deliberative
cognition did I hear you say that yeah I
think that is very
unlikely um I think that would be
unjustified
anthropomorphization of the universe
because why would it right we are Apes
it took four billion years to put us
together and and we are very recent two
300,000 years old modern humans sporting
and intellect are about 50 maybe 30
thousand years so we we are rose
yesterday blink of an ey ago after 4
billion years why would our modes and
capacities of cognition be the same as
nature in its raw State I think that's
incredibly unlikely um and if that were
the case if nature already had built-in
primary high level functions in it um
then an amoeba should have an
existential crisis but we have seen that
happen right if you you look down a
microscope these animals always look for
food and run away from danger and they
keep doing that until they that they
they die they don't they don't just
suddenly stop and and
meditate I don't know that we would look
if you were looking down a microscope at
us like but uh that's that seems
um let me gather my thoughts there a
little
uh that seems so I take your point that
you that the particular kind
of cognitive Machinery we have is
um only one particular corner of Life as
We Know It And so it would be weird to
imagine that the entire universe was
just like
us as if waiting for us to get there to
have a ation with uh on on the other
hand it also feels weird to imagine that
Universal Consciousness is dumber than
us and that we're somehow exceptional in
that story um I didn't say that
no I I think there can be tremendous
spontaneous intelligence look at savants
or even people with acquired Savant
syndrome um they do not have any
metacognitive insight into the
calculations they perform like there is
this guy was
truck had some some form of trauma and
now he can perform incredible
mathematical calculations in in the drop
of a hat um if you ask him how do you do
that we're expecting him to tell you a
series of introspective steps that he
follows through he would say no I just
know I just know the answer he would say
so that is a tremendous capacity to
process information in other words
intelligence that does not require any
kind of
introspective metacognitive function or
higher level mental functions it's all
done spontaneously so I wouldn't rule
out the possibility that um due to its
sheer size and complexity as reflected
in in the image we see the universe that
the original field of subjectivity prior
to dissociation had a tremend in this
data processing capacity in other words
is incredibly intelligent despite not
having higher level mental functions of
the of the metacogn metacognitive type
um so I'm pretty open to that but I
think it's at least extraordinarily
difficult to argue that it had the
metacognitive functions from the get-go
even you know if you look
at the the the the high level structure
of the physical universe according to
the latest uh uh simulations
cosmological
simulations um it it does look like a
Maman brain surprisingly enough if you
do a spatial FIA
transform know the the distribution of
matter Across the Universe including
dark matter is in terms of network
structure is just like a Maman brain
Franco vat and Alberto Fetti have been
studying this for the past many years
they have astounding results you can
find it in a peer-reviewed literature so
that that suggest tests that just like
us there is there is processing there is
mental processing going on in the
universe as a whole not only my M and
brains but if you take into account the
speed of light limit there is no way
that um there are closed Loops of
information integration at that large
Universal scale the universe is too big
and expanding too fast and the speed of
L speed of light limit is too low uh for
any kind of reenter Loop of information
integration to have happened and
everything we know about math cognition
and the science of Consciousness today
tells us that there is no consciousness
without re-entering Loops at least no
metacognitive Consciousness in other
words reportable experience not only
experience that is there but the
experience that the subject knows is
there and therefore can report so I
think metacognition is is very unlikely
but intelligence broadly defined no I I
think that that there is such a thing as
spontaneous instinctive intelligence and
you don't think the difference between
those two you think that the difference
between those two is real and not just a
frame of reference right I think it's
very real I I I think I think clinically
it's impossible to deny that that it's
real I think Savant syndrome shows us
that it is real you can you can perform
incredible Feats of intelligence without
even an iota of metacognitive Insight of
what you're
doing but you can also as it were uh
zoom in a little zoom in a little on uh
somebody that's reporting metacognitive
experience and all you see is something
that appears to
be um a non- metacognitive flow of
information around a network right that
doesn't that isn't you know where do you
where inside you find the metacognition
if you step back and you see the system
as a whole in this context then you see
the metacognition but as you step in uh
it's there yes we we do not have a
satisfying Theory um to conceptualize
that right now that that is correct I
was talking to Julia tonon the other day
exactly about this trying to figure out
a path forward I can tell you what
julius's hypothesis is but please don't
quote me because he didn't publish it
and now when people are still
discussing this um the hypothesis is
that
um there
are there is a particular type of mental
state associated with the prefrontal
cortex um that is able to mirror other
mental states to create a sort of a re-
representation another another copy of
other mental States but in a separate
Loop of introspection and that is then
what we call conscious metacog ortion or
metac conscious Consciousness it's the
ability to re represent our own mental
contents in metaal Contents or re
representations which is then what we
report we report the re
representations there can even be this
alignment between the two as Jonathan
schoer showed 22 years ago they can even
be dissociated in other words your your
re
representation can can be distinct from
the original experi you can sort of fool
yourself metacognitively
um so that's the hypothesis we have uh
going forward because re-entrant Loops
are necessary to even explain a unified
experience according to integrated
information Theory so for a
metacognitive experience uh you need
something more than just reentrance
loops and Julia's hypothesis is it's the
different kind of state associated with
the prefrontal cortex that has this
mirroring capacity this re
representation capacity um but
regardless of whether we have a good
theory a good conceptual account or
not uh um I think it is experimentally
and even clinically established that
there is a distinction between
Consciousness and metaconsciousness raw
experiential States and re
representations they can even be
dissociated like I said Jonathan
schooler showed so on an empirical basis
I think it's there the question is do we
understand it enough to create a sort of
internally consistent theoretical model
that has some explanatory power for that
the jury is still out I think so so the
the the conscious States metacognitive
or not how do they um make a difference
to the mechanisms of the biology as we
know
them are they you know are they if does
that question make sense as as
yeah I I I can give you first a dry
conceptual answer uh in the formalisms
of IIT integrated information Theory um
what matters is the causal structure of
a complex of information integration so
every fi structure has a caal structure
given by the transition probability
tables the so-called
TPT um if you have re represent ational
States in that it changes the cause of
structure and if the cause of structure
is changed then of course you may that
may lead to different Behavior so yeah
metacognition clearly can lead to
different Behavior that's an implication
of theory but I think empirically it's
also obvious um there is a little
difference when we are talking about
simple spontaneous behaviors like um
people with a blind sight if you throw a
ball at them they still move their hands
and catch the ball but they report that
they don't see the ball because a
re-entrance loop gets cut either because
somebody had the corpus callosum severed
or as a result of trauma or even the
progression of
dementia um but the behavior is still
there uh so you know in simple things
like somebody threw a rock at you and
you need to catch it whether you can
metac cognize the experience of seeing
the bow or not doesn't matter you still
catch it if you can but um in other
aspects of Life how how do you plan a
hun a
hunt um then I think uh matter cognition
plays a a clear causal role um we become
capable of deliberation and our Behavior
changes
accordingly role because it matters to
our survival and
reproduction yes if if metacognition
leads to different behaviors that
increase our chances to survive longer
and reproduce then those those features
would be fixed in the genome right for
for natural because of natural selection
so I I think the evolutionary storyline
stays largely intact I think um so I do
you think that that's sufficient to to
recover genuine Agency for living
things what uh what is do you mean
precisely by
agency so
um in evolutionary theory we are uh used
to saying that environmental variation
is just noise right so if you have genes
that make you produce seeds that's great
if you don't have genes that make you
produce seeds that would be bad but
given that you do produce seeds whether
the seeds are blown by the wind onto
rocky soil or fertile soil that
environmental variation that's just
noise to
the which genes get selected and which
genes
don't if we
were caused by our genes
to uh take a particular behavior that
mattered to our survival and
reproduction that would be visible to
evolution by natural selection it would
matter to which genes survive and which
genes don't but if we actually did
something of our own valtion something
that wasn't caused by our
genes then that would just be like the
Environ Al variation that evolution by
natural selection couldn't see at all
right yeah yeah so anything that
anything that we do as agents is just
noise doesn't affect evolution is there
any genuine Agency for us in being able
to matter to what happens or are is
everything that we do only what we do is
caused by our
genes I can give you a defensive answer
and a real honest answer maybe maybe I
I'll do both
um analytic idealism is compatible with
the position that in the sense that you
attribute to the word we don't really
have Rio agency analytic idealism is
compatible with it is that what I think
no it's not what I think and I'll tell
you why I don't think that I need three
minutes to tell you the story
um if you look at
paleoanthropology and you look for uh
the dating of the evence evidence we
have for the the the rise of modern
humans
anatomically that puts us back two or
300,000
years um and if you look at the evidence
for symbolic cognition for the ability
to replace elements of reality with
cognitive representations that point at
something Beyond themselves in other
words conceptual reasoning uh uh which
is related to agency um if you don't
have conceptual reasoning you're purely
instinctive and then there is no agency
in the sense you attribute it to the
word I think um but if we can think
symbolically then you can say well I did
it because I decided to do that not just
because Instinct moved me in an
autonomous faction fashion to do that so
the evidence for the letter for symbolic
thinking is 30 to 50,000 years ago
before that there is no such evidence
and
um this raises a very uncomfortable
question whatever genetic
mutation took place that enabled us to
express this extraordinary ability
unique in nature to think symbolically
to develop language to perform rituals
um whatever genetic mutation enabled
this happened about 200,000 years before
the capability was actually
expressed it lay dormant for 200,000
years before one of us for whatever
reason discovered that it was there this
is extraordinarily implausible because
we are talking about the most
significant genetic mutation in the
history of life on Earth and we are
saying it happened and was a fixed in
the genome for no reason U at first it
had no survival advantages whatsoever it
did it did nothing because we didn't use
it for 200,000 years until we did for
whatever reason Ian thol he's retired
now he was the curator of the Hall of
human history in the American Museum of
Natural History he wrote this
extraordinary book in 2012 called the
masters of the planet and in the book he
says I cannot quote word for word
anymore but close in the book he says
the only reason we have to believe that
such
fantastic thing happened is that it
obviously
did because short of the empirical
acknowledgement that it did happen
it would be Preposterous to say that the
most consequential genetic mutation in
the history of Life happened for no
reason it had no Fitness Delta
associated with it for the longest time
until its possessor for some reason
discovered
it the implausibility of this is so
fantastically
extraordinary that I think it leaves a
gaping hole in our account of agency in
the way you defined it and therefore the
jury is out about better hypothesis in
other words I think
personally that uh vanilla Neo Darian
Evolution doesn't do it I think it's
very implausible that it does that that
it does account for for it but those who
think it does account can still be
analytic
idealists okay
I I have so much more that I that I
wanted to tell it but I how are we doing
Michael we're doing great and we got 15
minutes go for it keep keep
going are you sure you do you not want
to come in well uh well I have just just
a couple of things um one one specific I
mean from the beginning I've been
sitting here thinking about um Amoeba's
existential crisis and uh what the what
the Hallmarks of such a thing would be
how would we no I mean I'm in no way
claiming that uh you know all of our
cognitive capacities were there from day
one I mean I do I do think that there
are differences ultimately but um but
but I'm not I'm not at all sure that
they can't have their own version of an
existential crisis and and there is a
there is a very simple version of
metacognition that Chris Fields draws
attention to which is that um you have a
you have a bacterium and that typically
what they're doing is measuring the
local let's say sugar concentration
right and they want to go up the up the
gradient and that's that
but there's an issue because because
that sugar for for example might be
poisoned in some way so some bacteria
what they actually do is in addition to
that they also measure the the output of
their own metabolic system so instead of
measuring the outside world they they
look inwards and they measure themselves
and there's a second order metabolic
Loop that overrides the first Loop and
says okay you may think that you're
going up the gradient and that's great
but if the metabolism actually isn't
going well I'm pulling the plug on the
whole thing we're going to Tumble and go
and go somewhere else right and that I
think is a very uh sort of primitive
version of the metacognitive capacity
where you're making judgments about your
own State as opposed to states of the
world and you know whether or not I mean
I don't expect there's any way you know
it's not the same as being able to
articulate it linguistically of course
but I do think that there are very
simple versions of metacognition that
some of these things have and I'm and
and so so I've been sitting here
thinking about um what would a a
unicellular existential crisis look like
and how do we know when each of us is
having it how do we know metacognitively
when we are having it you know those
that that's that's what I've been
thinking about um but but but I also I
do have a question um for Bernardo
because I I thought this was this was
pretty um pretty interesting too um the
the universe uh this and and the and the
speed of light being too slow for the uh
recurrent Loops um can you just talk for
a second about um it it's too slow for
what precisely that is that is what does
it need to you know if if if we if we if
we assume that the overall cognitive
frame rate can be anything I mean maybe
it just thinks super slowly the question
right so so my question is what what is
it not in time for with these with these
Loops can you say something about that
sure sure can I first quickly comment on
what you said as a Prelude to your
question analytic ideal idealism is much
more accommodating in principle of there
being some
primary C high level men Al functions in
nature than materialism is because
materialism would say um mentality
itself mentation itself is something
that arises out of complexity how much
complexity can you have in a in in a
cellular organism so it sort of closes
the door fundamentally very early on
analytic idealism because it it it
postulates that um there is a field of
subjectivity to begin with that
mentation in and of itself you already
get for free it's a question of what
kind of mental functions then evolve
then anal analytical idealism is is
accommodating of the hypothesis you
raised while materialism is not um I
personally tend to be skeptical of high
level mental functions being there from
the beginning but analytic idealism
which is not me it's just the thing I
sort of sell but analytic idealism is
accommodating of your hypothesis uh
certainly much more than than than
materialism now these re-entering Loops
at Universal scale um you know according
to our current cosmological theories
shortly after the big bang There was a
period of inflation in which the
universe expanded many times faster than
the speed of light
itself and what that means um and the
universe is still expanding um much
faster than we think it should that's
why we came up with this notion of dark
energy which is like almost 80% of of
the visible of the of the universe
invisible as it is um so if you take
these two factors into account the rate
of universal expansion the rate at which
space is being created in between things
and the speed of light which has stayed
roughly constant for as long as we could
measure it one could even say it is
constant the variation is measurement
error the jury is still out on that
because we Define the meter now in terms
of the speed of light so we def find it
to be constant in meters per second but
setting that aside that speed of light
limit is very low at a Comm cosmological
scale
300 million kilometers a second I think
it is is is very is very
low
so it never catches up with the rate of
expansion so if you need to like in
Neuroscience um there is very little
agreement on anything but there is
agreement on what I'm about to say now
for metaconsciousness to arise you you
need a sort of back and forth
communication between two different
brain areas usually something down in
the in the motor sensory area and
something up in the Neo cortex um and so
you you need a closed loop in which
information goes from one to the other
and back to the
first to do that at a universal scale
between two different regions of the
universe given how much the space in
between them is growing how fast the
space in between them is growing and the
speed of light limits not it's very
difficult to imagine that a loop could
be closed for information
transfer uh and you may say well
entanglement no no there is a theorem in
Quantum information theory that tells us
that entanglement cannot transmit
information it cannot be used to
transmit information this is one of the
most reliable results in quantum theory
because it's proven uh uh it's not
something that you need to measure so
the confidence is very high so from that
perspective unless we
postulate that the physical Universe we
see uh is not the complete image of the
mentation in the mind of nature that
there is more going on than we can
measure than we can register and that
these re-entrant Loops are being closed
in that which we cannot register unless
you make this of promisory note uh uh um
hypothesis uh it's very difficult to
imagine that the universe is having a
deliberate metac conscious thought of
the kind that you and I uh can have it
can be intelligent in a very spontaneous
instinctive way that there is nothing
that precludes this possibility but
higher level mental metacognitive
functions as we understand and as we
measure in our own brains through
neuroimaging it's very very difficult to
say that this is going on at the vast
Universal scales because of the rate of
expansion and the speed of light
limit gotcha yeah okay that's that's
very the expansion thing is is
interesting um just another another
question then on the um and I don't feel
by way the way I don't feel strongly
about about this so I'm it's not like
I'm arguing for the you know uh new ways
to beat the expansion anything like that
but but a question then about the um the
entanglement part the the theorem of
which you speak now that uh that you
can't pass information through it does
that is is that specifically for
external observers or does that so so
the distinction I'm drawing here is
systems in which there is a there is a
there's a screen between what external
observers can see and interpret of what
information is passing versus the system
itself from the from the inside right
and does this theorem cover sort of both
or is it really only for it doesn't
right only external observers kind of
what I figured so okay so so I think and
again I'm not particularly pushing this
but it sounds to me like there might be
a a little a wedge here in terms of what
what this what this what this what all
this really says is that we as external
observers cannot catch these these Loops
which I think is you know perfectly
perfectly plausible but that doesn't
mean that they're not actually happening
within the mind of the of of the larger
system that's correct that would be
David bom's um implicit order I see idea
that there is an explicit order and an
implicit order um um in bal's um idea
and in bomb's theory or
hypothesis um in the implicit order in
other words in the universe from its own
firsters perspective as opposed to an
external dissociated Observer um
information doesn't need to be
transmitted because information is
already there where it needs to be from
the get-go there is no spatial temporal
extension so there aren't two places uh
across which information uh can move uh
there is just a sort of holistic unified
non-spatially
extended entity which is the implicit
order and it it it has direct access to
everything about itself because it's not
extended uh things don't need to go from
one place to the other the empirical
counter to the hypo hypothesis is that
you could say well we
too from a first person perspective are
not extended all my thoughts and
emotions um can be immediately accessed
through uh Links of Association
cognitive Association uh there is no
transmission DeLay So to say I I I when
I introspect I don't find a spatial
temporarily extended field I find a
unitary monistic integrated conscious
point of view And yet when we go under
an fmri or an meg2 and have our brain
activity
measured neuroscientists consistently
see this back and forth of information
across brain areas un viewed from the
outside so if that is the case for
us I think the the null hypothesis that
should be the case for the Universe At
Large
too
um but if that cannot happen for the
Universe At Large then we start having
to think of the possible ways in which
the image of the cognition of the
Universe At Large differs from the image
of our own cognition even though we are
part of the same universe and we have to
justify why the rules of the game change
when you go across scales you're not
making any fundamental ontological shift
you're just going across scales why
should the rules change we would have to
come up with an argument for why the
rules uh should change at that level
that that I think would be the key
difficulty it doesn't mean that it's
impossible it it it it only makes
explicit what the epistemic challenges
are there MH
yeah interesting I see you guys are are
thinking about some some daring
possibilities here and I am the one
coming across as the conservative
idiot doesn't think far enough I'm not
used to being in this
position very
interesting I'm I'm probably more open
to what you're thinking than I'm letting
out right now I'm I get that sense too
yeah uh
I I wonder if I could bring us back to
the uh narratives that do a better job
of retaining
meaning that uh does any of this help us
tell a story that is either better
science or science that doesn't
eliminate
meaning
um I'll give you my sort of um cautious
answer first and then I'll really share
with you what I think
from a philosophical
perspective whether a
hypothesis makes us feel good or not is
entirely irrelevant what matters is what
do we have good reasons to entertain as
a viable hypothesis objective reasons in
other
words what we have good reasons to think
of as potentially being true and the
moral or psychological
or some other subjective consequences
that truth may have that that's our
problem if we don't like what is true
well too bad for us but what is true is
what is true regardless of how we feel
about it so from a strict philosophical
perspective the criteria for choosing a
hypothesis is not whether it's socially
nice or whether it makes us feel warm
and fuzzzy inside and gives meaning to
your life the criteria is do we have
reasons to think of it as true
regardless of how it makes us feel
analytic idealism is built around this
this notion
um and and for me it's a it was a real
struggle to to do it that way because I
don't like the key implication of
analytic
idealism it uh it makes me feel very
uncomfortable uh which is the notion
that
Consciousness uh Witnesses death and
goes through that major State transition
let me impress upon you why I don't like
it
if you take a high do psychedelic drug
you can have an incredibly bad trip and
I have had
two and that happens when your brain
metabolism is reduced a little bit
because that's what psychedelics do they
reduce brain
metabolism so even when your brain
metabolism reduces a little bit a
measurable little bit but nonetheless a
little bit you can have a horrible
experience imagine when there is no
brain metabolism at all not even a brain
goodness help us uh I don't like that
implication of analytic idealism um I
was much more comfortable with the
notion that Consciousness just ends and
therefore there is nothing to fear
because I would not be there to
experience fear or suffering or pain or
anything
but I think materialism is completely
untenable we have no good reasons to
believe it even though made me feel warm
and fuzzy in my youth um we have what we
have good reasons to believe is
analytical idealism is my in my view now
having said all this
um if you look at the
history do you guys have three more
minutes for on this answer because
there's new on here I've been thinking
about all good yeah I've been thinking
about this for 25 years so um if you
look at how materialism started it
started as a political tool the founders
of the Enlightenment um knew that it
didn't work as a metaphysics uh the need
Deo is on record saying materialism
doesn't work probably all matter is
Instinct with life not an abstraction
but we have to use materialism as a
weapon against the church why because
the church was burning scientists at the
stake like Bruno in
1600 but somewhere around the middle of
the 19th century when the Bourgeois
after the industrial Revolution started
awing social influence the game became
not just to survive the clergy the game
became to supplant the the clergy and
replace the clergy in Social influence
um and therefore now materialism had to
be literally true and mind had to be
something reducible to matter because
matter was the domain of science mind or
psyche which also translates into spirit
and so that was the domain of the church
so it's not enough anymore to survive
the church it's not enough even to
entertain dualism like was the defa view
between the cart and and gut until gut
in
1830 uh dualism was still the the
predominant view that too was not enough
it was not enough to share territory
with the church we had to conquer
everything and then we started truly
believing in materialism this
abstraction that Nature's given
pretheoretical given experience could be
reduced to an abstraction of Mind itself
it's like a painter that paints a a
self-portrait and then point at it and
says I am this portrait and now the
painter has to account for himself in
terms of patterns of pigment
distribution onc no good luck with that
that's exactly what we are doing with
materialism we invent non-experiential
States as a theoretical idea and then we
try to reduce the pretheoretical given
to that theoretical idea mind tries to
reduce itself to one of its products
that's like a dog chasing its own
tail but we bat that bullet because it
had major payoffs around the middle of
the 19th century supplanted the church
and got rid of the fear of death which
is what the church had used for a
thousand years to control the entire
population of Europe how can the church
without an army of its own since the end
of the Templars in the 14th century uh
13th how could it control the entire
continent well because it sort of had
its hands on the lever of the fear of
death it sold indulgences you know
became a major temporal power on the
back of that fear that was off the table
around the middle of the 19th century
the greatest cool things the
Reformation a major a major step um but
what we lost was meaning that was the
price he paid and N chronicled that at
at at that time he was a contemporary of
this transition and he chronic Chronicle
that in um um the gay science and then
in do spoke zaratustra he spoke of the
end the the death of God that we killed
God and we had blood in our hands and he
anticipated the ler the Le
ler mench the the the last man who would
leave without meaning and therefore
would have to Stupify himself and
distract himself into numbness in order
to survive he predicted that in the
1880s and here we are we are the last
men we lost meaning so now we watch
reality television it sugar uh and drink
alcohol that's that's how that's how we
Stupify ourselves uh um out of the whole
that is the absence of meaning this
probably was a great idea in
1850 but we've been acre a price that we
paid for this uh that it comes to the
point that it's unbearable now because
we are meaning seeking animals and we
are being asked to trade meaning
for uh for for the reassurance that
there is nothing to fear after your dead
because you're not going to be there to
experience it there is only so far we
can go down that path so if if science
which since the middle of the 19th
century has taken a positivist
behaviorist
turn um
science as practiced not as a method but
as practiced by human considers it a
value in a theory if it takes meaning
out of the
equation uh theor sound more scientific
if you take meaning out of the equation
the psychology here is clear everybody
wants to be the tough guy who stares the
hard facts in the face and has the balls
to say it's all meaningless and you
differentiate yourself when you do that
you differentiate yourself from the gbo
masses on the streets you're a better
person now because you have the balls to
stare the hard facts in the face then
that's the psychology of that of course
it has absolutely nothing to do with
nature at all um there is nothing
written large in nature that says
theories that stand a chance to be right
are the ones that eliminate meaning why
where is it edged in stone nature right
it's completely arbitrary it's it's it's
a side effect of our Teenage Human
psychology um that's essentially what it
is we are going through a self
affirmation phase we are we are 14 years
old and we want to impress the girls by
showing how tough we are in staring the
hard facts in the face um I think there
is a high likelihood that the actual
facts of the
matter intrinsically inherently carry
meaning
value and I think good science therefore
should be open to that possibility and
not discard it because some kind of of
some kind of moral value
uh that arose as a side effect of our
adolescent
psychology now what would that story be
I think analytic idealism as a
philosophy not as a science uh it
creates a Level Playing
Field
um but a scientific theory that has to
be a theory of life because that's where
meaning is
discernable life uh first and foremost a
theory of life that
restores the notion of meaning which was
excluded for arbitrary reasons what
would that theory of Life be I think it
would it would have to
entail and now I'm going to contradict
what I said in the beginning of our
conversation it would have to entail
some form of
theology not necessarily I think a metac
conscious theology a
deliberate uh uh um plan that was there
from the beginning and that rose out of
very high level thinking planning and
deliberation uh not necessarily that but
some form of theology nonetheless an
instinctive theology a spontaneous
theology but see something that
acknowledges the quality of the universe
the universe is made of mental States
then those states are are fundamentally
qualitative there is a quality to every
mental States that's what defines them
as being mental States
so could this spontaneous Universal
theology be about the quality of the end
states of the universe is it biased
towards a certain quality space in our
in our you know parameter space is there
a region in our parameter space
associated with certain qualities for
which the universe is naturally biased
naturally biased towards is the universe
pushing towards those qualities and and
how could we argue this what are those
qualities why should why should we think
the universe is biased towards them
which you then could translate as what
is in it for the universe to get to
those States what would them make the
universe feel like because that's the
only way to explain the bias in a mental
universe is what is the psychological
payoff for the universe to be spontan
ously and instinctively biased towards
certain
qualities uh towards a certain set of
end states that would be a theory that
directly restores meaning I am certainly
not capable of developing that I'm I'm
not a biologist I'm I just talk I don't
do any
experiment I'm just a bullshitter you
guys uh are the ones to think about it I
think the the the the notion that there
must be a
payoff this is this is getting to the
meat now so the notion that there must
be a payoff seems to me like a hangover
of the Orthodox story that everything is
explained in terms of costs and benefits
survival and reproduction what does it
mean to me like I'm
important uh where olical payoff is of a
different nature but but go go ahead go
ahead uh whereas uh if you let go of
um a competition between selves as being
the prime mover of everything you know
that this self survives and that self
doesn't so therefore the properties that
this self has are better in the sense
that it survives than the properties
that that self had if you let go of that
as being the prime mover and you think
of it all as being part of the flow of a
cognitive self at a higher level of
organization then that flow isn't about
uh the costs or benefits to think it's
just what it does it's it's the it's the
um the nature what's it's the N the
driver the prime mover is the is the
driver of the the cognitive process that
creates its own structure and the
structure that carries the process right
that's the kind of interaction between
the structure and process that's needed
and it isn't about you know this
structure out competes that structure or
this process is better than that
process that's naturalism um I'm
completely open to this actually that's
my default position um the point I
raised was if we if
if we want to restore meaning to An
Origin story for life and
Humanity can we do that based purely on
the naturalism you explained or do we
need some kind of psychological bias
towards certain
qualities um because then the meaning of
going through the moves is to reach the
instinctively anticipated and desired
end State and then you have meaning
there but if what's happening is akin to
to attractors in chaos theory that have
this name because it suggests they
pulling from the front while in fact no
such a things happen in Chaos Theory the
the system converges to an attractor not
because it's been pulled from ahead but
pushed from behind given its
regularities and properties so if that's
what's happening and I think there's a
high likelihood that is what is
happening is that compatible with the
notion of meaning because then the
attractor is just a misnomer it's a kind
of Illusion um nothing's being we are
not being pulled from the front there is
no
bias towards a certain quality of of
existence it's just the standard play
out of the Dynamics of nature which are
determined by Nature's intrinsic
dispositions nature because nature is
what it is it does what it does and
because it does what it does it will end
up somewhere not because it is
instinctively Desiring the qualities of
that somewhere but because it's just
being itself it cannot be other than
itself and do what it does um is this
latter story compatible with meaning I
don't
know I tend to think that it's not I
tend to think that for meaning in the
sense of theological purpose to be
there we
we need a kind of qualitative
psychological bias woven into the very
fabric of this field of subjectivity
that nature is in other words um an
intrinsic like and dislike
scale am I getting warmer or am I get
colder getting colder if I'm getting
colder I will change what I'm doing
because I don't like where this is going
but if I'm getting warmer I keep on
trying and if I get stuck in a local
minimum maybe the system needs some kind
of reset so we can go down the
optimization landscape but um I am
intrinsically biased towards the warm as
opposed to the Cod because the quality
of Warmness is of warmth is more welcome
to me given my intrinsic subjectivity
than the quality of cognus if this is
what is happening an an analytic
idealism creates the space for this
because it assumes that everything is
mental anyway so this kind of
psychological bias under analytic
idealism could very be very well be the
case and then you still don't have a
deliberate plan but you have a bias that
expresses itself
continuously in the play of things in
other words nature is always making a
subtle choice at some level and it makes
that choice not because it thought it
through but because it is what it is and
it simply likes warmth more than
coldness so it try it tends to change
things if it's getting colder and
changes to state of course if it's
getting warmer if this is what's
happening now meaning is entirely back
and you don't even need mea cognition
for
this does nature value higher level
mental
functions even before it knew what
higher level mental functions were is
that what nature instinctively is
driving to or is it harm Harmony of some
level in other words less fight less
competition that doesn't seem to be the
case right um the history of life on
Earth has been very bloody for the past
four billion years or or or something
else does it value some form of
self-awareness
above other potential mental
states does nature value or quality
above some other quality I think that is
the question if it does you don't need
plenty underneath the Liberation you
will get it automatic automatically in
the normal course of
things you talked about the The Blossom
on the tree that um Imagines for a
moment that it's all about itself and
wants to conquer the tree
versus recognizing that it's in service
and sacrifice to a larger story that it
doesn't understand right oh I'm amazed
you read that yeah usually that's not
the part of my story that scientists
read well I wouldn't be telling the
whole truth if I allowed you to believe
that I read it I watched a YouTube video
oh
okay
uh there's the you know the Blossom's
ability to comprehend tree and the and
the the flow of the lineage in which it
is a part
um it doesn't have the the the cognitive
Capac capacity to comprehend that to to
itself it's just going to look like a
personification of itself it just looks
like everything else is just a blossom
like me and I don't see the tree I just
see other
blossoms
um but the that
um balance between this the separation
that the the blossom has
a if we imagine it having a subjective
point of view frame of reference that is
relevant to it in contrast to the frame
of reference in which its environment
and it sit together in partnership in a
flow together that um stepping in and
stepping out of those different frames
of reference is where the where the key
is right when I step into the frame of
reference of the blossom well then the
stuff that's outside of me the that
stuff over there that's not me when I
step into the frame of reference of the
blossoms environment the blossom is not
me right but they are but they are a
mirror of each other right they exist in
so much as one creates a space that is
the perfect shape for the other one to
exist in and this pushes back to create
its own space in in that you know that
there are the perfect complement of one
another and when you step back and you
say oh from the external frame of
reference neither the frame of reference
of the environment nor the frame of
reference of the blossom but I'm
stepping back outside of that system now
I don't know where I am now but I'm
looking out I'm looking into that system
from outside I say ah they're the
same they're really they're really just
one thing is just turned around on the
other thing right it's not it's not
they're not really different they're
just reflections of each other yeah and
then you do another kind of stepping out
and you say oh but wait a minute so
they're the same and they're different
at the same time right these like when I
step into the frame of reference of each
of the parts I see that each part sees
the other as as nonself as different I
take the other the other part's point of
view and it sees the other as as nonself
as different but I you know I can also
see that they're the same that they are
just a reflection of each other that
they only persist to the extent that
they are the perfect complement of one
another that they are they're just the
same thing turned around so then I
realized that the the entire concept of
being the same and being different are
just the same concept that's turned
around it's just a comparator right it's
the negative of the comparator the
negative of the equals function is the
not equals function they're the same
thing really they're just turned around
and before you know it you go Meta Meta
Meta and now you know everything is the
same and everything is different and
that that but that whole that whole
dynamic of taking frames of reference
where you step inside a micro frame of
reference and a macro frame of reference
and a meta frame of reference that sees
the frame of
reference that's the kind of dynamic
where I think Harmony complementarity
rather than separateness
um is
the the quality um that arises from that
that's the that's the quality in which
all of that exists all of that sameness
all of that difference all of that
connection all of that separateness
that's the quality in which all of that
exists and um the difference between
existing and not existing is being of a
quality that enables those kinds of
stepping in and out of frames of
reference I don't know if that how
that's Landing with you I I agree with
you I think that's the story from our
point of view we take ourselves very
seriously because we think we are just
this and not the rest so we are very
invested in in the Apple Blossom and not
in the apple tree and the rest of of
life on Earth um so I think it is valid
valid for us to struggle through what
you just
explained I do think however that um
even if we are always just locked into
the frame of reference of the
Blossom there is another point of view
independent of us that takes the rest of
the system into account because if you
have a dissociation you immediately have
two Alters actually and the moment you
have a boundary and you separate the
inside from the outside the outside is
also an alter so taking all Life Away
there is still a point of view if
analytic idealism is right there is
still the point of view of all the rest
of the UN Universe which is a much Broad
other point of view from an evolutionary
theory perspective I think there is a
way to empirically check whether that
broader point of view is also an agent a
causally effective agent that is biased
in some way and the way to do that I
mean it's very difficult to do it
because you simply don't have the data
but what is interesting to see here
would be if the neenan idea that um the
genetic Evolutions themselves are
unbiased they are random bias comes in
only when you expose them to the
environment and then Fitness and natural
selection kick in and it will impose a
direction to the system a gradient in
the system that will favor Fitness so
once natural selection plays in you you
get a bias but in the underlying genetic
mutations there should be no bias under
Neo Darin
ISM now can we run a Randomness test in
a raw set of genetic mutations to see if
they're really biased or not now we
don't have the data the fossil record
does not keep the raw mutations the ones
that weren't viable probably disappeared
to never find
them however in the past few years there
have been two fantastic papers one I
remember still very well I think it's
from Israel live
that yeah about the the
malaria the genes that create a positive
response to malaria yeah yeah so these
papers claim to have shown that the
mutations themselves are biased and I
think what that shows is precisely that
other agent the you know the rest of the
universe outside of the living
Alters um even influences the living
altars I mean I whatever whever that
agency is whatever it corresponds to
it's certainly outside the human ego and
it is causally effective enough to
manipulate raw genetic mutations and
imprint a bias on it so I think that is
the best empirical hint or suggestion we
have today that there is some form of
built-in theology in the fabric of
nature it may be instinctive but it does
have some feedback loop and it does make
some kind of choice it would mean that
the the very tiny scales where things
appear to be small and insignificant and
stochastic and the very large scales
that you know the the the cosmic
teleology they're connected that you
know you think that they're the
conventional story is that no no no no
they're not connected right you know
what what wherever that's going is not
connected to what's happening down here
but if those very high frequencies and
those very low frequencies were already
harmonic they were already talking to
each other then our experience in the
middle would find strange coincidences
like that exactly how come those parts
were just the right parts that you
needed for making that kind of a thing
who would have thought right we have a
fundamental epistemic limitation here uh
the science we the part of science that
looks at first principles is
physics right it's the thing that looks
at first principles everybody else is
looking at Aggregates and compound
phenomenon yeah but in physics to
conclude anything empirically we need to
isolate the experimental conditions
separate the system from the environment
um and and and this is good methodology
but it comes with a price which is that
um we eliminate from
view all natural organizing principles
that may kick in only at higher levels
of
complexity in other words
fundamental organizing principles that
aren't microscopic organizing principles
maybe there is a bias in nature for
things that happen only at the scale of
an entire organism or an entire Society
or an entire galaxy
cluster um and and those correlations
will then be impossible for us to see in
a very structural methodological sense
because in our attempt to isolate the
experimental conditions we will reduce
the scope of what we observe only to
those organizing principles that
manifest in that tiny scope and we by
construction eliminate everything else
that may kick in only at higher levels
of complexity or longer distances in
SpaceTime so we will we may be
methodologically precluding our own
ability to recognize the feedback loops
you're you just talked about Richard
because they make kin at a larger scale
then we can invest on the basis of first
principles I think we need a way of
thinking that's that's able to start in
the middle that's able to you know you
start at a particular scale but it could
be any scale and from that scale you can
talk about how it pushes upwards and how
it pushes downwards and whether those
things are connected but you don't have
to start at the bottom you start at the
bottom you don't see what's going on at
the other scales
