I mean the main point was what is a
field of inquiry what is a demain of
knowledge you know you know what is a
neuroscientist what is a particle
physicist what is a complexity scientist
I was interested in that almost as a
meta question what you realize when you
go down that path is how difficult that
is to
answer agency
intentionality will
all of those ideas break the fundamental
Assumption of all of physics right I
view that as fundamentally
paradigmatically new and it is the
origin of complexity science and as you
say it's the origin of
life and that's what all science is
other than fundamental physics right and
that's why Emergen is so important a
concept because the processes of
emergence are what explain why other
disciplines other than physics have to
exist in the
world this is brain inspired powered by
the transmitter David Kau is the
president of the Santa Fe Institute
where their mission is officially
searching for order in the complexity of
evolving worlds when I think of the
Santa Fe Institute I I think of
complexity science because that is the
common thread across the many subjects
that people study at SFI like societies
economies brains machines and
evolution David has been on the podcast
before and I invited him back to discuss
some of the topics in his new book um
the complex World an introduction to the
fundamentals of complexity
science the book on the one hand serves
as an introduction and a guide to a four
volume
collection of foundational papers in
complexity science which you'll hear
David discuss in a moment on the other
hand the complex world became um much
more discussing and connecting ideas
across the history of complexity science
where did complexity science come from
um how does it fit among other
scientific paradigms how did the
breakthroughs come about uh and so on
during our conversation we discuss the
four pillars of complexity science
entropy Evolution Dynamics and
computation and how complexity
scientists draw from these four areas to
study what David calls problemsolving
matter another term for what the
complexity Sciences are about we discuss
emergence the role of time scales in
complex systems and plenty more all with
my own self-serving goal to learn better
and to practice better how to think like
a comp complexity scientist to improve
my own work on how brains do things
hopefully our conversation and David's
book help you do the same so I will
refer you in the show notes to his
website to discover all of David's other
accolades over the years um and with a
link to the book that we discuss uh if
you want this and all full episodes of
brain inspired support it on patreon
which is how you can also join our
Discord have a voice on who I invite
even submit questions for the guests um
and otherwise just show appreciation so
thank you to my patreon supporters and
thanks to the transmitter for their
continued support show notes are at
brain inspired.
codcast
203 here's
David I had the thought in in reading
your book and I'll I'll hold it up here
so we're going to be talking about uh
Concepts from uh the complex
World um my overarching kind of goal I
think in our discussion is to get a
personally for how to think like a com
complexity scientist um and and this
book is it's deceptive uh David because
I don't know if you can see it's pretty
looks fairly thin um it's elegantly uh
and concisely written but then you and I
I read the whole thing uh but I don't
know if I read the I don't know if I
read the whole thing because now I have
to go back and read the whole thing much
much more slowly because there's so much
material um in here so so this book is
it's interesting because it it is out
before four volumes containing the
foundational papers oh oh you have uh
physical copies already yeah I'll tell
you the history if you're interested
Paul I'll tell you what
happened um you know so a few years
ago I mean this is a long story I mean
like many people or of your listeners
might know SFI through its books
um those brown and red books if you
remember from the 80s and '90s
Christopher langton's artificial
life arrow and
Pines and Anderson on the economy as a
complex system and on and on it goes and
um so we've always published and been
interesting in communicating complexity
science right from the beginning from
the ' 80s um but we decided to bring a
lot of that
in-house and so have our own press as as
opposed to working with McGraw Hill or
Oxford or MIT all great presses but we
wanted the authors to be closer to the
Publishers and we wanted to make the
books more affordable and the big
project of the press is the four volume
foundations of complexity science
banding a 100 years which you see behind
me those beautiful yellow those are the
first three volumes the fourth comes out
in December so it's just under 4,000
pages and it grew out of asking the
community what is complexity science if
you had to have one paper or two
whatever that you thought were
absolutely
archetypical of this endeavor what would
they be and we amassed tons of
suggestions and it was surprising how
concentrated they
were and then we asked each person who
had was expert and had recommended a
particular paper to write the history of
that paper paper and it's enduring
impact
and um and each of that's what that four
volumes is it's um just under 90 papers
all placed in historical context and
annotated so I wrote an introduction to
those four volumes because I thought oh
my God what is this thing what has come
together it's more than an introduction
though so I mean one of the things that
you do is you you reference uh the
people who wrote about the papers who
annotated and and sort of introduced
those papers which so you're giving a
road map of a road map to the papers in
one sense but it's it's more than that
exactly no thank you exactly so that's
the history I thought I'd write the
introduction then I realized I'm not
really writing an introduction because
it sort of got out of hand and
um because I I wanted to to your point
each of those papers represented a
perspective on the complex world how so
where did they come from how did they
influence each other and so on and so in
weaving that tapestry I wrote a little
book I didn't expect to that was not the
plan but it became sort of black hole
dense so that's a good way to put it
yeah and so but I decided to keep it
that way and what the reason it's
actually published as a separate book
has a funny story it is the first
opening part of the four volumes but my
colleague actually Sean Carol at Hopkins
was giving a course on complexity with
Janine
ishmail and they said you know
we we just we were looking for the book
to write the course and then we realized
we're just going to use your opening
introduction but the students don't want
to buy all four volumes so I said oh
Sean I'm just going to do that and we'll
publish the
first opening introduction as a separate
book and that's the history of it to
make it available for students
uh that's interesting because I was
thinking you know I was kind of
envisioning how this book could be used
uh and I was kind of envisioning like
sort of a dedicated study group like
whether
whether we if if I formed one of those
right if I formed a complexity science
study group foundations of complexity
science study group should I use your
book and then because all of the uh
papers are in chronological order in the
found
and I can imagine going through every
single paper with the annotations but
that would that would take a really long
time what what would you recommend if I
were going to do something like that how
should I approach that I would recommend
just
that I would no because I think um you
know if if if you felt like it read my
shorter book first um no yeah I think
that That's essential because because
you you get then you get the whole
context and why
why you can go through chronologically
which you actually probably took pains
to figure out how they are related to
each other uh and put that well the main
point I mean you I mean again the main
point here was not only to organize the
papers but to ask where they came from
in the 19th and late 18th century right
so well that what what was your eventual
uh task and eventual goal in writing the
book because you you set out to write
this introduction and then it became
something more so yeah what was the uh
what did you envision here to what did
you hope to achieve I mean the main
point was
um what is a field of
inquiry what is a domain of knowledge
what does it mean to be expert in
X you know you know what is a
neuroscientist what is a particle
physicist what is a complexity scientist
I was interested in that almost as a
meta
question and
what you realize when you go down that
path is how difficult that is to answer
in
a thoughtful way right you can say silly
things neuroscientists study the brain
okay whatever um physicist study the
universe they're not particularly
informative answers right and so one was
what is this
Paradigm that we call complexity and a
lot of people in many books have been
written that confuse it with methods and
that really drove me nuts well yeah but
it okay we'll get we'll get I'll ask you
more yeah no it's important because the
methods matter right it's it's a very
difficult thing but let me just give you
a couple of examples you know if I said
if you said to me well asked me the
question what is quantum
mechanics right and I said to you oh you
know what it is it's um functional
analysis linear
algebra right um
yeah you say well that doesn't what's
general relativity and I said oh that's
the calculus of variations and
differential
geometry they're important they're
absolutely foundational the study of
tensor and so on but they're not the
problem they're not the conceptual issue
and so part of it was what is the
relationship between the Technologies of
knowledge and methodologies and the
ontology the domain of inquiry and they
are deeply entangled as I think you're
alluding to in very interesting ways
particularly in the complex domain um
and so I wanted to resolve that so I had
to go
back and establish where all this
started and just in a
nutshell the phrase I use is just as
modern physics and chemistry have their
roots in the Scientific Revolution of
the 17th century complexity science has
its roots in the industrial revolution
of the 18th and 19th we study machines
and we study machines that were made
engineered or
evolved and understanding that kind of
matter as opposed to the ordinary matter
of physics and chemistry is the nature
of complexity science but so recent
philosophical works and and old have
debated I'm throwing this into a tangent
already so I apologize debated um or
rather uh shot back on the idea that
organisms could be even equated with
machines but now you're you're saying
that organisms are evolved machines so I
I just want to clarify do you view
organisms as machines or do you see the
distinction yeah I mean I have such a
capacious definition um just in terms
of mechanisms
that perform adaptive work that are
metabolically fueled I'm willing for
that to be an ecology or or a machine I
don't I don't mean necessarily classical
okay I'm not talking about you know
watches and grandfather clocks right uh
but I am talking about mechanisms that
do work yeah and um whose and the work
is dependent on certain internal degrees
of
freedom that produce motion that we view
as informational or computational so
it's quite it's quite capacious and um
and I'm willing for those machines to be
distributed to be organic and be very
noisy so yeah you have an inclusive
definition of machine then it sounds
like which is fine um so just a moment
ago you talked about what is it to be
a uh let's say a Quantum physicist right
which is a different question than what
is quantum physics which you also kind
of asked but um and I know you sort of
bristle at the question what is
complexity science um and but then I
thought right when you were talking I
thought oh well maybe a better question
is what is a complexity scientist or at
least you could Wrangle a a better
answer and one of the things that struck
me um about reading your book about
complexity science one of many many
things is it fair to say that one goal
of complexity science or scientists is
is integration rather than
unification oh that's interesting I mean
there's so much to say here um
let me make a slightly different point
and then Edge into that
question in terms of the development of
a mind that is interested in this kind
of
problem in my life I sort of make
distinctions
between two kinds of scientists in their
early
formation the first kind I sort of call
fial and these are the people who looked
at the stars when they were 12 and said
I have to be a cosmologist
or they saw a suffering animal and they
said I have to be a
vet they look directly at their target
and established an
ambition another kind of scientist I
think of peripheral vision scientists
and they see a pattern in their
peripheral vision and as you know
peripheral vision is really
crap and you're not sure what you
saw sort of
diffuse and it haunts you for your
entire life and you're constantly trying
to bring it into focus and that
peripheral
pattern for me at least evolved into
complexity science and I found it in
writings by people like Doug Hof and
margin Gardner and Margaret Bowden you
know and so on and then NE and chenhow
quite frankly um who slowly gave me a
sense that I wasn't
hallucinating oh some validation a
validation a certain order of nature
that isn't a pattern that you can
directly look at so if you say I study
the Sun or I study you know gas giants
or nuclear fusion machines um that's one
thing but when you say I'm interested in
that pattern that
unifies what the brain does and What
markets
do and what Society do that's a
harder description and um so I do think
complexity science as an ontology which
I think I now M understand much better
had that character now when you say is
it synthesis or
unification that's a really interesting
question I
think I think it's a bit of both quite
frankly because it's synthesis because
you're looking for the horizontal
connections across domains like
economies or biology and so
forth but you are looking for the
underlying shared principle for example
the principle of information or
computation or cognition and that's
unification so I think it's a bit of
both well I said integration but I guess
if you're looking for the common
underlying uh patterns that would be the
synthetic part of it I
suppose yeah it's
it's synthesis can be merely
comparative right you could could write
an associative
book pointing out
commonalities but I think it would be
more profound to say or ask where do the
commonalities come
from and that's also a part of this
Enterprise so okay since you mentioned
your own personal story I was going to
ask you this later and I'll I'll just
ask it
now and this is I guess in terms of what
of how the Santa Fe Institute operates
and maybe how
optimally operates do you want a bunch
of people who are studying complexity
science who are studying the science of
complexity itself kind of like you or do
you want people in their individual kind
of domains maybe some fial people who
have started to appreciate their
peripheral vision over time and and
appreciate the what complexity science
approaches have to offer within their
fields is it is it better to have a
bunch of those special who then can uh
widen their their view or do you want
everyone just studying complexity
science if that makes sense I mean again
I I I don't know the answer to that
question and it's very
idiosyncratic but at the core it has to
be people who are looking
for the fundamental principles of the
self-organized selective universe that
is we all study problem solving matter
and the fundamental principles governing
problem solving
matter that has to be at the center and
you can have
expertise in other fields
archaeology Linguistics
Neuroscience but that it it has to be
primary not secondary um because there's
a lot of rigorous technology and
methodology that goes with that persuit
yeah and
um you'd be spending your entire life
doing catchup because most of your
expertise was in your domain which is
critical our expertise is in
the the fabric or the interstitial
fabric that connects
Fields how did that feel when you
finally found that home right so so it
had bothered you sort of uh since an
early age going back to your peripheral
analogy and and that's kind the reason
why I'm asking is cuz I want to know how
to approach my own field like a
complexity scientist and I have had that
same I don't think I'm a fobal person
but I think that's also hindered me in
my specialties right uh
and so how did that feel once you
realized oh uh complexity science is
kind of my intellectual home yeah you
know it's worth mentioning the history
briefly here Paul because because it
gives you a sense of where it came from
so in the 19th
century many things were happening but
two things of interest to this
conversation what one is we were
building steam engines yeah right
uh and out of that came the science of
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics
how do we build better Machines of
various kinds that were revolutionary
both in terms of engineering but in
terms of
economics at the same time we were
trying to understand patterns in Natural
History post lenus we're talking about
Darwin and Wallace where does all this
come from and why is it that animals
look a bit mechanical I mean an i a lung
a heart that looks a little bit like
some of these machines that we're trying
to build just more
efficient so all these theories start
emerging and essentially there are four
what I call
pillars that emerg in the 19th century
entropy Evolution Dynamics and
computation see I read the book I read
the book you got it those are it so you
are everyone could ask these questions
about these systems they were
studying are they stable are they
efficient
how much energy do they
require how are they engineered or
evolved what problems are they solving
what we call computation or
logic so as you say
Evolution
entropy control Dynamics and
computational logic and all of those
people
boltzman Maxwell Claus Carno Darwin bu
babage Wallace were all part of a
society in constant conversation in the
19th century but see and you write in
the book that this is before organized
academic publication uh systems which is
where we all talk to each other now I
mean we can say we all talk to each
other and we see each other at
conferences for example but but you
write a little bit about how these
people came together and and interacted
which is and each other right and fought
each other I mean you know Charles
babish fought everybody is that right oh
yeah he he was Surly much to say about
babage a really important figure but um
you know was in correspondence with
Charles
Darwin as was Maxwell in argument with
him you know they didn't agree on a lot
of things and this is before the tyranny
of metrics and the journal system and
and what was starting to happen and
really happened in the 20th which is
complexity science proper is that those
fields started to coales
right we started to do and those four
volumes start in
1922 with lotka who said I want to
combine Darwin with Claus and Carno I
want to do Evolution and thermodynamics
in one go and the whole history is when
you say what does it mean to think like
a complexity scientist essentially it
means connecting the four
pillars that is the game so you're not
allowed to think about something purely
in terms of information you have to
think about the energetic
implications right you have to think
about its
stability right its robustness and so
forth what problem it's
solving you know is it doing it is it a
computationally hard problem or easy
problem it's solving so really thinking
like a complexity scientist is having
the four Fields a little bit under your
belt have to be a little bit under your
belt that and that's a big ask as well
it's a big ask but I mean you can tell
right away I mean in this community you
had better
know something about theoretical
computer science something about
statistical mechanics something about
non- Dynamics and something about
adaptive
Dynamics you have to and you don't have
to be expert in all of them right right
but and I think it's so any problem is
rotated through those four pillars and
um that's what it means I think to think
like a complexity scientist and we can
talk about the history but finding those
principles uh that combine the four well
you I mean you had just mentioned that
uh people often equate complexity
science with the methods and how that's
a mistake and other Sciences as well but
if you have all four of these pillars
under your belt each of these pillars
has their own abundance of methods so I
think that's um where someone like me
gets kind of lost right like how do I
know it's almost a frame problem uh in
complexity science where how do I know
which methods to draw from from all of
these fields to make the connections if
I only know a few from each field for
example yeah no I think it's a totally
reasonable conundrum that we all face
and in the end it's disciplined by the
question you're asking um so let's take
the example I mean the second paper in
foundations is zad's
famous analysis of Maxwell's demon so
this is this
really extraordinarily
surprising thought experiment suggested
by
Maxwell that the second law is unlike
all the other laws in physics it's not a
fundamental law and it can be violated
locally if you have an intelligent demon
in your
system and one can talk about that at
lent but but he didn't call it a demon
did he did he call it a demon he did oh
but it wasn't coined Maxwell's demon in
later is that yeah that's right it was I
think it was actually Edington okay who
um Lord Kelvin who called it Maxwell's
demon okay um he called it an
intelligent being you know a
discriminating Observer he but
nevertheless
that
weird conceptual slate of hand that
placed an intelligent
entity absolutely at the foundations of
physics
um became the field that we now call the
thermodynamics of computation which led
to the quantum computation Revolution
so there was a good example of someone
struggling to understand the nature of a
fundamental law in physics which was not
a fundamental
law based on conservation principles and
symmetries as the other laws were um and
realizing that the right way to think
about it was in through a computational
informatic lens
so to me they were natural methods I
mean the methods weren't developed let's
be quite clear I mean information Theory
didn't exist until the' 40s but this
going back this is this is
how complexity science was the the pre
foundations were or the foundations were
inspired by technology uh and the
machines coming along to a degree right
to even have these processes to study
and understand is that
right yes I mean the that's a very good
point
the the whole concept of the second law
comes out of
what an Caro's analysis of steam engines
right how do I make an efficient
thermodynamic cycle and so that wouldn't
have even been
asked um you know I make an efficient
Machine by minimizing heat dissipation
how do I do
it and all the follows from that
question and you're right was I I
interrupted you with an aside I thought
they were connected what you were saying
no I think I mean I just want to make
the point that I very I think it's
rarely the case that
you start with the method yeah right I
think that you you you start with the
question and then you start in these
papers of course because they
foundational they developed their own
methods I mean there was no chaos theory
before Ed Len invented it HRI panker had
made the observation based on his
analysis of the three body problem that
there was this thing in deterministic
systems that was a bit of a shock that
they weren't perfectly predictable
without perfect Precision of measurement
Loren then says takes that to
meteorology and again very interesting
history a very rich
history and has to develop techniques
for the
analysis of chaotic systems nearly all
of these papers are making methods right
not just applying them and that's not
unlike the history of physics I mean you
liit and Newton had to invent the
calculus um Network Theory as we now
know it which is what happens when
sociology meet statistical
mechanics um was invented to deal with
systems that are naturally described as
Network systems um but at a certain
point what happens is something a little
bit decadent
perhaps the method moves to center
stage and then just gets overused and
over deployed and becomes the thing
itself as opposed to the the the
instrument for understanding the thing
itself where is so this I'm just jumping
way ahead
now uh and then we'll come back but so
where
is complexity science in terms
of is complexity science continuing to
evolve and develop new methods or is it
in danger of the methods becoming uh so
centralized that it could be mistaken
for the methods um I mean I know all
Sciences are sort of continuing on and
developing new methods when they need to
but it seems like complexity science is
so fluid and
evolvable that uh it essentially what
I'm asking is where are we now in
complexity science you know I mean I
don't know I think it's right at the
beginning okay I mean I think right at
the beginning I mean there are field
string theory is a good example of a of
a field that's nominally
started with an effort to resolve
contradictions between discret and
continuous formalisms in theoretical
physics and then became the method
dominated by mathematicians not
physicists and and you know now it's
it's sort of drying up because um at
some point people woke up and realized
that they weren't answering the
questions
right they were just building more and
more elaborate Tech techniques um I
think it again you have to look at the
history I mean let me just give you an
example of why I think we're at the
early phases one of the papers that we
include in this volume is the
canonical Mulla pits original paper on
neural networks okay so this is the
paper that established the entire field
in 1943
and two Extraordinary People weird
people as you know right
so Walter pits child
prodigy homeless writes letters to
Bertrand Russell in when he's 12 or 13
or whatever it was gets replies inviting
him to
Cambridge Russell not realizing that
this kid who had pointing out errors in
the
prinkipia was a homeless kid and um you
on the one hand and then doing the same
thing by auditing carnaps lectures
University of Chicago and then you know
Warren McCulla trying to discover the
psychon the elementary atom of
psychological um you know
processing um these two come together to
try and
develop a formal logic based on
thresholded units that we now think of
as Neal metet and in the process make
all sorts of criticisms which are still
valid to this this day that haven't been
addressed since
1943 um particularly issues of circular
causality um wait what you just said
that they make
criticisms what yeah they well they it's
very interesting I mean that's a you
know so in that
paper they make many points about what
these kinds of machines in my sense can
do and what they can't do and what their
future problems will be um one of them
is the um in these neural networks that
are recurrent it's very difficult to
establish causality so how will we
understand them if we've got circular
causality in millions of units which of
course is the problem of today the
problem of interpretability of neural
networks this is 1943 I remember them
saying something about you you would
know the phrasing better than I but um
you know with their drawings and they
they they do put recursive Loops in
there and then I I feel like they punted
and said uh these of course are are in
the system and will have to be addressed
at some point yes I mean essentially
that is what they say and the and they
put it very fluidly and beautifully M
you know had a very colorful language
um but I you know that paper really has
come into its own in the last 10
years and there are many other papers
like it and so that's what I mean when I
say at the very beginning because the
interpretability problem which is trying
to understand the logic of large
decentralized thresholding
units even today we're even dealing with
non circular causality most of these are
strictly feed forward right Auto
encoders
but I don't think
we've we have the methods actually or
the Frameworks for analyzing such
systems they're just being developed as
we speak so so I mean and I could go
through all of these papers even
deterministic chaos there's so much
current debate about the Free Will
problem and I've talked about it myself
at length so confusing and
um based on a really crappy
misunderstanding of of chaos and even
quantum mechanics
and and so forth
so whilst we have expertise in a number
of fields it does feel like a series of
disconnected Islands without
Bridges and that's what's gratifying
right I mean and again the history is
attempt to build them you mean within
complexity science or the Paradigm of
complexity science or within the
Specialties both yeah frankly yeah both
yeah again I I kind of want to ask like
what the current challenges let's just
we'll come back to current challenges so
let's stay in like the history um all
right so so um take us back then you
have the pre- foundations and then in
the the 1920s you start to generate what
um with the Advent of people like Turing
and lots of other people um thinking
about how machines work uh and then
applying that to how maybe biological
organisms work uh so early
1920s it starts to sort of gather these
disparate parts and try to make sense of
them together and so what else like in
that early landscape did it did it look
like yeah I mean I think that you have
to remember how much happened in the 40s
and 50s I mean because in the 40s and
50s we have you think about it so this
is just volume one right of those four
you have
Shannon yeah information Theory you have
churing computation imitation game you
have
Nash Game Theory you have Weaver so all
of this is happening interestingly so
complexity as a
phrase that somehow captures this
constellation of Concepts that the four
pillars
circumscribe uh was first articulated in
1948 by Warren Weaver that was Weaver
and
Weaver explicitly wanted to make a
distinction between
Simplicity what in the book I call the
world of symmetry symmetry yeah right
and determinism and so forth
um disorganized complex
which is the world of of boltzman caro
and clusia statistical mechanics gases
dis for formally disordered States um
both of which we know how to describe
mathematically one we average and we
treat with ensembles and one we treat
with classical differential
equations and in the
middle is the world that he called the
world of organized complexity the things
that just seem irreducible that we're
constantly struggling with and that's
societies and brains and the natural
world and ecosystems and all the rest
and Weaver says that's complex somewhere
between those two extremes and in that
middle we need new methods so it was
both ontological and epistemological in
1948 and the point he makes is he
says we
need new forms of computation to study
that
explicitly uh he talks less about new
kinds of mathematics which we turned out
we did need um and so that paper is very
precent and it
established the field which then by the
1970s everyone was talking about
complexity it it you know now it at the
same time in the' 40s roseen Blu you
know um and Vena are inventing
cybernetics
right and cybernetics has a legitimate
claim to be
being the
embryo of what developed into complexity
science is that because of the the uh
emphasis
on a not autop poetic but on
Agency on agency I think on agency yes
what about it 1970s um yes very much so
because what the
cybernetic
framework did
is it
said the
objects
have
objectives right that that you know
interestingly William James in the
principles of psychology in 1918 or 1919
whatever he wrote that book he makes
this very interesting distinction
between laws from in front and laws from
behind Okay and he James suggests that
the defining characteristic of all
mental
phenomena is that they follow laws from
in front meaning they have
purpose they're being driven from the
laws from behind you know that's physics
and chemistry what we would think of
bottom up but there's something P
peculiar
about psychological mental phenomena
which is that they they kind of start
with a desire they start with an with a
goal and cybernetics was the
mathematical and engineering
solution to the William James question
and of course it came out of radar
tracking machines and all that stuff in
the
war and was
generalized uh to the study of in some
sense self-maintaining informations
whose parts are integrated through the
sharing of information so venina set
about trying to develop the framework
that would allow him to address that
question of course someone
unsuccessfully um it morphed into
control theory and complexity science
branched off in a different set of
directions so had had Viner stuck to his
original emphasis and goal he might have
been more of a forefather I hate that
term but more of a progenitor of
complexity science I mean you you
started by saying that in some sense uh
we can trace complexity sence back to
cybernetics yeah I mean the problem is
you know he became absolutely obsessed
with um feedback yeah yeah nothing wrong
with that but uh nothing at all wrong
with that it's it's one of the four
pillars right right it's the control
Dynamics pillar um and in I mean again
that has a fascinating history going
back to Maxwell's work on Governors
which regulated power in Steam Engines
but the vena discovered actually
rediscovered but it was one pillar and
it was a little bit too much was made
made of this everything is about
feedback and the maintenance of state
and the relationship to the notion of
homeostasis but there's all this other
stuff going on right that was much as
interesting let's say about adaptation
and computation and change not
stasis not just tracking targets but
making them and
um he kind of he was a bit too much of a
monomaniac I think on this on this
feedback loop concept and and missed a
lot of other interesting material but
this goes back to how to think like a
complexity scientist right because
monomania Heralds great discoveries as
well because when you become transfixed
on something even if you have your
blinders on you're going to study that
thing in great great depth and that
leads to discoveries maybe in that
narrow field so if I want to be a
complexity scientist studying you know I
study the brain right and behavior um
like for example like how do I know how
much time do I spend studying feedback
control and then moving on to
self-organized systems and then moving
on to uh you know autop poesis right so
how much how how often do I spend right
and and what is the trajector the
perfect trajectory in terms of how when
to start integrating Concepts uh and
methods from these different
fields it's I mean let's take the
example let's
imagine that no
Vina asked himself the question of what
would happen if two
agents were engaged in mutual feedback
he would have been forced to start
thinking about things that Von neyman
Morgan Stern and then John Nash were
worrying about what we now call Game
Theory the theory of strategic
interactions it's another higher order
stability
concept that comes from Reckoning with
multiple agents
interacting so that's just one example
he he he he got stuck with a single
agent in an environment with say a
moving Target and so I think the the
framework suggests themselves by virtue
of asking the next logical question and
and then you have to go and retool you
know to try and address them but I do
think it's the
question that prompts the expansion your
inquiries but often the next logical
question is only logical in hindsight or
obvious in hindsight right um I mean
that's just a question of creativity I
suppose may be more than logic but it's
only logical in light of what you know
about complex systems and and what makes
them interesting but if you don't know
that already it's hard to see where that
next logical question is from that
context perhaps well let me give you
another example which brings in John Von
noyman not in Game Theory but in his
theory of
autometer I think it's quite natural um
so van neyman's working at The Institute
for advanced study on building the
maniac based on the aniac Philadelphia
to do numerical
meteorology and
ballistics and these machines are very
unreliable right and so these machines
keep breaking
down so your having to replace
parts so vomen says how do you achieve
robustness in noisy computational
systems of the kind that Vena was
positing to solve problems of feedback
control ven wasn't worrying about the
fact they were falling apart he was
theorizing about it Van Norman was
building a computer that was falling
apart so he says the only way to ensure
continued operation
of a system with that many parts is that
the parts
replicate Oh I thought you were going to
say redundancy but replic redundancy was
one yes he wrote a very famous paper on
essentially redundancy or robustness in
probabilistic autometer um fault
tolerance is what we would call it
now you can do it that way but that only
takes you so far at a certain point you
need to replenish it and the way you
replenish it well how life replenishes
it is it replicates parts so Von noyman
suddenly realizes do you know I thought
I was just trying to build reliable
computers what I was really after was a
theory for the origin of
life okay and so and because it's
vanoyan he doesn't stop and say oh I'm
not going to go down that path because
look at all the things I'm going to have
to learn about biochemistry and so on he
does go down that path and invents an
entirely
new Theory the theory of universal
Constructors which have now proven to be
only in the last decade again with the
work of people like David Deutch and
then my colleagues you know Sarah Walker
and Lee Cronin on assembly index and so
on but that's a beautiful example
of seeing the
problem and then daring to pursue it and
not just saying I don't have the time or
the skills so I maybe if you say
thinking like complexity scientist is a
kind
of I don't know if it's an immodesty or
a bravery or a recklessness that says I
am going to go down on that path because
I know someone has
to right so I mean I hate to uh bring
this in but then people have to worry
about their careers as well and I know
SFI you've maybe you used you've used
the term Maverick in the past to
describe people's um
uh uh personalities what kind of people
fit in the SFI although I know it's a
wide range of people but uh then I I
have to worry if I go down all of these
different rabbit holes and spend a
little bit of time in each of them and
ask the right question that I have to
worry about my career right you know I'm
slightly less sympathetic I'm the worst
person that
way
um I'm just echoing what I think people
might be thinking no I know and I know
people do think this and I and and I
write and I get it and um but I do think
there's something a little wrong with
the world to be honest yes but the
that's the way it is yeah well but then
it's our job to defy it I mean I have to
say
I at a certain point you we only live
once and we don't live very
long
and I think you should dare to go down
that path and the reality is Right Paul
that if you're sincere and you really
work at it chances are you'll do work as
interesting as conventional work in your
own field it's not you might not be the
one you might not be a loren or a Von
noyman or a Nash most of us are not but
you could still do good work down that
path and and that's been my experience
it's it's it's not that it's a totally
Reckless jumping off a cliff move it's
just a Lal move and so most people have
done very well surprisingly and maybe
not surprisingly right because the
territory has not been saturated with
other scientists so even if you're not
doing the best work you're making
discoveries because there's no one else
in the same room with you so I think
there's a there is a kind of safety
weirdly enough in moving into
underexplored territories because you're
not competing with a million other
people right so it's a trade-off right
you don't have the security of
peers as many peers but you have the
benefit of an unpluged environment so I
think they might even out
so I'm sorry I'm just going off the top
of my head here with questions but this
made me just think you have these four
volumes the foundational papers what
role does survivorship bias play in in
like the complexity Sciences right so if
I go laterally and I maybe I'm not
jumping off a cliff but maybe I took a
misstep and it's Tak leading me down a
road that's not going to get me in the
foundational papers uh volumes right
right is there do you see that um isn't
it a problem or not a problem but a
phenomenon in within complexity science
as well I mean it's a phenomenon in all
Sciences right most of us will be
completely forgotten and I think that so
it is the case that these are
the the papers that prove to be of
enduring value um but it's worth asking
were they attended to in their time I
mean you mentioned ausus a couple of
times that's 1970s that's matcha and
verella that was completely ignored it
was considered New Age nonsense for
decades was it decades has it only in
the past decade or two come backs I mean
people like Randy beer and others at
Indiana who have really been championing
that worldview even now honestly Paul
even now if you went into your
Neuroscience conference and you
mentioned they'd slap you about the face
I don't go to Neuroscience conferences I
don't want to get slept know so I think
even now but what they did right it's
inter about vman is he they said life is
not about self-replication it's about
self- synthesis
right it was a it was an interesting
move it was very much in the Universal
Constructor lineage um and but they used
this language which was quite unfamiliar
to people you know the concept of
autonomy and self-maintenance
and the issues of boundary that only now
through people like Judea Pearl's work
and Carl friston's work all this idea of
marov
blankets in the Bay's language but it
was actually present in their language
but it was you know it was early
language so it felt a bit odd and
unfamiliar
so I think so
again I think they're way ahead of their
time people like Nicholas Lumen the
German sociologist used their work to
interpret
societies building on people like
durkheim's idea of a society as a
irreducible aggregate of individuals
it's it's greater than the sum of its
parts
so but I think it's fair to say that a
lot of Pap in this volume certainly like
Von forer's theory of self-observation
that is you know 30 years before Doug
talk Hof talking about strange Loops
people think this is kind of silly stuff
Age of Aquarius speculation you know and
part of the problem is we were so good
at reductionism we were so good at
simple causality that anything that
was decentralized Collective complex
causality many the summation of many
many important
factors it attracted a kind of mytic
language prior to the development of its
methods that was kind of marginalized as
new agism and um you know it's there
with Alexander Von humbal in his early
theories of ecology but it's very
empirical right it's based on the
observation of the natural world early
attempts to formalize these ideas in
things like
synergetics or general systems theory a
lot of people thought it was kind of
just a little strange
are you happy with uh the term
complexity
science I am because it it does two
things for me
um one is it's opposed to Simplicity and
reductionism of a certain kind
that there are ways of knowing without
taking everything apart right there's
that bit of complexity can I guess your
next point I'm sorry gu are you going to
use the word pluralism in this next
sentence no I wasn't but I
can the the other one was much more
about the development also in these four
volumes of what we now think of
algorithmic information oh yeah karov
Solomon off
chatin
and this idea that was developed then
subsequently by people like risten and
and others that complex phenomena are
incompressible
phenomena and um
um and another way of saying that is
that they break lots of symmetries and
they have long histories can we pause on
broken symmetries that's it's one thing
I realized you know when you're reading
a book and you you read the same phrase
over and over and then you get halfway
through the book and you you think I'm
not sure I have a great grasp on what
that phrase means broken symmetries is
one of those phrases so I went back and
I tried to um see if I could find a
little more detail what what does
symmetry and therefore broken symmetry
mean I'm not sure if if you could just
expand on it a little bit and why it's
important for I don't want to use the
word emergence yet in our conversation
but why it's important for complex
systems well I'll tell you why it's the
opposite is important first symmetry so
symmetry is the foundations of all
physical Theory and you can think of it
as symmetry of
process the time symmetry of the
equations of motion and that gives
you through
elaboration all of the forces in the
standard model and and so on so a lot of
the gauge theories sit on fundamental
symmetries in the processes but then
there's symmetry of
outcomes right that the there are
alternative States you can be in but
you're more you're as likely to be in
one as the other okay right and that's
true at very small scales and we'll talk
about that in a second second and that's
where things like the renormalization
group and so on kick in so the symmetry
of configurations vers versus the
symmetry of the fundamental equations
and laws and basically physics all comes
out of
that now it's been known for a long time
in physics and beyond that in certain
processes whilst there is a symmetry of
outcomes once you enter into one of
those States you get stuck in it
and you can get stuck in it effectively
forever very famously one of the
founding texts also in I think it's in
volume two the 1972 paper by the Nobel
Laur Phil Anderson more is different so
what what Phil starts with in that paper
is the following thought experiment says
take a simple molecule like NH3 like
ammonia ammonia has two configurations
it's a pyramid and those pyramids invert
they goop bloop bloop bloop and it's
small enough that it fluctuates between
the two configurations such that if you
were to observe the system naturally
you'd be in one state 50% of the time in
the other state so you have symmetry of
outcomes okay but if you make that
slightly larger molecule just more atoms
like ph3 like phosphine that also has a
p pyramidal structure that oscillates
but very slowly well still quite fast
but slowly relative to the NH yes and so
basically
the energy requirement to move between
the two states now is high enough the
energy
barrier that actually you you basically
stop where you
started and as molecules get larger and
larger the underlying physical laws that
gives you symmetry of outcome become
useless because now you end up where you
started okay now why does this matter in
a very famous paper written by Eugene
vigner uh on physics on what he called
principles of invariance and symmetries
he said all physical law tries to do two
things it tries to come up with a very
parsimonious set of
processes and a very small set of
initial
conditions the process is is the thing
we understand usually based on Symmetry
and the initial conditions are things
you don't understand you have to assume
them okay what Phil was saying in 197 2
in the Mor's different paper is that
once things get large enough almost all
the information you care
about that allows you to explain the
observable is in the initial
conditions the thing you know nothing
about and it so now Darwin's theory and
other theories like it are
essentially theories that try to explain
the the history of initial conditions
and we can get into that it's a little
bit but it's a very profound observation
so broken symmetry is when the state
that you find in the natural
world cannot be explained by the
fundamental law but by something you're
ignorant of namely the initial condition
and there are many ways you can get
broken Symmetry and we can get into that
um so if you take I'll give you one very
simple example then
stop if you think about a DNA molecule
it's made of four
bases the sequence of bases
matters right because they make proteins
that are
functional with respect to the laws of
physics you could permute it completely
it makes no difference that's all
one
molecule right with four to the nend
possible configurations Each of which is
essentially equally likely by the
fundamental laws but we know wait a
minute most of those sequences of acgs
and T's are rubbish only a small tiny
subset actually make functioning
proteins well junk DNA well we can
well that's another issue the issue of
junk DNA I'm just making this point that
the the why broken symmetry matters is
because when it comes to problem solving
matter the only way to really explain
the functional configurations is to look
at their
history not the fundamental
laws so so in that example the the
symmetry breaking is the uh the
sequencing of the molecules themselves
it's the sequence you find at
multiplicity so
meaning that particular DNA sequence is
found across all organisms from flies to
humans why that one physics doesn't tell
you why physics says any of them could
be found right all compatible with the
laws of physics right so you have to
come up with a special story which is
exactly what Eugene vigner and physics
doesn't want because it wants it all to
come down to the fundamental laws right
so anything that's not a fundamental law
is a result of a broken symmetry is that
any persistent
State
um where
this where the observation of that state
cannot be explained by the fundamental
law is going to be evidence of a broken
symmetry right um you know you walk out
of your door you go left or right
physics doesn't know which way you're
going to
go you choose to go right because I
happen to know you need to buy some new
a new pair of socks thought was because
I had free will but okay right well
there's that's another issue but but I
need to know your history or your
internal states to know that yeah and um
anyway it turns out to be the
foundational concept for all complex
phenomena um from DNA molecules to
transistors because these can all if you
think about hopfield who just won the
Nobel Prize in physics of all things oh
I wanted to ask you about that maybe we
can come back to it yeah I'll come back
to that but what he showed right I mean
the reason it's important the reason one
in physics is because he was working on
spin glasses and um the point about spin
glasses is that they can store tons of
broken
symmetries they have lots of ground
States and um so it's it's absolutely
crucial
and perzy who won the Nobel Prize
before WR won it for symmetry what he
called replica symmetry breaking which
is why hopfields model works so this
concept is everywhere once you start
looking for it so I don't know if we
want to bring up emergence right now I
mean you do spend some time um actually
it's one of the whole parts of the book
talking about emergent properties and
emergence um and the last time we spoke
you you know uh you wanted everyone to
kind of cool their Jets about emergence
that it's not some some spooky thing and
you talk a little bit about this in the
book and then you have at the very end
you um you talk about compilers as a
sort of solution to the to thinking
about emergence so maybe we can come
back to that but what what I was going
to ask uh and stop me if you want to go
somewhere else because we can go
anywhere but so a broken symmetry
then here's what I want to ask is there
anything that is not an emergent
property of something else and and un
paired with that I was going I was
leading into that because broken
symmetries are are uh fundamental for
any emergent property great yeah so one
way to say it again I don't want to get
too weedy but
is if you're in this world right
where the particular state that has been
selected depends on a history and I
don't mean I mean history mean it
depends on time right and
um what are you going to
do if you were Eugen VI you throw up
your hands and you
say we're done there's nothing to be
done that's just all about the world of
accidents it's the world of Frozen
accidents another um name for for broken
symmetries
and and the physicists and the
philosophers of physics have a word for
this a pejorative phrase they call them
the special Sciences
it's like special education anything
that's not fundamental oh I'm special
I'm special yeah I'm special too I'm
we're special and
um but you can do something really
clever um which is you can take those
brokan symmetries and you can aggregate
them into what we'd call effective
Dimensions one of them could be a
cell right and then you can come up with
cell theory or you can aggregate them m
a particular kind of cell called a nerve
cell that has an excitable membrane
which you can then explain using an
effective Theory hkin hux Theory so
they're not fundamental but they're very
coherent and consistent and quite
parsimonious and this is the key concept
right is
that the the fact of broken symmetries
doesn't imply a world just of
description because if you aggregate
them just right
which is what emergence is about um you
can come up with theories which work at
their
levels and and that's what all science
is other than fundamental physics right
and that's why Emergen is so important a
concept because the processes of
emergence are what explain why other
disciplines other than physics have to
exist in the
world it's it's really important so you
have an aeration of broken symmetries
and this um if arranged just right leads
to what could be leads to an
effective what theory is that the
effective Theory and that effec
effective Theory which which just means
that you can that you can say something
about the causality of the way that the
system is interacting with the world or
affecting things um that that abides at
its own level um and you don't have to
appeal then to lower
exactly quirks for example you don't
have to reduce everything to like more
micro micro States and that is an
emergent property an emergent system
yeah absolutely let me just make
demystify this so let's again go back to
a DNA molecule and RNA
molecule that's a very complicated bit
of chemistry there right but if you're
doing
um Diagnostics Medical Diagnostics
genetic Diagnostics phytogenetic
inference you don't need to worry about
the chemistry you just say just give the
letters it's just got an A there instead
of a c so the a thing that doesn't have
any of the detail chemistry right it
stands in for it because the detail
chemistry maps in a consistent fashion
to the letter A the a capes everything
you want to know you can you can back it
out if you want to and um that ability
to back it out if you want to um says
something about the chemical processes
because that's not true for every
everything right not everything has that
degree of coherence and stability in
time um and for example you know your
beliefs aren't as stable as that our
political institutions are not as stable
as that and so emergence has different
properties in different scales and in
different contexts but the fact that you
can do useful scientific work with a
list of
letters without going to the chemistry
is really
interesting right I mean I can tell you
do you have CLE cell by looking at
letters although we invented the concept
of CLE cell no we did interestingly no
but it's but it's a coherent mapping
right from the chemistry to the category
that works that has utility that's why
we believe in it and um I'm sure we
could have done it in other ways but it
really works and and that's evidence of
emergence and that is
again coherent coordinated dimensions of
fundamental m
that can be labeled or
tagged and then you work with the tags
right yeah and that is is what emergence
is all about and there are different
mathematical ways of saying that um but
but that's the key so then I I go down
and I list all of the things that I can
observe and I don't find anything that I
can't say is not an emergent property of
something else what is is there anything
that is not an emergent property of
something else I'm sorry this is a kind
of an ignorant question but uh I've I've
run a short list through my mind at
various times and I thought okay so it's
it's just well I'll give you some
examples of things you
know this this um property that you can
do work with the aggregate variable real
work right demonstrable work in the
world is not true of most things that
you
measure and um
and so that's very important there are
many properties of the world that are
aggregate properties of underlying
microscopic things but they don't show
this emergence property I mean let me
give you one of the
um controversial example so Game Theory
so game theory for a long time when it
was first starting to be developed was
thought to be a normative prescriptive
model of human behavior right we were
going to use this simple model that John
Nash and others developed to to actually
run political institutions right and uh
mutually assured Dru destruction was not
a problem because we could model exactly
and what rational actors would do when
they're in possession of very powerful
thermonuclear weapons okay
um you know and many of these ideas were
idealized into ideas like Cooperators
and
defectors well it turns out that the
notion of a coopera Defector is actually
not a label like like acgt is with DNA
it's not a consistent coherent mapping
from psychological States cognitive
States neural States it's not it's it's
a it's a endlessly
metamorphosing idea that doesn't have
temporal and spatial stability and
therefore it's not very useful and so at
a certain point game theorists realized
this is not a normative Theory it's a
kind of way of thinking about thought
experiments more rigorously with
math okay
and so that's a failure of emergence and
you find them everywhere there are
things that we think are real we
theorize with them and they don't
work and um so there's only a small
number of things that actually have
that consistent property that you
can screen off the lower levels
and U you know and you can say I mean
it's much to say about this but again
look at your field like let's say I
wanted to treat a psychiatric
illness should I do it with
psychoanalysis or some behavioral
intervention or with or with
pharmacology quirks you should do it
with quirks or do it with quirks even
better even worse right what is the
right intervention into the system and
these are questions of emergence and I
think where our
behavioral therapies fail they're
suggesting that the categories that
we've discovered are wrong they're not
truly emerging categories they they are
actually arbitrary aggregations of
microscopic degrees of freedom so for it
to be emergent it has to be pragmatic it
has to work it has to work it has to
have
this and there's lots of language for
this I it has to be effective it has to
have it has to be effective yeah and and
in
people the technical term for when it
doesn't work is sometimes called the
failure of entailment okay um and when
it does work sometimes called
dynamically
sufficient right so the example I like
to use is is mathematical proof If I'm
proving a
theorem why don't I have to use
Neuroscience yeah right because it turns
out that mathematics the axioms and the
deductive rules are sufficient they they
label
consistently a certain kind of logic
so you can operate with them if they
didn't right if you got up every now and
then when you were proving a theum and
sort of had an outrageous tantrum I'd
have no I've got the wrong I need
another kind of theory here I need a
theory of Mind here I need to go down a
level yeah right why you keep picking on
Neuroscience David that's unfair no
because that's norfield I'm not no I'm
just kidding I know that's why you're
that's why you're bringing it up I
appreciate it
um so we kind of went into the uh
emergence talk right before that you
were talking about the stability and we
were talking about broken symmetries and
if something stays in one condition for
long enough um it is uh considered a
broken symmetry but then you sort of
hesitated and but with that sort of long
enough like and then I thought well you
write in the book about one of the
challenges in complex science is dealing
with time and
and is that because we need to think of
everything in terms of time scales and
what is the right time scale to think of
it because if something flips back and
forth quickly on our observational time
scale we can say that it's symmetric but
if something has been to the right side
for 100 years and then if it or
geological time can be symmetric but we
might not observe it right so is that
where time becomes a challenge in
complexity science or or how what is the
relationship of time no AB I that's
completely correct I mean that's I mean
that that's exactly right and um because
you know in the lifetime of the universe
everything's going to be symmetric
because you know there'll be some kind
of heat death or what have you and we'll
be we'll be fully thermalized and which
is is a symmetric state so you're
completely correct time scales and
time is
deeply foundational in our thinking and
um right your are the thoughts that
we're having
now are absolutely dependent on the time
scales of
chemistry you know action potential
rates aggregate circuit properties and
so forth you're completely right and um
it's why this actually introduces okay
there's so much to say about
this um and that is that the notion of
subjectivity in this profound sense that
you just asked that which I mean by mean
the choice of time scales for these
processes um is a key Concept in
complexity science
and it was already a key Concept in one
of the pillars right when when the
concept of entropy was being
formalized it was understood that the
value that you
calculated dep depended on the course
What's called the course graining um so
for example um I can tie turn a
six-sided die into a coin by just making
half of the numbers heads and the other
half of the numbers Tails right and
um and so and if you calculate the
entropy of a fair coin it's a different
number from the entropy of a fair D
because one's the entropy of 1 six plus
1 16 plus 1 six and one is one and a
half plus a half and that choice of what
we call the cor graining that is the
aggregation of the probabilities is
subjective and depends on the time scale
of observation to your point
so this is a field that's nent now how
we really think
about Observer dependent entropy
calculations and it plays into
everything I mean that's one side of the
time question another side which is as
profound and people perhaps not aware of
is the concept of past present and
future have nothing to do with
physics um they have everything to do
with observers there is no past present
and future and physics but not in
classical physics and the actually the
right way to calculate them is to use
the thermodynamics of computation to use
a computational
theory again because of entropy is that
because of because of measurement
because of um it gets to some of the
issues that that MC and Pitts were
talking about which is um the reason why
there is a past versus a future is
because of things like the
irreversibility of the logical or
function in a neural
network because you the the mapping is
not invertible I I I can go forward in
calculating or but not backwards because
I don't know what the initial states are
they're ambiguous but the point is that
all of these Concepts that we use to to
explain complex
systems depend
on the limitations of the
Observer whether that's a Cell by the
way a
neuron right yeah yes again picking on
Neuroscience no no no the reason I'm not
picking on it actually know no and I no
and I mean this sincerely because I
think it's a very key field because it's
about brain and mind
and there's a special role of brain and
mind in complexity science speaking of
nested uh time
scales right and it's the field that
worries about computation and
observation chemistry less right and um
so I think it's kind of at the Nexus of
some of these theories in a quite
profound
way let's see we went from uh we went
from broken symmetries to
to time I before we move on is there
anything that the in the book that we
haven't talked about yet and I still
have you know questions that you think
is is something that you would like to
highlight before I continue asking your
questions God there's so much you know
so I
think I think it's
important
to understand the importance of
complexity in terms of
reconciling in the 20th century the
social and the Natural
Sciences
and you know take some take the the
Austrian School of
economics and I'm talking about like
shumer and Hayak and
others a lot of
ideas that we're thinking about now in
in network science come from the 40s
which is how you generate knowledge in
decentralized systems and that became an
ideology of in neoliberal ideology but
actually in the' 40s it wasn't so much
and
um you know
how do you come to consensus when you
have many constituents with partial
information problems of consensus and
coordination that really comes from
social science and now is
everywhere and so we tend to think of
Sciences in terms of going from
mathematics and the Natural Sciences
into the social sciences but actually
this is a case where the reverse
happened and one of the things I've been
interested
is this approach to the consilience of
the
disciplines when you look very carefully
about how ideas
migrate and um that was a bit of a
discovery for me of say
oh you
know General systems
theory which is now used in large
organizations to build
aircraft came out of the work of fechner
in biophysics and
Psychiatry oh that's so that the oddness
of how knowledge actually comes together
is an important part of what I talk
about because it's not linear and I
think the educational system we
have is misleading in a really profound
way but so the the point that you were
just making um about
well understanding I think you use the
word um consilience but you know
understanding where the knowledge began
and then where it ended and and you know
how it traversed and so that is a a
Herculean scholarly effort but what does
it teach us anything
about does it teach the working
scientist anything about how to go about
their uh problem
solving I think it does
because because of this weird fact that
we're addressing now
of the limitations of
time very often right the seeds to
solving a problem
exist you know I as I said I
think there's something very unfortunate
about the way we learn science and
practice it because and we all do this
right we write papers and by and large
we we site contemporary work cuz they're
likely to be the reviewers or whatever
some cynical reason but also because
it's seems more relevant um and then
we'll put in the occasional historical
reference just to demonstrate our
scholarly bonafides you
know but I have to say in going back and
reading these
papers um and these are quite limited
right cuz they 200 years or in the
volumes just hundred
years so many trails that weren't
followed because they didn't have the
methods then right every paper right
it's like one tenth of it was
realized because they could because they
had to site their peers who had methods
right but we now have methods that they
didn't you could go back a 100 years and
rewrite that paper in a completely novel
form now based on what we now know and
so really profound work is so super
generative and
um I suspect you could kind of win a
Nobel Prize just hanging out in the
1930s and rewriting what everyone wrote
that's I was just thinking that's what a
wonderful exercise uh if you were trying
to uh if you're an educator to to assign
some some of those foundational papers
and have someone rewrite them with
through the modern lens EX I mean it's
interesting I was talking to a colleague
here the physicist Carlo relli about
this and caros said you know he's going
back and looking at all of the
foundational papers and statistical
mechanics and rethinking them but which
life is short we only have so much time
I know I know I know but I think it's
it's less about being prescriptive about
what one should do but just suggesting
that um there is richness in in the
super richness in deep ideas and it's
worth bearing in mind that just one path
of many was
followed it's just worth bearing that in
mind and we could live in a very
different world if the other path had
been
followed yeah
right um okay so one one of the things
that you do in the book is you sort of
list out you call it synoptic uh surveys
so there are there have been a number of
books
um over the years sort of giving
synopses of complexity science and each
sort of there's a like you said before
there's kind of a cluster of centralized
ideas but each highlights a different um
idea but one of the things you note
among those is um that there are common
themes but the earlier you get the more
the books tend to focus on the
principles and the onology um and then
as you Traverse uh more toward later
current
times uh alluding to what you were
talking about earlier the the books tend
to focus on models and the methods um so
um and and you note that well this is a
good sign because it's a sign of a
maturing field uh but you're
also uh somewhat hesitant because it's
also a sign of you know what modernday
uh Society demands on on a uh mature
field so so what do you think about that
current um demand let's say from from
modern society yeah so I should say I
mean again this book is just as you've
seen right it's just full of tables
right it's kind of a crazy table book
because I
wanted given the constraints of length I
wanted put as much in and one way to do
that is with tables right yeah it's
quite thin but it's just tons of it's
really thick yeah it's kind of thi yeah
I think if this had been written the way
many books are now written it would be
like 500 pages oh my God and I think
people write very long books when they
shouldn't um quite frankly I prefer
density myself um you can look up all
the other stuff on Wikipedia we don't
need to resay it over and over and over
again so but as you said I I really want
to just list all the books that purport
to be books about complexity science
right I mean you know people can go and
read those for themselves and see what
other perspectives are worth
understanding um but one thing I did
notice you said I mean you know these
popular books not the technical ones you
know hacken book on synergetics is a
very important book came out of Germany
and but you're not going to read that
for fun
whereas you you you will read you know
prine's book for fun or Melanie
Mitchell's book for fun and you know
these are these are edifying um in a way
that's not quite as
challenging um but I saw it it the early
books that were wrestling with what is
this sort of brought a lot to bear on
the problem you know that
they're they're quite poetic um they're
quite expansive um
and as the field developed people would
go down you know my colleagues Jeffrey
will be I'm going to use scaling Theory
to understand right je West yeah Jeffrey
West or like Mark Newman I'm going to
use Network Theory to understand and
they're all very Illuminating but they
tend to be more narrow in their
methodologies and one advantage of that
is that readers can then use them right
right they can say oh I'm going to do
scaling on my data right or I'm going to
use networks on my data and I think
Society likes that for good reasons um
it has utility
um but it's a bit that early
conversation we were having about what
was lost in the
history what other methods would have
been useful what other ideas were there
that were neglected because they didn't
lend themselves to scaling or something
and and I think all Fields I talk a lot
to my theoretical physics friends about
this is that theoretical physics physic
up until the standard model was
established in the' 60s and ' 70s you
know so after Gman and fan and schwinger
then it became all
maths physics ceased to be conceptual if
you if you pick up a physics book pick
up margan now's book on the structure of
physical reality it's just a brilliant
read it's like wow this is fascinating
the nature of time the nature of
causality whether space is fundamental
or emergent those kinds of question
questions um and then they become these
very
technical texts exploring very narrow
questions that you're not particularly
interested in and um so I think there is
a natural Evolution but I think
it's comes at a
cost um and there's a reason why people
still go back and read gabak it's still
meaningful to people and because so many
of the questions it raised are
unanswered
so then so then what does that mean for
the future of complexity science I mean
um is it going to be just more methods
and models is that is that the
trajectory of a maturing science or
there'll be a paradigm shift and it'll
go back to principles in ontology and
rejigger oh by the way I wanted to
mention the uh Paradigm shoot Matrix no
the uh yeah the disciplinary Matrix
disciplinary Matrix I think that's one
of the more uh important maybe not
important but um very digestible
Concepts uh from that you talk
about in the in the book yeah so oh yeah
this idea so one of the questions was is
this a
paradigm if not what is it is it a yeah
yeah that's that's good
question I shall ask you that now okay
so what is I'm curious to know what you
think of Paradigm is I think so I I
Marshall a few alternative related
Concepts to address this one is the
konian Paradigm and the disciplinary
Matrix one is Vicken Stein's language
game yeah and the other one is Diles
hermeneutic circles and they're all
attempts to deal with a kind of the
mology or part hole relationships of
knowledge
structures and is this a part of physics
or a part of chemistry you know and
um is this really co coherent as an
Enterprise
and I like what Thomas Kon said he said
look think about a
matrix and or a graph that's connected
and the point
is how easy or difficult is it to add a
remove an edge from the graph if I
remove this Edge does it really matter
does it change everything or does it
just locally change something and for
him the the the the characteristic of a
paradigm was or a par paradigm shift or
what he called A
revolution is when you take away or add
an edge which completely compromises the
underlying
rough incompatible is incompatible with
that incompatible yeah you you make this
observation where you have an
observation of an interference pattern
through thin little slits and you see
classical Behavior just because you
looked at it and you think
there's nothing in my classical
mechanics that can explain this I need a
new Theory the theory of quantum
mechanics and so on and
um and so the question for me
was what's the paradigm shift from
physics and chemistry to
complexity what becomes incompatible
with physics and chemistry one we've
talked about quite a lot which is a weak
incompatibility which is all these
broken symmetries which mean you need
emergence and effective theories because
the fundamental laws don't do it it's
kind of weak right CU they still obey
the physics it's just not
determinate the more profound one for me
is when the particle thinks Life Is Life
or does it have to think it doesn't
matter life for me thinks okay there you
go sure but you know it's when the
particle says no I'm not going that way
I'm going home right then agency
intentionality will all of those IDE
ideas break the fundamental Assumption
of all of physics right um these are not
these are no longer particles in fields
these are self-determining particles and
I view that as fundamentally
paradigmatically new and it is the
origin of complexity science and as you
say it's the origin of Life the origin
of life is coextensive with the origin
of complexity science in that sense is
that why I um am trending toward being
more interested
in life as as the thing to study as
opposed if you're if you want to
understand intelligence you have to
understand
life I think so and it's really
interesting Paul I
mean this is a debate that many of us
have been having now for a while which
is what is the meaningful difference
between life and
intelligence well you don't you can't
you don't conf you don't have to
conflate them which is what I'm worried
doing right defining one by the other
but and I want to keep them separate but
I I don't know how to no so I'll give
you an examp I think I know how to keep
them separate but it's not easy um one
way to say this that I think will be
compelling to even though I don't have a
fundamental theory in um in physics a
distinction is often made between
intensive and extensive variables um
things that grow in system size like
entropy right uh versus things that
don't like temperature you know you have
the same temperature in a room whether
it's Twi as big or and
um
life is intensive you're not more alive
because you're an elephant than a flea
that would be weird right um it's it
doesn't seem to be scale dependent
whereas intelligence does I think any
reasonable definition of intelligence
would allow that an elephant is more
intelligent than a I mean if you don't
do that I would say you don't have a
very good definition and so
but that distinction I think is real the
theory should reflect that fact that in
one world scale matter matters in the
other world scale matters less um but
that somehow that they are at some point
of
convergence
equivalent at some point but could you
say if one organism was more mind
than another that it was then also more
alive I mean these are semantics I don't
think you should I think it would not be
useful but that has nothing to do with
intelligence that has to do with let's
say subjective experience of a fly
versus an elephant versus a yeah there
might be another concept we need okay a
third right that's a very good point um
I don't think intelligence is the one we
want for that yeah but um you know CU I
mean for example um a virus is more adap
AP aable than an
elephant that's true we learned that a
few years ago right at the right time
scale okay but the time scale turn out
to matter yes and so but so we do have
other Concepts where there's more or
less which don't perfectly align with
more or less intelligence right you can
be more adaptable and less intelligent I
think that's true of a virus versus a
human um but but there is a point right
at
which intelligence and life seem to
conver and I think the origin of
life might be that point which is the
origin of both right because I don't
think you'd want to say that prior to
life the universe is intelligent there
are people who say that my colleague
Seth ly would say the universe is a
computer well you're an a an it from bit
kind of guy right well right and I think
but information to me I want to make
distinct from intelligence okay I think
that was the that's the revolution in
the physics of information right even
though Claude Shannon worked on
Engineering
Systems telegraphs and telephones and
computers um we now know that you can
talk about the information in a black
hole so it's a theory that's more
General than purposeful matter I think
that's an important
Point okay David I want to make sure
that I get to some so I had like I told
you at the beginning I had uh a few
people write in some questions for you I
want to ask you one last question before
I get to those patreon questions and the
questions I'm going to ask you from them
also have to do with what we've already
been talking about but uh okay
so so you know you said early on in the
conversation how nent complexity science
is still and and we talked about whether
it's synthesis or unification and how
it's kind of defined by the boundaries
of other
Sciences it still seems to me from an
outsider like sort of a a disperate uh
collection of entities right and and
this goes back to like how do I know
which which uh thing to choose if I have
this particular question right um you
know I want to know like well what is
complexity how does complexity science
view the brain and there's not a simple
answer to that
right really what I want to know is uh
because it feels uncomfortable to me to
like sit in that
world does it over time feel start to
feel more comfortable living in that
space where there are so many moving
parts and things to choose from and
knowing if if I'm I have this question
these are the fields and methods I
should draw from Etc does that start to
feel more comfortable over time I mean
it's an interesting I mean this is a
very hard question to answer right
because it would be unfair if you say
how should a
physicist understand the brain right and
you'd think God what would that even
mean you'd have to sort of think about
that for a bit um and or a chemist or
anyone else so first of all it's a
difficult question to answer for any
field it's not special to
complexity um and I'm not sure
complexity is a field in this in the way
they are by the way either it's a
paradigm but not a field perhaps well
that's
interesting interesting and
um so again let me just state it to
demystify it a set of principles to
understand problem solving matter right
and brains do that they solve problems
um and what are those principles and
we've said they're the pillars you want
to understand the metabolism the
thermodynamics of the brain that's
totally reasonable that goes into fmri I
mean that's the whole evolution of that
technology which is in some sense an
effort to connect the thermodynamic
vertex to the informational vertex
saying through the landow principle it
says you know every Elementary
operation requires a certain amount of
energy you know KT L 2 or whatever and
so
um so I think
that looking at any system that is
purposeful in the Adaptive sense not the
religious sense in the Adaptive sense um
through these
different Frameworks and their
Associated
methodologies you know there are people
who study I know them right there are
people who study critical phenomena in
in the brain so they're using
statistical mechanics there are other
people who are interested in low
Dimension movement in low dimensional
manifolds in the brain so they're
studying non dynamics of the brain
they're all out there right and they're
and I think the complexity lens at its
best combines some of
those right and in the process
possibly asks you to re-evaluate the
boundary of the system you're studying
okay that's right so it's sort of saying
maybe what I'm really most interested in
is not just in one
head it's in a population of heads in
which case I need to now engage with
social networks and information
transmission in a way that I could get
away with ignoring when I did the work
in the lab right um so but do you think
like a a good exercise for me or or a
neuroscientist someone like me right
could I go through your book with these
four pillars in mind and and sort of
because you do it um things are parsed
out in tables but you also write about
the the all the papers that are in all
the tables and stuff so I could kind of
go through and scan with these pillars
in mind and think what what of these
methods and frame conceptual Frameworks
and
approaches are linked to those four
pillars that would be beneficial to me
to understand what I'm studying do you
think I could do that I think one could
do that I think there is a heuristic
there okay but also I don't think it's I
do think it's a separate Enterprise
right because it's really looking
for I mean you you said it at the
beginning right I don't remember of
integrational synthesis
and I mean you'll still do amazing work
if you just work on the biochemistry of
cell surface receptors now there are
people you know
you know like Bray at Cambridge who said
you know I want to study self-service
receptors as if I'm looking at flocking
of birds right right I'm going to study
them as if they're coordinated
Collective dynamics of
semi-autonomous agents and this is where
pluralism comes in as well right because
then you're taking and perspectivalism
yeah exactly and he's taking a kind of
complexity lens on what normally would
be studied using more traditional
biochemistry so I think you can you I
think you are right say if you step back
and say if I thought of the nucleus as
flocking
Behavior what would that do how can I
let's say I applied those methods I
think you could do that I think it'd be
quite a
powerful experiment in
counterfactuals to to to use it that way
and I suspect by the way remember I
remember John Wheeler making this point
the it from bit John Wheeler um is that
his heuristic for doing physics was
always to ask the counterfactual yeah
what if what if there was no gravity
what if there was no strong nuclear
force what if you know yeah what if
information is more fundamental than
energy
um and I think that can take you quite a
long way as long as it's disciplined by
real methods and real Frameworks as
opposed to fantasies which is also
interesting with us that's on the
fiction shelf yeah we haven't even
talked about that but all right well
sounds like I uh I better get get on it
if if I want to do it within this
lifetime right so well I don't think so
actually weirdly enough I don't think so
poor
because
interestingly I mean just take the
example of whe again whether we like it
or not Carl frison's free energy um it
really was just I'm going to take
ideas from information Theory and
rethink the brain through that lens
right
and and of course you can take it as far
as you like but I don't know if it's
that hard I don't know if it's that much
of a digression David thank you so much
for your time it's really nice to see
you again I recommend this book and then
people can I I'll I'll put links in the
show notes to when where people can find
those Foundation papers and then we'll
start the 40-year journey into reading
them all and understanding them all yeah
good luck thank you for having
me brain inspired is powered by the
transmitter an online publication that
aims to deliver useful information
insights and tools to build Bridges
across neuroscience and advanced
research visit the transmitter. org to
explore the latest Neuroscience news and
perspectives written by journalists and
scientists if you value brain inspired
support it through patreon to access
full length episodes join our Discord
community and even influence who I
invite to the podcast go to brain
inspired. Co to learn more the music
you're hearing is Little Wing performed
by Kyle Donovan thank you for your
support see you next time
