all right let's talk about some
billionaires here because and this guy's
just a hundred multiple hundred
Millionaire right Joe Rogan he's not
quite a billionaire yet but he's
probably like at least in the past
couple years made couple hundred million
on one deal probably 100 million other I
don't know his sptify is like 250
million uh you know but there's over
taxes and you know you got to pay your
agent uh so you know you may only have
$150 million so his job
is to bring on
billionaires and have them uh articulate
some type of like grievance one that is
about like you know whatever Free Speech
maybe because they're you know these
Tech billionaires are so uh enamored
with free speech or about how they're
being forced to be Dei and the solution
is to get the Federal Trade Commission
or the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau to stop uh suing them because
they're monopolies here is um Joe Rogan
doing his work as the butler to the
billionaires uh sir uh H how should we
uh deal with your problem with these
pesky little um uh government
Regulators um forcing you to um uh
comport with antitrust law
oh why don't you come on and complain
about how someone swore at
you of all what was the premise like
what what would they were they saying
was your offense was it that you were
allowing information that was not true
that was getting out there I know there
was also they're saying that you guys
were allowing hate groups to speak there
was a lot of this yeah I mean the the
tough thing with politics is that
there's
like well when you say someone's coming
after you are you referring to kind of
the government and investigations and
all that I mean so the issue is that
there's
the there's what specific thing an
agency might be looking into you for and
then there's like the underlying
political motivation which is like why
do the people who are running this thing
hate you and I those now pause it for a
second I just want like this billionaire
baby brain here and he's understand he
knows exactly what he's doing he knows
he's talking to some who doesn't really
know what they're talking about and he
knows that there that this guy's got the
biggest audience out there and so he's
going to make it about hate you the
government hates me the government hates
me I mean like what child would think
this this guy's a billionaire this guy
has destroyed companies bought
competitors they uh they um they have
lied to reporters they have uh you know
they're in the business they they caused
a
genocide they they like like that's what
Facebook did I'm not I'm not being
factious here um look up uh Myanmar and
so this guy knows what he's doing the
government doesn't hate him and he is
going to divorce his argument is not
going to be like they hate me because we
were putting up we were allowing Co
disinformation and we wouldn't take it
down so they hated me like and they
wanted they wanted to sit next to Jenny
at the um at the in the cafeteria and I
wouldn't let them and they thought that
Jenny was too friends with me and
therefore no that's not what's going on
here when Biden got
in because of uh of a growing movement
within the Democratic party about
antitrust and the fact that antitrust
laws have not been in any way enforced
since the Reagan Era that this
Beth Facebook meta whatever you want to
call it had uh and Google for that
matter and Apple for that matter these
Tech beths have acquired so much Market
power they are breaking antitrust laws
they are um uh and they're incidentally
not only they acquiring so much economic
power but they're acquiring so much
political power and he doesn't want you
to know that he doesn't want to know
that this is the reason though I'm sorry
just like right now meta is under to you
bring up antitrust meta is under in a
April there will be a if if I don't know
the the Trump appointee if they kill
this case which is literally what
Zuckerberg is trying to get H to make
happen right now with this advertisement
on free advertisement by state media Joe
Rogan meta faces April trial in FTC Cas
seeking to unwind Instagram merger they
acquired Instagram in 2012 and then
WhatsApp in 2014 the accusation is that
they overpaid for them because they
wanted to kill a competitor Instagram
and TiK ToK by the way Tik Tok is
Instagram's biggest competitor by far
and you know what the Supreme Court May
uphold a Tik Tock ban which will just
inflate this guy's net worth so he and
Elon Musk are in a race to loot all of
us right now uh by killing these actions
that would benefit the general and he LS
into the fouchy thing because antivaxers
are because that's where in the market
that's where he's sitting on that's he's
on the show say that's what they want to
hear they're H animals that are easily
LED but again these were the same people
they were talking about save the kids
the other day another reason that the
FDC is looking at Mark Zuckerberg's face
is because of spying and and profiting
off data from kids all right so just
remember the timeline here right uh
Trump wins uh Zuckerberg uh basically
announces hey we're going to allow hate
uh talk on our site now we're not going
to do any disinformation checking you
know all of that push that we had to
have actual like journalists do any fact
checking we've decided we're not going
to do that anymore and we've hired
basically our our Global Affairs guy is
a former Bush Administration official
official who was part of the Brooks
Brothers riot in 2000 longtime
Republican operative and then once they
do all that this guy goes down to
Florida to visit with the uh the the new
monarch um Donald Trump Donald Trump and
I wonder if Joe Rogan's gonna go like
well wait a second when do you say the
government hates you like like in the
same way that I hate this guy who you
know I bumped into it you know who real
dick to me in junior high
um to do with the Federal Trade
Commission antitrust against you let's
see if he does who wants to put a bet
and see if Joe Rogan's going to ask that
question I I just want to flush out the
timeline that you just laid out because
it's really important right this the New
York Times had reporting from over the
weekend that they decided after the
election before Thanksgiving in those
weeks after Zuckerberg was Consulting
with meta board member billionaire VC
Mark Andre uh that they were going to
wind down all of the hate spe
protections and the factchecking Mark
Andre went on Joe Rogan oh my gosh yes I
knew I recognized that name he was the
one who told us that the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau was going
after and debank people that was
Elizabeth Warren's personal agency
targeting him and other companies I
wonder what it could have been talking
he could have been talking about on the
26th of November which is the exact
timel that that the New York Times
reported on that andreon and Zuckerberg
were working together to come up with
this new Pro right wi service and I'm
sorry I'm gon to make a really stupid
aesthetic point the freaking broccoli
haircut and the oversized t-shirt with
the chain dude you're not a 15-year-old
tick tocker I I would not be shocked if
this guy's getting a divorce because of
this new look that he has going on here
oh my God Andre incidentally went on and
said that people are being debanked the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
actually has gone after banks for Deb
banking in this way the complete
opposite of what he's saying I remind
you also that when Peter Teal's uh
mentee um uh JD Vance was chosen as
president as to be the vice president
nominee and Dre immediately endorsed
Donald Trump and then Elon Musk
immediately gave uh uh millions of
dollars hundreds of millions of
dollars and then there's like the
underlying political motivation which is
like why do the people who are running
this thing hate you and I think that
those can often be two very different
things so I we had organizations that
were looking into us that were like not
really involved with social media like I
like the cfpb like this um Financial I
don't even know what it stands for it's
the this guy you telling me this mofo
doesn't know what the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau stands
for are you like how effing dumb is Joe
Rogan how how effing dumb or how much of
an accomplice is he to what these
billionaires are doing I mean honestly
this is disgusting
yeah what is it the the H the uh listen
I'm a businessman Al Capone doesn't do
this this uh
FBI what is it Mark sure knew what it
was Federal band Incorporated coming
after me for my taxes oh he's above it
he's not concerned at all about
2021 launched investigation by Rohit
Chopra the head of the cfpb into uh
Facebook potentially illegally using
third party financial data to Target
their ads if he doesn't know about that
major government he do you know the name
of that agency head looking into his
company then he's just really bad at his
job list this whole Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau thing that he just
pulled and go back understand this is
the tell that this whole thing is a
performance that this has all been
written by his crisis uh um you know his
PR firm this is how you approach Joe
Rogan this is how you go on this is how
you dress this is what you say these are
the verbs that you
use they hate me says the Harvard grad
billionaire do the gritty oh my God go
ahead two very different things so and
we had organizations that were looking
into us that were like not really
involved with social media like I like
this cfpb like this um Financial I don't
even know what it stands for it's the
it's the financial
organization um that Elizabeth Warren
had set up oh great and and it's
basically it's like we're not a bank the
Bing section yeah no so so we're not a
bank right it's like Market what does
meta have to do with this but they kind
of found some theory that they wanted to
investigate and it's like okay clearly
they were trying really hard right to to
like find find some Theory but it like I
it just it kind of like throughout the
the the the the party and the government
there was just sort of I don't know if
it's I don't know how this stuff works I
mean I've never been in
government just like a quiet
consent
um the the uh Consumer Financial
Protection
Bureau is uh started to investigate and
incidentally they did this in um 202
before let's just be clear here they've
been investigating him probably for a
year up to that so it's not like oh they
came in on the day and they hated us um
because Facebook and this may come as a
real
surprise because this guy she I'm just
up there I just created this so people
could connect with each other and check
out if somebody else was hot I had no
idea that we were scraping everybody's
data and that's the way that I became a
billionaire I just woke up one morning
and I got this big check from the
business people and all of a sudden I
now know that Elizabeth Warren is coming
after us yeah what they have this theory
that
um that the uh Financial products and
services that are being sold on meta uh
may be problematic in scamming people I
mean me an effing break they first
requested that information in 2021 and
then brought the the uh basically the
probe in 2024 so he has those two things
he has the an trust lawsuit that he's
staring down the barrel of um that could
basically threaten his uh control over
Instagram and WhatsApp uh at meta and
then two that cfbb probe about
potentially uh illegally uh using third
party financial data to Target ads and
this is exactly what andreon said almost
word for word when we covered that in
November on Joe Rogan's podcast the
thing about Elizabeth Warren and the
cfpb um and like the natural followup to
when he goes on this greed here would be
like what are they saying they're
investigating you for does he ask that
question another thing we should find
out I don't know how this stuff works I
mean I've never been in government I
don't know if it's like a directive or
it's just like a quiet consensus that
like we don't like these guys they're
not doing what we want we're going to
punish them but um but it's uh don't
piss down my back and tell me it's R
it's tough to be at the other end of
that what was it like um well it's not
good I think well the thing I think is
actually the toughest though is um it's
it's Global right so and and really when
you think about it the US government
should be defending its companies right
not be the tip of the spear attacking
its companies so when we so we we talk
about a lot okay what is the experience
of um okay if the US government comes
after you I I think the real issue is
that when the US government does that to
its tech industry um it's basically just
Open Season around the rest of the world
first off
like now it's not just that the American
government hates us the European
government's also hate us for no reason
how come for no reason everybody hates
us and all I'm doing I don't know about
this business stuff I'm just trying to
go out there and have some fun we're a
good old American company Mr Trump don't
you love us Joe you want to come up
let's go let's go watch a ball game or
something come on every defending the
American people from you and your
predatory business practices which on
top of other things are spying on their
kids what is predatory what is that big
word I don't know what that means you
hate me this is just like honestly like
this is this feels like a movie like
there was a movie made it might have
been even too generous to him at the
time I know but this feels like uh
what's that movie where they had the
kids play all the gangsters uh it was
from the' 70s it's uh it's like yeah the
kids play all the gangster all the roles
are played by kids right it's just like
this is so baby brained and yet
andreon oh hey man I'm just like uh I
mean it's just this is so such a
pipeline all of these guys incidentally
all these guys also spy the out of
you oh yeah Bugsy Malone thank you all
these guys spy I mean this is like you
know you can have all these sort of like
conspiracy theories about the CIA the
FBI and all this here it is all laid out
in front of you we just have this guy
come on do a performance pretend like
the government regulatory whatever that
means agencies are coming after us for
you know uh allowing fraud and us
profiting off of the fraud that uh
Financial scams that we basically
advertise on our thing or the data
scraping we do of all their material
whatever I don't even know what all that
means man it's like we're just trying to
have
party Tik Tok Tik Tok was banned for the
same things that Facebook and all these
other American companies do but what the
price that Tik Tok wasn't willing to pay
is to have their CEO bootlick the
incoming Administration this
gratuitously that's the only difference
do what Facebook does like when I think
about like American technology companies
protecting American technology companies
well you know you got like uh Elon Musk
who got billions from the American uh
taxpayer and then went basically built
all his stuff in
China these guys um it seems like Tik
Tok can be replicated it seems like
social media can be replicated I'm not
saying like we don't have this like
proprietary like all of the American
industry you just fired how many
thousands of Americans I mean give me an
eth how many did did did can you search
the transcript did Rogan ask Zuckerberg
about H1B abuse at any time in this
three hour conversation with a uh
billionaire we should uh search
that is that to its tech industry um
it's basically just Open Season around
the rest of the world right I me the the
EU I I pull these numbers the EU has
fined the tech companies more than $30
billion over the last I think it was
like 10 or 20 years holy oh my God
that's pause it for one second $30
billion oh my God that's almost 5% of
Elon musk's net
worth uh holy cow meta is worth
1.53 trillion holy cow and that's one of
the tech companies whoa that's crazy all
the tech companies combined
worth multiple they've been fine for no
reason right just cuz they hate and you
know what the EU is reasoning and the
fun the fine mechanism that is being
used there is also also their equivalent
of antitrust so perhaps this is because
you guys are way too big and have way
too much control over everybody's
information and what people are
consuming and they have nothing to offer
physically all they do they they've
reached a saturation point the the
glasses and the virtual reality or
whatever these are like things that rich
people can buy cuz they're $5,000 now
they're at a point where they don't they
have to continue to grow their market
share for their shareholders and they
can't do it because they're not offering
for anything for anybody except data
collection and now I guess hate hate
speech and let's be
clear if Facebook did not exist the
number of tech companies in this country
would be exponentially larger because
all of the companies that they've bought
to kill so they didn't compete against
them all of the companies that they've
bought subsumed and then laid off all
the people would exist or would have had
a better chance to grow yep so all this
is just
and he's also this is he's also now
telling you what the tell it what the
ask is from Trump because he knows Trump
largely speaking is not going to pursue
the antitrust stuff that they that the
Biden Administration did but now he's
also like saying well they're not
protecting American companies the US
government is they should be protecting
us who well gee how would they do do
that Mr Zuckerberg well I don't know
maybe if Trump wanted to threaten
tariffs on European countries unless
they lay off us there that might be
something to do but I don't know all
that International stuff let us spy on
your kids Europe yeah I don't get all
that complicated
stuff 10 or 20 years holy when you
think about it like okay there's it's
like you know $100 million here couple
billion dollars there but what what it I
think really adds up to is this is sort
of like a kind of eu-wide policy for how
they want to deal with American Tech
it's almost like a tariff and I
think to decide somebody say tariff well
maybe we should it's almost like a
tariff you mean these fines for breaking
European law is like a tariff so why we
have tariffs too I mean this is just
well it's for an audience of one it's
for an audience of one and but there's
20 million 25 million people who are
being dumbed down by this stuff I know
and that and and Rogan again either is
an idiot or just like willfully playing
along in a the only thing that it gives
him a reaction and all the sort of Lies
like literally talk about like uh you
know baby bird feeding this is like this
is just gruul and it's just like pouring
into uh Rogan's you know system and just
pouring out the other way this is so
this is one of the the most disgusting
things I've ever seen honestly so grot
grossed out by this and remember this is
the guy incidentally Rogan who bitched
when I went on uh uh Patrick Beck David
show to say that people making over $3
million annually should get taxed 90
cents on each dollar after3 million this
idiot doesn't know anything about what
it is to make $3
million unbelievable
it's almost like a tariff and I think
the US government basically gets to
decide how are they going to deal with
that right because if the if the US
government if if um if some other you
know country was screwing with another
industry that we cared about the US
government would probably find some way
to put pressure on them but I think what
happened here is actually compl oppos
the US government led the the kind of
attack against the companies which then
just made it like the EU is basically
and all these other places just free to
just go to town on all the American
companies for second incidentally he's
got the clock wrong it was the opposite
that happened EU has much better rules
on data scraping and data protection and
whatnot and we have followed their lead
he's
lying oh yeah the truth is like this is
the only uh place that billionaires can
go with this stuff because a social
network at that size it frankly should
be under the post offices jurisdiction
and uh all the growth things and
algorithms get that out of there just
have have a place where people can find
the people that they know online but he
has this and we have to like make it be
some massive profit Seeker so now we're
going to try to like Farm the Hogs antix
Hogs and all these other places just
free to just go to town on all the
American companies and do whatever you
want but I mean look obviously like I
don't want to come across as if like we
don't have things that we need to do
better obviously we we do and when we
mess something up we deserve to be held
accountable for that and and and just
like everyone else um I do think that
the American Technology industry is a
bright spot in the American economy I
think it's a strategic Advantage for the
United States that we have a lot of the
strongest uh companies in the world and
I I think it should be part of the US's
strategy going forward to defend that
and God no no it's not it's actually not
true these companies need to Bren they
they the the amount of useless
speculation that has been poured into
these social media companies that are
just there at this point in their like
gestation are just there to suck your
data away and sell it to advertisers the
amount of money that is invested in them
is completely unsustainable I mean we
have a bunch of just like speculative
bubbles that could be cropping up and
just things to look out for whether it's
in we saw there was some fears about the
commercial real estate bubble before but
cryptocurrency and all that speculation
is going to be a huge issue for our
economy I think as well this too if the
American economy is reliant on these on
these companies that have nothing again
physical to offer except what I just
said then we're in deep trouble it's
actually going to would create much more
resiliency in our economy to break these
people up but he's lying because he has
his own wealth to wor about I mean in
Western capitalist they look at the
America and the tech sector because
that's where profits can be made by
people who just want to make money with
money and not actually do any work um I
think it's a uh huge dead end um because
you look at what say China is doing
putting uh money behind important things
like uh def fossil fuel high speed rail
exactly or electric cars and we're not
doing any of that because people
like this are effing around about Ai and
crypto currency and free speech
and you know it looks good to investors
so that's what we're going to continue
sinking money into is this
dumbshit it's unbelievable all right
well we we're gonna have to play more of
this uh yeah uh Zuckerberg stuff
tomorrow but honestly it is it
is it's beyond
gross how the multi-millionaire
Rogan brings these uh multi-billionaires
on and um simps flates
them uh in such a way and while these
guys are just lying
and so obviously
lying and uh so that they can ultimately
screw all of Rogan's listeners that's
what's going on here and I don't know if
Rogan is a willing participant or just
too dumb or just too odd but I've got
billionaires hanging out with me now I
got billionaires in the Green Room of
Mothership man yeah all of a sudden no
longer interested in Ubi because people
don't want to work hard
exactly exactly the every man he's an
every man you're a fool if you believe
that or even if you like pay lip service
to it he's a loser um we got we got more
Clips we we get it's 246 but yeah I
wonder if uh speaking of the Green Room
wonder if Jared Kushner was there
backstage not saying he was but he has
been before without a doubt hey folks
don't forget to hit the Subscribe button
and check out our daily show we do it
every day at 12:00 p.m. Eastern for
about 2 and 1/2 hours we even take phone
calls you should check that out
