means that getting a nobell prize
doesn't guarantee that you will be
listened
to so
biology Beyond The
genome and for those of you who are book
addicts the music of life is the first
one that actually used the subtitle
biology Beyond The genome and you'll
understand that when I talk about the
talk today and there is a forthcoming
book due out next month from Cambridge
University press um understanding living
systems so because you're a very general
audience I'm going to say a word or two
about what is um The
genome and it is of course a very long
thin
thread in all the trillions of your
cells it's a thread of molecules called
nucleotides because they're molecules
that sit in the nucleus most of them
anyway there happen to be just four
types A T G and C that's all you need to
know in you and me the genome contains
three billion of those in every single
one of your cells except for our red
blood
cells now important point they are
chemicals and those of you who know your
Chemistry will know that chemicals can
only do what chemicals can do they do
what chemicals automatically do and they
like to bind together in pairs a likes
to be with T and G with c those are
chemical attraction
dependent upon the energies in those
molecules and in doing this they have no
choice they cannot therefore be
described as
selfish either metaphorically or
literally only
organisms you me and the cat and the
bacterium only they can be described as
self or cooperative and in case you're
wondering we're not born selfish either
a baby cannot be born selfish it simply
has needs food and care to enable it to
live grow and flourish and it slowly
learns that it can
choose now a bit of size comparison if I
enlarged a nucleotide from one of our
genomes to the size of of my fist the
size of a golf ball the living cell
would be the size of the United Kingdom
and if the nucleus were here in hay and
here's the
nucleotide the edge of the cell would be
way up there in Scotland you'll see the
significance of this very
soon and part of what I want to get
across to you today is that focusing on
genome sequencing you can all go and buy
your genome from 23 me I'm not supposed
to do adverts that's okay anyway
focusing on genome sequencing is a
little bit like mistaking the pixels for
the
message I've put here we wish them all
well because that's the ending of my new
book coming out next month um
understanding living systems and if we
looked at that message and expanded it
up just a little bit nowhere near the
degree to which we'd have to
represent the difference between a
nucleotide and the edge of the cell up
in Scotland all we can see are pixels we
no longer understand um the message at
sufficient magnification therefore the
meaning is no longer evident and that is
true for you and me and all organisms
that have to read their genomes in order
to make proteins we don't understand
what the CG and mean we don't need to
either so so how did the genome become
described around the Year
1980 so over 40 years ago now as the
Book of Life creating us body and mind
of course if you want to follow Richard
and if that was so there's a very simple
test the conditional logic of life would
have to be found in the
genome now I write computer programs
that's how I worked out just 63 years
ago how your pacemaker mechanism works
in the heart I wrote a computer program
to represent that on an old valve
computer I know what computer programs
have got to have in them they've got to
have the conditional Clauses the if then
else Clauses and if you look for those
in the genome you will not find them
anywhere in the genome the genome has
switches every Gene every part of the
sequence that needs to be read to make
proteins or rnas those have
switches but the control of those
switches is elsewhere it's not in the
genome itself and I want here to
recommend an article which came out in a
journal that I edit progress in
biophysics just a couple of years ago by
Keith bavo he wrote an article the Gene
and Appraisal you can find it on the
internet without too much difficulty he
wrote the gene plays a passive role as a
Vital Information store it enables us to
make all the proteins we need all the
rnas we need but it is the phenotype
that is you and me that plays the active
role so where are life's control
routines
I'm a cellular electrophysiologist in
origin and I can tell you where they are
because that's where the if then else
Clauses are that's where the code if you
want to call it that lies that enable us
to make choices those are our
conditional onoff switches they're in
the membranes of our cells and their
protein channels without those membrane
processes there could not be choice in
response to electrical and chemical
signals
and choice is an essential element of
any theory on what it is to be selfish
or
cooperative moreover all our nerve cells
have those onoff switches the channels
that enable it to be possible and
furthermore there are no genes for any
of those membranes all the lipids that
form the membranes and the complicated
structures that you can see in a typical
cell none of that is coded for in the
genome all of that is
inherited now go back to the genome each
triplet that is three nucleotides
corresponds in the translation mechanism
in your cells and mine to an amino acid
in a protein for example AGC enables the
amino acid theorine to be selected don't
worry if you don't know what theory in
is it doesn't matter too much now this
is what is often called the genetic code
but as bostock's article makes Crystal
Clear it's not a code it's a template
it's simply something that enables
something else to be made as I said
earlier on there is simply no code of
life or program of Life in The genome
and so I'm now going to unravel the four
major common
misunderstandings that have infected our
understanding of what it is to be a
living system which is what the new book
coming out by Cambridge next month is
about there are four the first is the
central dogma of molecular biology which
is the idea that there's simply one way
of causation all the way from those Gene
sequences to the proteins to the body
and therefore to you and me and which
then determine whether we are selfish or
cooperative the second is the vican
barrier here that's the idea that the
future eggs and sperm are not influenced
by what we learn as organisms during our
lifetime that's the idea there's a
complete separation of the germline away
from the body as a whole the third one
is that DNA just replicates itself it
does so like a crystal and the fourth is
therefore the idea that the replicator
and the vehicle that the cells in your
and my body are completely separate and
that's of course the central idea of The
Selfish Gene I'm just going to go
briefly through each of those first of
all the sensual
Dogma Francis Crick formulated this in
1958 and then he reformulated it in 1970
we don't need to go into the detail of
that what you need to know is that it's
real when it is taken to refer to a
simple chemical fact that DNA sequences
are used by living cells to make amino
acid sequences forming proteins but it
is illusory and completely misleading
when taken to exclude control of the
genome and its reorganization by living
systems now the evidence that
reorganization of genomes has occurred
during Evolution during the evolution of
two was one of the major discoveries of
the first sequencing of the human genome
in the year
2001 it is in the nature paper when the
first human genome sequence was
announced the grand fanfair over in
Washington and over here in
London now the point about that is that
very few people seem to know that what
figure 42 in that article in nature in
2001 shows is that in the evolution of
some of the key proteins in our bodies
as you go through the various species
from a bacterium through to yeast
through to more complex organisms like a
mouse through to us as humans they have
formed themselves by
accretion of chunks of protein to form
proteins with more and more
functionality that means of course that
the organisms as they developed and as
they evolved must have known how it was
possible to move this chunk of DNA over
there to put it in connection with that
bit over here and so on and so forth if
you calculate the probability that that
could happen by chance it would not just
take the 13 billion years of the
universe it would take even more than
that it's extremely improbable that that
could have occurred by chance so the
first point I make is that there is
clear and hard evidence that it must be
the case that organisms are capable of
reorganizing their genomes in response
to stress moreover that's an old
Discovery it was found by Barbara mlto
working on corn the plant way back in
the 1940s published in genetics during
the 1950s eventually given the Nobel
Prize in
1983 and then she was completely
ignored means that getting a Nobel Prize
doesn't guarantee that you will be
listened to that's another
problem okay that's the central dogma
finished there is no central dogma the
vican barrier that's the it's named
after August vican the German geneticist
who introduced the idea he introduced it
primarily to exclude from Charles
Darwin's ideas the idea that the body
could communicate to the Future egg and
sperm so it was introduced precisely to
remove an important aspect of evolution
that Darwin himself
favored now today his idea how this
could happen he speculated you see
somehow how if my body changes it must
be possible that information gets
transmitted to the sperm and ex cells so
he said there must be tiny particles
that cells give off well he knew that
was the case because even in the 19th
century people knew that little
particles were pushed off by cells he
called them
gules we found them they're today called
extracellular vesicles or extra
what do they do they carry rnas that
control the genome for its metabolic
activities and so on to the germ line
that has been
demonstrated now the vice barrier
therefore there never was any good
evidence for it incidentally and I'm
happy in question time if you want me to
justify that
statement to continue watching this
video click the link in the top left or
in the description below or visit I a.tv
for more debates and talks from the
world's leading thinkers on today's
biggest ideas
