we think we understand the very
low-level machine code of the universe
but getting to stuff that we recognize
and even that has been analyzed in
existing mathematical physics that's a
big long you know
effort where do the fundamental laws of
nature come from that's what this
conversation is about I speak with
mathematician computer scientist and
theoretical physicist Steven Wolfram
about his attempt to derive the laws of
nature starting with almost nothing now
these ideas are outside of mainstream
physics and they're not fully fleshed
out but the claim is that some real
progress has been made so that's what
this discussion is about it's an
overview of some of the main ideas for a
candidate Theory of
Everything I'm Shane fonsworth and this
is the escape sapiens podcast supported
by the Andrew Fon Brown Foundation if
you enjoy this content you can support
it directly by liking subscribing and
sharing and now here Steven
wol I I hope you
enjoy escaped
sapiens so let's start with a few
definitions that will pop up again and
again in the
conversation what is computational
irreducibility and why should people
care about it right actually it turns
out it is almost exactly 40 years old as
of later today the very first time I
wrote the words computational
irreducibility happened 40 years ago
later today so to speak so what is it so
when we think about how we figure out
how a system behaves we we can say we
may know the rules by which the system
operates for example we may know some
rules for some program we know the rules
by which it operates the question is how
do we find out what the system will do
so let's say we want to know what will
happen after a million steps of running
these rules well one possibility is that
we can just work out a formula and say
okay we know after a million steps we
just fill in the number a million into
some formula we get the answer
immediately that's kind of the the
concept that has been typical in kind of
mathematical approaches to science that
it's kind of like you can solve it and
get a formula for what will happen what
computational irreducibility is about is
the fact that in many systems you can't
actually jump ahead and see what's going
to happen the only way you can work out
what's going to happen is to follow each
step and just see see what will will
happen so why is that important the
essentially the if you look at kind of
the the the Big Arc of sort of History
of Science the um the sort of the the
the thing that really launched a lot of
modern science was the idea of
introducing mathematics into into
science and sort of the concept there
was we'll just work out a formula for
what what's going to happen we'll use
calculus or something we'll say this is
you know this is the formula at at time
T we can work out the result and that's
been kind of a dominant theme in sort of
the exact Sciences for the last 300
years and it's LED people to believe
that oh you know if you're doing
epidemiology you've got these formulas
and you can just work out what will
happen kind of the Assumption is with
mathematical science we can always jump
ahead and see what the answer will be
computational irreducibility kind of
denies that computational irreducibility
tells one there are systems where there
is no way to kind of jump ahead and just
say what the answer will be it's
something where to know what the system
will do you essentially have to follow
every step just as the system itself
behaves and so that that's a that's a
pretty important idea it turns out
because it kind of gives one from within
science it kind of shows one a
fundamental limitation of science it
also has some very positive aspects for
example you know we lead Our Lives we
you know we progress through time and so
on if the if we could always say oh we
know what's going to happen in the end
in the end the answer is going to be 42
or something there will be nothing
achieved by that by the leading of our
lives and the passage of time but what
computational irreducibility tells us is
that actually there is something
irreducible that's achieved by the
passage of time by kind of the
progression of of of things that happen
through the course of of of time in our
lives and so on so it's kind of a a um
on the one hand it tells you that the
bad news is it tells you you can't
always know what will happen the good
news is it tells you there's something
that that that you can't always know
what will happen and that there sort of
a thing achieved by actually progressing
through that time now you know there are
many many places where computational
reducibility shows up like for example
if you're interested in Ai and you're
interested in can we set it up so that
AIS will only do what we want them to do
well if you have computational
irreducibility you'll never succeed in
doing that because there will always be
a way that the AI as it actually
progresses and does what it does will
surprise you and so I think one of the
things that for example will be a big
kind of societal debate is to what
extent do we allow computational
irreducibility for AI type systems if we
say no they they've always got to be
predictable well fine then they'll only
do what we want them to do but they
won't be able to do a lot of the
powerful things that they would
computationally be able to do so it's
kind of like do you want computational
reducibility or do you want to sort of
fit everything into this reducible box
where you can know what's going to
happen so you know you might ask I mean
there are computational reducibility has
many consequences and you know at at
some level it has very Bal kinds of
consequences like saying you know why
are there bugs in programs well because
most you know it is hard to foresee what
programs will do that's a that's a kind
of computational irreducibility symptom
the thing when I was inventing
computational IR reducibility uh you
know I thought I thought of it as kind
of a limitation on science but for
example one of the things I absolutely
never imagined is the idea of proof of
work in blockchain for example which is
essentially a computational IR
reducibility idea and um it's
you know and that because that's a thing
where one is one is taking irreducible
effort and one is kind of to you know do
Bitcoin mining or whatever else and
that's so there's again there's
something is being done and that
something is sort of this irreducible
computation something I certainly didn't
imagine when I when I came up with
computational irreducibility another
another aspect of it is I mean it it
just has many many consequences but
another one that I studied uh quite a
bit
is trying to understand things like the
second L of thermodynamics the fact that
when you start Systems off in a kind of
orderly way like gas molecules sort of
arranged in an orderly fashion they tend
to become more disordered over time and
the question is why why does that happen
and what's happening is that they are
effectively the the the collisions of
these gas molecules are implementing an
irreducible computation and that means
that when we look at it because we are
bounded in the sort of computational
work that we can do in perceiving what's
going on we can't decode kind of this
irreducible computation that happened
and so we just say oh it looks random to
us and that's kind of the essence of the
second law is that there's this mismatch
between the irreducible computation
that's happening in these actual
molecules Computing where they're going
to go and the bounded computation that
we are able to do as observers of that
system and it turns out this this
interplay between the computational
irreducibility of underlying systems and
our computational boundedness as
observers of those systems that seems to
be the key thing that basically leads us
to the laws of physics that we have this
is something I absolutely did not see
coming and it's I think it's a very
remarkable thing that the the the sort
of the three key theories of 20th
century physics statistical mechanics
second law of Thermodynamics is one of
them general theory of gravity and
SpaceTime another one and uh quantum
mechanics the third one it turns out to
my great surprise I think all three of
those theories are derivable not just
things that happen to be the way they
are but they are derivable from sort of
the underlying computational uh
character of the universe effectively of
of of sort of an inevitable
computational structure combined with
the fact that there is computational IR
reducibility interacting with
essentially our boundedness and other
characteristics of us as observers so in
other words for observers like us it
becomes inevitable that we must perceive
the laws of physics that we that we know
so to speak and that that that the fact
that that works is one of the important
components of that is computational
irreducibility computational
irreducibility is what leads us to
believe in things like the law the gas
laws to not have to say we're going to
look at every individual molecule we
have to know what every individual
molecule does we are only able to look
at this kind of aggregated view of a gas
and we're only able to do that because
what's underneath is computationally
irreducible and the same thing seems to
be true for SpaceTime that the fact that
we believe in the continuity of space
for example is a consequence of the fact
that sort of underneath there's
computational irreducibility and because
we are computationally bounded we can't
kind of get to see all those details and
we just have to summarize things by
saying there's there's continuous space
and it's the same type of story with
quantum mechanics we can talk about talk
about in more detail but so so that's
that's kind of the the key idea of
computational educability is that even
though you may know the rules by which a
system operates that may not tell you
what will the system will do you may
have to just explicitly follow those
rules in a sense you have to do the same
amount of computational work that the
system itself has to do to figure out
what it will do and so the way that sort
of what's why is why why is there
computational
irreducibility well the answer I think
is you can see it as a consequence of
this thing I call the principle of
computational equivalence and what the
principle of computational equivalence
says if you look at all these different
possible systems then above some very
low threshold all these different
possible systems will be equivalent in
the sophistication of computations that
they can do so in other words we can
imagine a microprocessor in a computer
we can imagine a human brain we can
imagine a bunch of molecules bouncing
around we can imagine some simple
computational system some little program
that you can you can specify with black
and white squares or something like this
any one of those things will be able to
do the same level of sophistication of
computation and that's closely related
to the fact the idea of universal comput
it's also closely related to things like
girdle's theorem um it's a uh but it's a
it's a slightly tighter version of those
kinds of things okay so if one has this
principle of computational equivalence
what does it mean well what does it what
what does predicting a system consist of
the system is doing what it does it's
Computing what it's going to do and you
as the predictor of the system are going
to be smarter than the system the system
is doing what it does it goes through a
million steps or something you're some
going to be able to do some smarter
thing and conclude in five steps this is
what the system is going to do well the
principle of computational equivalence
says that that isn't going to work
because it says that whatever means you
have to do the prediction whether it's
your brain or mathematics or a computer
or whatever else it is computationally
equivalent to that little system that
you're looking at and so you can't
expect to kind of jump ahead and predict
what it's going to do you basically are
stuck having to follow step and and just
do the same computation that it does so
it's kind of a the the the reason why
computational irreducibility happens is
because there is this one sort of
uniform level of computational ability
that exists and at least in in things
like our universe so to speak and and
that's uh sort of embodied in this
principle of computational equivalence
so that that's that's uh it's you know I
have to say in the in the 40 years since
I originally kind of came up with I I
actually the idea of computational
irreducibility was a few years older
than that but the term computational
irreducibility is almost exactly 40
years ago um today um but um you know
it's been it's been interesting the
extent to which sort of that way of
thinking about things has affected uh
kind of has has found its way into all
these different domains and all these
different issues and I mean there you
know they're just there's so many of
these things like for example another
one is is to ask the question kind of um
things like will there be will there be
an end to science will there be an end
to mathematics uh will there be will it
come to be the case that sort of uh AIS
can do everything and there's sort of no
place for the humans type thing these
are all questions that are deeply
informed by this idea of computational
reducibility and if you don't if you
don't know about that you kind of Might
conclude for example that uh you know
you'll you'll finish science and you'll
be able to answer every question so to
speak and another one that's come up
very recently is the question of you
know with with AIS can you just solve
all of science you just find an AI
That's you know a million times smarter
than us humans in some definition of
smartness and it'll just say to any
science question you might ask to say I
know the answer um and computational
reducibility basically tells that that
won't happen um there's a small footnote
to that was quite interesting which is
it won't happen if you imagine
considering sort of all possible science
questions if you restrict that to
science questions humans care about it's
a slightly different there could be a
different answer but um in the so yeah I
mean I think this this
notion of I mean I I in a sense as I was
mentioning one can see computational
irreducibility
as kind of the one of the key pieces of
sort of a a different Paradigm for
thinking about the world and about
science that we've had for the last few
hundred years I mean in in
before it's kind of this question of how
much can we understand about the world
and you know if You' gone back 500 years
many people were like well there's a lot
of things we'll never understand about
the world they just happened to be that
way and then there was no we've got all
these mathematical ideas we're going to
crush it we're going to understand
everything and by understand what tended
to be meant was we'll be able to predict
everything about what will happen and
that got sort of enshrined in various
people's ideas of what science
fundamentally is about prediction and so
on it's not applicable to all areas of
science but in an area like physics for
example that's a that's a typical kind
of if you know what you're talking about
then you will be able to predict what
will happen in the world so to speak and
computational irreducibility is kind of
I think sort of the next step in that in
that Journey because it tells one yes
there are things you can predict there
are slices of reducibility there're
actually an infinite collection of
slices of reducibility but there's also
kind of a a kind of a background of
things that you cannot predict and and
that's sort of the the you know so that
that that gives one A different view of
what science is about what science is
capable of doing and it has well both an
intellectual implic impation and also at
some level kind of a societal
implication because in a sense there's
you know there's a there's a kind of
people have often believed oh you know
if we could solve Society we could make
the world a better place so to speak
what computational reducibility tells
you is you'll never be able to quote
solve Society the concept of a kind of a
a controlled
system it just is never going to work
because when you think you have this
controlled system something because
there's computational irreducibility
there will be an infinite collection of
surprises and you'll never be able to
get this kind of closed we know what
every how everything is going to work
kind of
system so one of the main points that
you bring up with you brought up is that
the laws of nature that we develop they
really depend on Who The Observer is
right and so how do how do you know what
is fundamental so you mentioned for
example uh um in your writings you
mentioned that even the
three-dimensional space that we live in
might be emergent and there's some
underlying computational structure that
from which it develops right so how do
you know what is fundamental if if if
everyone is if we're just observers
right all we have is the perspective
that we have how do you how do you know
that space for instance is not
fundamental if that's the thing that we
really
see well it's a reasonable question I
mean it's kind of the it's it's kind of
what is the ultimate abstraction what is
the you know what is the thing that is
you know is there an Ultimate
abstraction and I think the answer is
that you know I I think we can
computation at some level the following
of
rules is the closest I think I can come
to giving you kind of an ultimate notion
of abstraction that if you say if if you
if you imagine that
things follow definite rules we're not
saying what those rules are we're just
saying things follow definite rules at
at some level things follow definite
rules now actually it's it's more
complicated than that because what I
actually believe now is that things
follow all possible definite rules it's
not like you can hold one up and say
this is the rule for the universe
instead in this concept that I call the
ruad it's this kind of object that
essentially runs all Poss rules and what
your the ruad consists of kind of the
entangled limit of the running of all
possible computational rules so in a
sense there's there is still you know in
even defining that I'm kind of using as
a basis for what I'm talking about
Concepts Like rules and computation and
there might very well be a different way
to formulate the same object using a
completely different way of kind of
presenting it but the thing that you
know the thing that that I have believe
is kind of the ultimate fundamental
thing is this ruad object which I could
I at least think of as the sangled limit
of all possible
computations and the you know by the way
just to make it even more complicated
that's the ruad there's also one can
imagine the hyper ruad one can imagine a
thing which in our view of computation
we could say let's figure out what's
going happen after an infinite number of
steps of this computation okay we can't
determine that in any finite number of
steps but we can imagine as actually
Alan Turing did at one point we can
imagine that we have an oracle which
just tells us the answer and we add that
onto our computer so what we end up then
with is a sort of hyper computation in
addition to the the standard computation
that we do where we follow every step in
the rules we're also saying and we're
adding on this black box that will just
tell us the answer
to what happens after an infinite number
of steps and so we can go in addition to
the ruad which is this thing that's the
entangled limit of all possible
computations we can imagine a whole
hierarchy of hyper Ru ads that that
embody the the entangled limit of these
hyper computations and so you say well
well why you know why did we get the
ruad and not one of these hyper rule ads
it turns out that for example it's just
a matter of kind of Science and
computation Theory and so on that
there's sort of an inventor Riz
between our ruad and any hyper ruad so
there was no there's no connection there
can be no quation that goes from the
ruad into the hyper ruad or vice versa
and in fact it's probably the case
although this isn't something we've
completely figured out that there is a
kind of Ral relativity that as an
observer in any level of hyper ruad it
will look the same to you in other words
what what's tricky is you have this ruad
which is supposed to represent sort of
everything that's possible and
everything that in a some sense happens
but we as observers are embedded inside
the ruad and so it's this it's this
elaborate question of how does an
observer within the ruad perceive the
ruad and the answer is it depends what
that Observer is like if we didn't say
anything about what that Observer is
like we wouldn't be able to make any
statements because the ruad contains all
possible computations and we just say we
don't know what's you know everything is
happening but the fact is that because
we are observers of the kind we are that
that forces us to perceive certain
things about the rad so simple example
of this we talked about the second law
of
Thermodynamics the fact that we are
observers who are computationally
bounded means that we don't get to
follow every individual gas molecule and
we believe in the second law of
Thermodynamics we believe that what
tends to happen is that we will get this
computational irreducible process which
which we can't decode and it'll look
random to us if we were a different kind
of Observer if we were an observer who
traced every molecule who was very small
and had lots of computational ability we
wouldn't particularly believe in the
second law of Thermodynamics it would be
something which somebody would tell us
oh you know if you looked at all these
molecules in the aggregate this is what
you'd see and we'd say well okay we you
know that's not something we notice I
mean by the way it's it's it's really
kind of notable how much the way that we
perceive the world depends on our means
of perception so for example space which
we think of as a very you know it's
obvious space exists we might say and
it's obvious that as we look around us
that we see kind of a slice of at a
particular we see a region of space at a
particular time and then you know time
passes and the we see a region of space
at a different time but that depends a
lot on a bunch of scales so for example
if we look around you know if you're in
a room you might see 10 m away well it
takes light you know microsc to get to
our eyes from that distance away and it
takes us milliseconds to process what
we've seen so for us in the in the
environment that we're looking at it's
as if we see instantaneously we see this
lump of space and then we see that
changing over time we kind of see this
every movie frame we see a complete
movie frame and then we see it
progressing through time but if we
thought a million times faster than we
do you know Digital Electronics runs a
million times faster than our brains do
um if we thought a million times faster
we wouldn't have that perception because
the light travel time from the distances
we're looking at would be significant
and we would be seeing you know this
Cascade of photons arriving and if
somebody tells us oh by the way you can
think of that as slices of of uh of
space progressing Through Time we'd be
like well that's kind of interesting but
it's not the way that we perceive things
so you know there is a a a great this
it's it's not surprising that the way we
perceive the the kinds of things that we
talk about and the kinds of laws that we
ascribe to the universe depend on kind
of the way in which we're perceiving
things and what uh you know what seems
to be the case is that for the three
sort of key laws of physics that uh that
we kind of learned in the 20th century
that two attributes of us as observers
seem to be critical one is that we are
computationally bounded that we can't
decode all that computational
irreducibility and the other one is that
we believe we are persistent in time so
in other words even though at every
moment we're made of different atoms of
space in our models we still believe
that it's the same us and we have the
single thread of experience going
through time and it turns out those two
characteristics allow one to derive MH
in precise form these three core kind of
laws of physics that arose in the 20th
century which is really surprising can
can I ask you about that when you're
building your
models how do you introduce those
assumptions so how how do you introd so
you start with the ruad in some way um
which is the space of all computations
or yes and so then you somehow introduce
the notion that there's an observer
that's completely bound that's not
completely bounded that is bounded in
some sense and then from that assumption
plus some other assumptions you can
derive for instance that space is
three-dimensional or that no we cannot
derive we don't know how to derive that
we can derive that space satisfies uh
General satisfies the Einstein equations
including lenan signature yeah yeah yeah
yes you you get the signature as well
absolutely because in our models so one
thing not uncommon in the history of
science you kind of have to go back
before you go forward the fact that
people concluded in
1919 that uh that no actually earlier
than that it was 1909 maybe that space
and time could be bundled together I
mean that wasn't an original idea of
Einstein's that wasn't in the 1905 kind
of special artivity package that was a
subsequent kind of mathematical gloss on
that introduced by minkovski actually um
that kind of you could think of space
and time as sort of both facets of the
same kind of thing in our models there
are absolutely not facets of the same
kind of things space and time are
completely different space is associated
with well time I already described time
is kind of this this progression of
computation the passage of time is the
doing of computation so what's space
well I mean that's a slightly longer
story so so the beginning of that story
kind of starts in Antiquity when
everybody was arguing about you know is
the world discreet or continuous and you
know were there atoms was there just a
flow how was the world made of what was
the world made of and wasn't known for a
long time finally by the end of the 19th
century it became clear that matter is
discret there are molecules and atoms
and so on and then pretty close to that
time it became clear one could think of
light as being discret as well made of
photons or whatever at that time in the
early 20th century as I've come to real
understand this history better in the
last couple of years most people
believed that space was discret most
people thought that just as matter was
discret so space would turn out to be
discret but nobody could make the
mathematics work out in fact um you know
people like Einstein made statements
like you know in the end it will turn
out space is discreet but we don't
currently have the tools to see how to
make this work well 100 years later we
finally do and that's sort of an
underlying idea
in these kind of computational models
that that that we built and so the idea
is what is the universe made of well one
view of what the universe is made of
probably not the only possible way to
think about it but one that I found
convenient is you just imagine there are
these atoms of space just these elements
that are discrete points just a big
collection of discrete points they're
not in space they they are what makes
space how do they make space well these
points have relations to other points
it's as if they have a giant friend
network of the atoms of space and you
can represent that friend Network as a
graph a network actually formally it's
convenient to have it be a hyper graph
where instead of just saying that that
two that that there are pairs of things
that are related by being connected by
an edge that you can have any number of
things related by hyperedge but so so
what one imagines is what is the
universe made of the universe is just a
giant hyperth and every feature of the
universe is a feature of that hyperth so
it's kind of like if you were looking at
I don't know fluid like water and you
say and you and you see an Eddie going
through the water that Eddie is just
made of those molecules of the water it
is a a feature of kind of the the
collective motion of those molecules
that there is this thing that we
identify as an Eddie and so similarly
our belief is that for example po I like
electrons quarks whatever else they are
things like edies but in this hyperth we
actually know how that works for black
holes we kind of know how black holes
can can exist in this hypergraph and we
can and the the thing to say is so
there's this hypergraph and it has
features that correspond to we think
particles we don't know how that works
yet um we we kind of know how black
holes work there and then what happens
to the cyerra well the cyph is
constantly being Rewritten so there are
these rules that are applied to the
hypergraph and the rules basically say
if you have a little tiny piece of
hypergraph that looks like this it will
be Rewritten to one that looks like this
and the passage of time is the
application of all these little rules
and so that um and so then the question
is well if you have all these little
rules being applied what is the kind of
aggregate effect of that could I ask
just quickly is the idea that the the
the smallest units here all about the
same rule or is it that different
universes correspond to different
rules okay this is complicated okay so
in the in the in the sort of the first
way of thinking about this everything
obeys the same rule by the time you get
to the ruer ad and that's another
conceptual step when is dealing with all
possible rules but let's let's say there
is a way of describing our universe in
which every update is by the same rule
or by the same small collection rules um
it's um so so the question is if in the
case of a fluid again you got these
molecules bouncing around and they obey
certain laws and mechanics and so on and
you can ask the question what will be
the large scale behavior of the fluid at
the small scale you've just got a bunch
of billion balls bouncing around but
what does that mean when you have a
trillion of those or a trillion trillion
of those what is the aggregate effect
well the mathematics has never been
precisely filled in and in fact some
things I've done recently fill in a bit
more of it but what we know is that the
limit the large scale limit of molecular
dynamics of molecules just bouncing
around is fluid dynamics the large scale
limit is the this sort of continuous
fluid that obeys certain fluid equations
and so on well you can ask for the same
kind of derivation of the Continuum
limit for this hypergraph that's being
Rewritten and the first thing that I I
kind of knew in the 1990s that um uh the
first sort of big fact is the Continuum
limit of all that rewriting with certain
footnotes and so on added in which we
can talk about but essentially the
Continuum limit of all that rewriting is
not the equations of fluid mechanics but
Einstein's equations for the structure
of SpaceTime so that's a it's a really
quite remarkable fact that from this
kind of underlying microscopic kind of
very simple structure the the limit of
that is is is is the equations that we
know govern SpaceTime now there are many
many issues that come up so for example
you say well the universe seems
three-dimensional to us but this
hypergraph has no notion of Dimension
all it has is a bunch of points and you
know there's the question how do we
figure out even what effective Dimension
the thing has and the answer to that is
it's a pretty simple kind of
mathematical construction you say you've
got this big graph and you've got a
particular point in the graph a
particular node of in the graph you can
say well that node is connected to some
number of other nodes a distance one you
just follow one Edge to get to those
other nodes then you then you do it
again and you follow two two edges and
so on and if you say if you go R steps
from that given node you ask the
question of how many nodes do you get to
after you went our steps and so if you
if you just think about a grid for
example a two-dimensional grid then as
you go out you know R step you'll get
some kind of diamond shape of where you
got to and the number of nodes that you
get to goes up like R squ just the the
area of the of the of that diamond shape
so and in three dimensions it would be R
cubed and so on and so what you realize
is that the effective dimension of this
hypergraph is the growth rate is that is
that exponent of the growth rate of the
number of nodes that you get in a ball
effectively of a given radius so that's
an example of how you deduce from this
hypergraph if you got a big hypergraph
you can generate one in a computer um
you get a big hypergraph you can deduce
the effective dimension of that
hypergraph now that that and then you go
on and uh actually if you look at that
growth rate of that that volume of that
ball um there's a correction term the
correction term is proportional to the
curvature of the effective space the
richy scal of curvature um and that
happens to be the thing that shows up in
the Einstein equations interestingly
enough and so that's sort of the
beginning of how things how things
develop now actually the thing I said
it's a bit more complicated than that
because you're dealing with kind of
growth rates not of balls in purely in
space but of cones in space time and so
it's just a little bit more ornate but
the idea is the same and that's kind of
how you start to derive the equations of
General altivity the Einstein equations
from this underlying structure but it
doesn't tell you it it it simply tells
you that well you if you assume that
things are finite dimensional not
infinite dimensional that's one of the
footnote assumptions that you have to
make to derive the Einstein equations um
but one of the things that is a a very
interesting consequence of all of this
is because Dimension is now a dynamical
parameter you can have Dimension change
in the universe so we think that the
universe is threedimensional but
actually we're pretty sure in our models
that the universe started infinite
dimensional and just gradually became
something that was about
three-dimensional and so one of the
things that's of great interest is to
try and find Dimension fluctuations and
if we're lucky they will have survived
to the time of the cosmic microwave
background and we'll actually be able to
see the effect of Dimension fluctuations
in cosmological measurements and so on
and so that that's an example of of um
but but you know so in our models
there's this the the idea that space uh
sort of is three-dimensional is an
emergent phenomenon and I think that it
gets a little bit more we don't know how
to derive the number three um in the
three dimensions of space and and and in
fact my guess is maybe I you you asked
is it one definite rule okay so I have
to explain that a little bit more so the
next thing to realize is that when
you're updating this hypergraph there
are many different places where updates
can occur and there isn't a single kind
of thread of time where you say oh this
is the next state of the hypergraph this
is going to be the next state of the
hypergraph because there are all these
different places where updates could
occur and that that fact is what leads
to kind of the the way that relativity
works that fact also leads to Quantum
Mechanics because the essence of quantum
mechanics is that that it isn't the case
that definite things happen you know in
classical mechanics you throw something
it goes in a definite trajectory in
quantum mechanics kind of the idea is
there are many paths that are followed
and we just get to be aware of certain
probabilities in the aggregate of these
paths well in these models there's it's
very explicit that there are different
Paths of History because there are
different ways in which this updating
can occur so and and sort of then
there's a whole story of quantum
mechanics about how we as observers who
are ourselves branching to many parts of
History
observe a universe which is it which is
also branching through many paths of
history but setting that aside for a
second so kind of the concept is that
there are many different places where a
particular rule could be applied many
different orders in which the rule could
be applied but then when we get to this
whole ruad object we're not looking at a
particular rule being applied in many
different places and ways we're looking
at all possible rules being applied in
all possible places and ways and so
there's and then there's the question of
what you know from out of this ruad how
does uh you know what what slice of the
ruad are we perceiving as observers like
us so to speak and any Observer who is
computationally bounded and believes
they're persistent in time will observe
with some footnotes the Einstein
equations for SpaceTime but we don't
know how many dimensions that'll be in
so my guess is that there is a another
aspect of us as observers that's
probably something unbelievably obvious
to us um that we effectively implicitly
assume that leads us to have our
perception of this ruad object be the
one that corresponds to threedimensional
space so you know there are many aspects
of of the way that we perceive the
universe that seem totally obvious to us
but actually are not so obvious here's
an example one example is we can do any
experiment we choose we are not
constrained
we we have free will to do experiments
that's not at all obvious it could be
the case that the reason we see what we
see is because we are forced to do just
this experiment then this one then this
one and we're not free to make a choice
about what experiments we do that's an
example of another assumption that we
make about how we exist in the universe
so to speak another one is that we
believe in objects we believe that there
are things that have some unchanging
character to them so for example we
believe in pure motion we believe you
can pick up a thing and move it and it's
still the same thing which is not
obvious and and for example even in
traditional general relativity if you're
close to a space-time
Singularity things don't stay as things
they get sort of arbitrarily ripped
apart but the fact that we believe in
pure motion we believe that there are
objects is another one of these implicit
assumptions about the world that has
consequences for the laws of physics
that we perceive from this ruad from the
slice that we're taking of this ruad
object I don't know you know it's one of
my my current things to think about is
kind of what what are those implicit
assumptions that we're making that end
up feeding into our perception of the
world so to speak and and what things
are as I say given even very coarse
knowledge about our assumptions we can
already derive quite precise facts about
the kinds of laws that will perceive but
you know it's a question of well what
what other things are we assuming that
lead to other aspects of of what we
perceive in the
universe so one thing that I'm rather
curious about here in terms of your
setup is so in in a in a geometry in a
geometric space the points are coherent
in the sense that I can derive what the
distance between various points will be
if I know enough information about other
points in the system let's say like if I
know two angles of a triangle I can work
out the other angle and so on yep um in
your initial setup is there initially a
coherence that you put in or the
coherence is derivable through this
computational uh development yeah it has
to be derived I mean one of my projects
right now is what we're calling infra
geometry can we build a version of
Geometry that doesn't start from an
assumption of the existence of space so
all of these things that you're talking
about like angles angles are a pretty
non-trivial thing in our in our setup up
uh points we know what they are lines
are shortest paths in this graph gd6 in
this in this graph we kind of know what
lines are if we say are two lines
parallel we can we can actually give a
definition of that which is this kind of
operational definition that's based on
distances from every point on one of
these lines to every point on the other
line and so on it's a just a little
ladder type thing you can you can make
you can start so the the goal is can you
build up you know this is this is our
goal is to build up differential
geometry basically from a new basis
because usually in you know in in kind
of when you when you think about
manifolds for example kind of the idea
is when you look with a a powerful
enough microscope you see ukian space
you see standard standard geometrical
space but in our models that isn't true
what you see in a in a in a you know in
a good enough microscope you'll just see
a hypergraph down there which doesn't
have any reason to look like you in
space and so the question is what does
what what does how does how do you build
up Geometry from that and and this
question of of sort of how how you this
question of how why is space coherent
why is there sort of why is there a
space there at all that's an interesting
question and it has I think deep sort of
roots so in our models the hypergraph is
effectively knitted together by events
that occur so actually when I say there
is this hypergraph and it is the
universe that's kind of a that's kind of
a
simplification because what what we
really think of there being as we can we
can think of that being sort of a
substrate of this hypergraph but the
reality of things is mostly the update
events that occur in this hypergraph can
I just stop you for a second and for
people who don't know what a hypergraph
is is this do you view the picture of
this uh these steps of computation and
the different directions that
computation can go in is that what you
mean by the hypergraph right those
series of steps what do you mean exactly
okay so
so okay it a graph is something where
you have a bunch of points they might be
people for example and you have
relations between those points so those
relations are are lines that join those
points so for example you have might
have a friend Network and the friend
Network might be uh uh might be would
just be something which is just this
graph it's not laid out physical space
it's just a graph a network of relations
between these points that correspond to
people so the only the the hyper part of
this whole thing is only that instead of
there being a relation between two
entities there can be a relation between
any number of entities so for example
you can have a a three-way friend so to
speak rather than just a as a friend of
B it's like a B and C are all friends
together and that's a single Hy Edge
that the it's not that important that
this is a I mean it is technically very
important because the kind of the the
it's a much more flexible structure that
allows all kinds of things that
otherwise have to be distinguished to
not have to be distinguished it's it's
technically important but conceptually
it's not that important that we're
talking about a hyper graph rather than
a an ordinary graph just so so
essentially what one's thinking about is
that everything about the universe is
determined by the relations between the
atoms of space that the only thing we
can say about an atom of space is that
it is unique this atom of space is
distinct from that atom of space and the
only and then we're saying that we are
defining relations between these atoms
of space which we can draw as this graph
and we can potentially lay that graph
out if we were making a picture of it on
a computer screen for example we lay
that graph out in a certain way and that
that corresponds to you know that that's
that's how we get sort of a perceivable
thing from this underlying kind of thing
that is just a bunch of relations
between atoms of
space so and and
so what um uh what I was saying is that
that one can think about this this hyper
graph as it is progressively being
updated and every update takes a certain
number of hyperedges
and kind of grinds them up and produces
another set of hyperedges and that that
there's an event that occurs which is
that updating event M and in the end the
only thing that we can perceive is the
causal network of connections between
those events so what I mean by that is
some event happens and the output of
that event becomes the input to another
event and so that defines a kind of Tim
likee sequence of one event has to occur
before another event in time so that
because it is producing the input that
will be used in that other event and so
what you end up with is this is this
giant kind of causal graph that is you
can think about it is coming from the
the updating of the hypergraph it is a a
graph of all the causal relations
between every event that happened in the
universe so for example when you get to
a black hole there is an event horizon
which means there is no causal
connection between what's happening
inside the black hole what happens
outside there are no causal edges that
cross the Event Horizon in that
direction and that's that's kind of the
the defining feature of a black hole in
in in our models but so this causal
graph in a sense is more real than the
hypergraph it is the thing that we are
really capable of perceiving to get the
hypergraph what we do is we take this
big causal graph and we have to Define
what counts as a particular moment of
time for this causal graph and there are
all these events happening and they
happen all
over you know all all over this causal
graph what we have to do is say this is
a set of events that we will say are
simultaneous in time and this is a setup
very similar to the the way that special
tivity is set up um it's you are
defining a simultaneity surface of the
events that you say are happening at a
particular time then another set of
events happen at a later time and we can
know that that there's is's a certain
ordering a partial ordering of these
events where some events have to be
after other events and so on in some
events we don't know what their relative
ordering is they're space likee
separated in the language of Relativity
and so so we build up these space likee
slices of this is what could be the
current moment of time this could be the
structure of space at the current moment
of time that thing that we get from
slicing the scaal graph is the hyper
graph so we can we can think of it that
the real thing is this causal graph and
the hyper graph is the is a thing
derived by saying we choose to say that
this is what counts as now across all
those different events so the way to
think about it in terms of the structure
how where space emerges from is the fact
that space is coherent is a consequence
of all of these events occurring in
other words if you if you stopped the
events from occurring you would you
could for example you can you can you
can break off a piece of space if there
are no events that knit together two
pieces of space those pieces of space
are not causally connected they are
effectively independent so in effect in
in you know in our perception of the
universe and of space the vast majority
of everything that's happening in the
universe is the knitting together of the
structure of space so probably we we
don't know but in some vague estimates
of parameter values there's really only
one parameter in our models but which is
the the size of the elementary length
the size of the elementary time um
they're all related um but with some
very vague estimates of these things
maybe one part in 10 120 of the activity
of the universe is is not just the N
together of the structure of space um so
most of the activity of the universe is
knitting together space making space
coherent making it be the case that
there is a causal connection for example
between one part of space and another
part of space
making effectively space in some sense
come to equilibrium just like the
molecules in a gas will come to
equilibrium and have a certain
uniformity to them the fact that space
has an apparent uniformity is a
consequence of the fact that there's a s
of causal connections between different
parts of space it's effectively sort of
this knitting together process in space
is what leads to things like the
apparent homogeneity of space and so
this this phenomenon
so it is an incredibly non-trivial thing
that space is coherent in other words
that that there is a um and that um uh
and and that breaks down for example
when you have an event horizon you no
longer have causal connections between
well in the case of a black hole Event
Horizon between what's going on inside
the black hole and what happens outside
I mean there are different kinds of
event Horizons where you can have sort
of a a separation going in both
directions and so on do you resolve the
singular at the center of a black hole
in your framework there is no
Singularity it's disc what I mean so
yeah it's discret space and so so that
means that for example in traditional
generality one of the Mysteries is there
has to be essentially topology change in
SpaceTime because a black hole with a
quote Singularity ends up being
SpaceTime with a hole punched in it and
how do you get from SpaceTime without a
hole punched in it to SpaceTime with a
hole punched in it well that's not
something you can discuss in the context
of standard general relativity in our
models it's that's easy to get because
everything is discret and so there is no
discontinuity between kind of the thing
with with you know with the formation of
an invent Horizon for example and the
formation of a singularity is something
that is it just you can you can get
there because you're not trying to take
a continuous space and change its
topology you've got a a graph you can
think of a topology of a graph if you
want to but the the effective you know
the the emergent Continuum topology can
in the limit can change discontinuously
because you're taking the limit of an
infinite sized graph but when you look
at the in at the graph itself you just
see well it tangled itself up in a
particular way so yes it resolves that
issue um as well as many others I mean
it's you know in the simplest kind of
black hole in our models time just stops
I mean that that you see that in general
altivity as well that you know every
every path every gck is a is a finite
length in a in a in a non-rotating black
hole for example and so in our models
the way you see that is there are these
update rules and at the center of a
black hole it will just turn out there's
no update you can apply so time stops I
mean it's it's it's very interesting how
a lot of things that one thought about
as mathem IAL become in a sense
mechanical so for example time dilation
standard phenomenon in relativity that
things that are moving quickly uh
effectively have time running slower for
them in our models that becomes a very
mechanical fact because if you have a
thing like a particle for example that
is sort of uh that is at a particular
place in space and it is kind of
progressing through time it's being
Rewritten its structure is being
Rewritten but it's staying having the
same overall characteristics but it's
using it sort of computation budget is
used to rewrite itself through time if
the thing is also moving it has to do
two kinds of computation it has to it
has to recreate itself at a different
place in space and it has to update its
internal structure in time and so when
it's using its computation budget to
move in space it doesn't have as much
computation budget left over to change
with time and so effectively time go
slower for it I mean that that all turns
into a bunch of mathematics but that's
the intuition behind how time dilation
Works in our models and and there are
other things like how gravity works for
example there another very lovely thing
well actually before before we go into
gravity can I just stop you for a second
because I I'm curious about something
else which is when you're doing this
update is the fact that you're looking
at all possible updates is that what
gets you around having for example a
hidden model uh hidden variable model
the fact that you're yeah I mean the
structure of these models is so
different from the traditional setup of
few particle quantum mechanics that it's
hard to pinpoint exactly what it is that
kind of gets you around kind of you know
violation of bells inequality issues and
things like this but the end result is
yes you get around those things but it's
it's I mean but you must be able to show
that right you must be able to prove
that so so and when you follow that
proof what what what's what are the
characteristics of that proof what does
it look like
well okay so I would say that the the um
this is still it's still kind of
complicated and it's not I would say we
haven't got the cleanest version of this
we haven't got as clean a version of
this as I would like to have okay I can
give you some intuition and I can tell
you some mathematics but the intuition
would be great yeah yeah they don't
quite meet in the middle okay so so um
so essentially one one question is might
say is our model a deterministic model
MH and the answer is yes the whole what
we call multi-way graph of all possible
Paths of History there's just one of it
but the question of what we experience
is a question of sort of where we are in
that multi-way graph so to explain that
in physical space we experience the
universe in a particular way because we
are at a particular place in the
physical Universe oh we think it's the
same laws of physics in another galaxy
but we're not actually seeing what
happens in that other Galaxy Well turns
out there's an analog of physical space
that is the thing that's relevant for
quantum mechanics we call it branchial
space here here's how it works so we
talked about how kind of you get these
multiple threads of History you're
rewriting these hypergraphs you get
these different possible rewriting paths
so what can happen is there's one form
of hypergraph and there there are two
possible rewritings that can happen so
you get get two different hypergraphs it
could turn out that those two different
hypergraphs the rewritings two different
rewritings of those end up converging to
a single hypergraph of in The Next Step
so you end up with this kind of
branching merging set of Paths of
History so that you you think about that
whole structure that's branching and
merging successively over time now you
say Let Me Take A Slice of that at a
particular moment in time what you'll
end up with is all these different
branches of history that sort of poking
through that slice all the kind of loose
ends of this thing that was branching
and merging with different Paths of
History so you can then ask the question
how are the different Paths of History
knitted together and it's actually the
same story as with causal Connections in
SpaceTime but played out on a different
situation where if you say two different
branches of History are next to each
other if they came from a single common
ancestor One Step before so you've got
these branchial connections so to speak
these connections between branches and
you can kind of make a map of all these
connections between branches and what
that does is it builds up essentially a
space that we call branchial space and
if you ask what is that what is the
structure of that branchial space we
wish we knew more about that it's some
kind of Hilbert space thing but we don't
completely know how that limit works
but so qualitatively what happens is
there you you are kind of moving to
different parts of different paths in
history as you move through branchial
space you're moving to different parts
of History different different possible
parts of history now where it gets
tricky is we as observers of the
universe also exist in branchial space
we're extended objects actually in
branchial space our minds do not
experience a single thread of History
our minds experience a clump of threads
of History just as we're not used to
experiencing individual atoms of space
we experience these big lumps of atoms
of space that correspond to what we can
perceive at the scale that we're at and
so it's the same thing in in this
branchial space that we are sort of
experiencing this kind of lump of
branchial space and so then the the
there are well a bunch of different
issues one is that it is a non-trivial
fact that we believe that there is a
single thread of history that we
experience because because actually what
what's happening is that we are
conflating all the branches in this
Lumpa branchial space we're conflating
them all to say there is a definite
thread of things that happen and that's
so when and that's for example imagine
that we have a quantum computer that is
what a quantum computer is doing is it's
following multiple threads of history
but then what has to happen at the end
of doing that quantum part of the
computation is you have to knit together
all those threads of History to uh to
get an answer that we humans will say
yes that's the answer there's no good to
say oh well the answer is the
superposition of all these different
threads of History it's we want to know
did the computer say one or zero and so
we have to knit those threads of History
together and that's what in the standard
formalism of quantum mechanics people
talk about as a measurement process but
nobody says what happens what the
mechanism for that is they just say and
then measurement happens and we get a
definite answer and so in our models we
get to say something about sort of the
mechanism by which we knit together
those different threads of history and
it's not not obvious you know the amount
of effort that it takes to knit together
those threads of History might actually
be quite large so but but now you can
ask questions like okay so so one key
question is in this branchial space what
is the interpretation of kind of motion
in branchial space what is what what
changes as you move around branchial
space and what seems to be true is that
motion and branchial space is like a
change of quantum phase so you know a
key feature of quantum mechanics and the
usual formalism is that you describe
things in terms of complex numbers and
that you describe Quantum amplitudes in
terms of comp complex numbers that's not
actually necessary there's an
alternative formalism of quantum
mechanics where you describe everything
in terms of positive and negative
probabilities and so on but in the
simplest way of doing it in the usual
way that it's treated in quantum
mechanics you have these complex numbers
and they have a magnitude and a phase
well what seems to be the case is that
the position in branchial space is
related to Quantum phase and the reason
that's important is oh we didn't really
talk much about gravity but in physical
space gravity is all about the
deflection of shortest paths in when
there's no gravity a shortest path is
kind of a straight line when there is
gravity when there is a a mass somewhere
a lump of mass that that deforms
shortest paths do not be straight lines
that's what leads to gravity in general
relativity and so on in our models what
happens is the the presence of energy
okay so what what is energy in our
models turns out to be something much
simpler than I ever thought it would be
energy is basically the density of
activity in this network so if you look
at how many events are happening per
unit region of this hypergraph that
basically is giving you the energy
density in that in that region of the
hypergraph it's a little bit more
complicated than that in the in the
mathematics but that's the the intuition
is the activity in the network
corresponds to density of energy in the
network and so what is being said then
is that the presence of activity
deflects the paths of of of shortest
paths deflects shortest paths to no
longer be straight lines and that's what
leads to gravity in physical space and
so turns out the same thing happens in
branchial space that the presence of
energy momentum ends up deflecting paths
in branchial space and that deflection
of paths corresponds to a change of
quantum phase and there's this lovely
thing the fan path integral which tells
you that the way Quantum amplitudes work
out is according to something which is a
change of phase as you have a density of
well LR in density essentially an energy
density and so what what turns out to be
the case is that our models what in
physical space is gravity and the
Einstein equations and and uh uh and
kind of the deflection of things by by
gravity in bronchial space that same
thing turns out to be the F and path
so in other words you've got in both
cases the presence of activity in the
network presence of energy um deflects
paths in one case that deflection of
paths is a physical deflection of paths
where we can just see the thing is
turning going into orbit whatever else
in the other case that deflection of
paths is a change of quantum
phase so when when we're talking about
things like
um it's you know it's it's frustrating
because I I think we're really close to
having a very clean few sentence version
of here's how bells in equality works
but we're not quite there yet and so I'm
kind of circling around kind of uh
explaining pieces of this and it's um
it's sort of frustrating because because
in the end what we're looking at in
quantum mechanics is sort of how does a
branching mind perceive a branching
Universe MH and the the the question of
whether one of the things is you know
okay so there's supposed to be
probabilities in quantum mechanics where
do those where do those different
possibilities come from in our models
and the answer I think is it's really
simple they just come from the fact that
we can be at different places in
branchial space so we the fact that we
observe this happening rather than that
happening is because we are at this
place in branchial space now that has
little to do with so the whole sort of
entanglement and uh you know we have
these multiple States and they're
related and they're related in a way
that doesn't uh correspond to what
happens in physical space and so on
that's all rather trivial in our models
because there's this whole notion of
branchial space it's easy to have these
these
uh sort of pieces of reality different
threads of reality coexisting and so on
that's a straightforward thing how that
relates to for example oh I don't know
some experiment that you might do uh
that involves some interference pattern
or something like this um that's another
interesting thing so again I can give
you some intuition the mathematics is
only partially done for this case but
you know one of the mystery mysterious
things is you've got two slits and you
you you're you know you say which slit
did the photon go through if we um what
seems what we observe happening is that
we have destructive interference for
example where even though you know on
its own the photon could have gone
through one slit or the other somehow we
end up getting destructive interference
and it's as if it went through neither
slit and how does that happen well in
our models what probably happens is that
the photons corresponding to the going
through the different slits wind up at
different ends of branchial space they
end up far away in branchial space those
two possibilities it went through one
slit it went through the other slit end
up being far separated in branchial
space so what well if we are an observer
who has a limited extent in branchial
space then what will happen as far as
we're concerned is because these photons
wind up at these different possibilities
wind up at different ends of branchial
space we'll never be able to to have a
coherent view of that we'll never be
able to say yes we know what happened
and so it's it's if we could if we we're
only sensitive to this small part of
branch of space so as far as we're
concerned the photons just disappeared
because there's no there's no no place
we can be in brancher space where we'd
see both of them given that we're of
limited extent so in a sense destructive
interference which is a very bizarre
phenomenon in some ways is a consequence
in that picture of the fact that we have
a limited extent in branchial space and
so this the photons didn't disappear
they're they're alive and well but
they're sufficiently the the
possibilities are sufficiently far
separated in branchial space that we can
never perceive them so that's that's
kind of another another sort of
indication of what happens but you know
it's a little frustrating because at a
mathematical level we can very
beautifully reproduce Quantum circuits
and things using our formalism in fact
it's actually now probably the most
efficient way anybody knows to optimize
Quantum circuits is to turn them into
these multi-way systems do a bunch of
theorem proving technology at the level
of multi-way
systems and turn them back into Quantum
circuits so we kind of know that the
formalism you know reproduces at least
Quantum circuits Quantum circuits are
not all of quantum field Theory but we
have pretty good reason to believe that
that we'll get sort of all of quantum
field Theory but you know when you ask
about um uh you know each of these
different things that are typically
identified in in quantum mechanics and
you say how does that how in detail does
that work we don't quite know yet I mean
in fact this is a literally last few
weeks um somebody I'm working with has
been very actively working on trying to
untangle this um and we seem to be
making progress so in another in a
little while we may have a nice crisp
this is exactly how it works um it's
it's you know one of the things about
these about this whole activity is you
know we think we understand the very
low-level machine code of the universe
but getting to stuff that we recognize
and even that has been analyzed in
existing mathematical physics that's a
big long you know effort and you know it
is exciting that a lot of things people
have studied in mathematical physics
seem to plug in as limits of our models
so you know people have studied you know
some particular mathematical structure
and yes you can find that structure as a
limit of our models our models are in a
sense very flexible and but nevertheless
have definite structure um but you know
various limits of them seem to seem to
connect with these other kinds of things
but it's it's a it's just um uh it's
hard work um kind of connecting all
these things together and um uh when
when typically it's very satisfying
because when you actually see one of
these connections it's like oh wow
that's how that works you know I didn't
I didn't understand how that works in
fact I just had that earlier today about
some things to do with machine learning
which one can think about using some of
the methods from
uh from our physics project and I just I
finally understood something that i'
wondered about for like decades um about
uh about why machine Learning Works um
and uh so that's it's it's it's very
satisfying but it's hard
work can I ask you you mentioned so I
understand because I understand sort of
how gravity might emerge in your models
right because you start off with the
assumption that you have some distances
between the sort of smallest units
within the computational model but you
mentioned about photons right so how
does a photon appear in your model do
you do you have charge is also something
you input as in we don't know we don't
know how photons sharp I mean so so what
we do know is how black holes work um
and we can
simulate you know black hole mergers and
things like that and we get nice little
ring Downs of of merged black holes and
so on we get little gravitational waves
coming out
that's stuff we can we can look at and
we can see it a base you know it's it
follows what the Einstein equations seem
to say actually it turns out to be a
really good numerical model for doing
General altivity so it's actually
something which people have started
using as a kind of build up from the
microscopic structure rather than build
down from the Continuum equations but um
in terms of what a photon is and how it
works we don't know I mean in fact my
increasing guess is that partic are very
much like black holes and one of the
things that's
been kind of a uh uh you know our
expectation slightly more technically is
that particles are certain kinds of
topological defects in this uh in this
hypergraph so it's it's as if you know
you have a it's like you have these sort
of topologically stable things like an
Eddie and a fluid for example once you
have that fluid going around and you
know having that the the spot in the
middle which which is you know in which
things are going around different
directions on different sides of that
spot it's it's hard to untangle that
Eddie and so it has a certain stability
through through time and our our our
guess is that that's our particles work
but we haven't figured out the details
of of what you know what are those
topological defects I mean just to give
you a sense of why this is hard okay a
few years ago I was talking to sort of
one of the world's sort of leading graph
theorists okay and I'm asking about you
know how do we understand how these
topological defects work in graphs and
so on because there are some sort of
Elementary versions of this that are
understood for pler graphs and such like
he looks thinks about it for a minute
and he says come back in a 100 years we
may know a little bit more by then so in
other words it's you know there's a lot
of mathematics that is not known um and
we're having to try and build that and
that's part of the reason it's hard work
I mean you know when it comes to General
activity for example you know one
understands how tensors work in integer
Dimensions one understands how calculus
Works in inter Dimensions you know
people learn univariate calculus you've
got one variable they learn multivariate
calculus you've got two variables three
variables whatever what does calculus
look like when you have two and a
quarter variables nobody knows but we
need to figure that out and that's what
this infr geometry thing that I was was
mentioning earlier that's kind of that's
what that story starts to be about is
how do we Define the the whole structure
of mathematics starting from things that
are very different from space as we
normally think of it but um
uh let's see you were you were just
asking about um um I mean I I think I
was mostly making an excuse excuse for
why we don't know what photons are but
I'll mention make another comment which
is one feature of black holes is from
the outside black holes pretty much all
look the same black holes they have a
certain Mass they have a certain analog
of of spin um but you know any black
hole of a given mass and spin-like thing
kind of looks the same even though
different black holes might have
different crushed civilizations inside
them but from the outside they look the
same so one of the longtime mysteries of
physics has been why do all electrons
look the same and the you know it is I
think far from impossible
that they only look the same from the
outside and in other words that there is
in a sense there's an inside that might
not be the same and but like black holes
from the outside they all look the same
you know I don't know whether it will
turn out to be that way but my guess is
that there is a very close connection
between black holes and particles and
that's something that is not nearly as
obvious in Continuum models of space in
Continuum models of space black holes I
mean you know particles generally are
thought of as as as infinitesimal
geometric points in in Continuum
theories you know the electron is just a
point and quarks are just points and
there isn't really a a a way of you know
taking them apart in our models there is
we don't know exactly what they're like
inside now you asked about things like
electromagnetism and so on um and the
the idea of well local gaug inv variant
the idea that there are
um that you know it's kind of like you
have an electric charge and it produces
an electric field and the electric field
you know goes out like a you know like a
hedgehog or something actually real
hedgehogs don't really look this way but
it has spines going out in all
directions um you know it has it has
pieces of field going out in all
directions and then always the question
is if you move that electron how does if
you go far away from the electron how
does the moving the electron affect the
electric field and what we know is that
that that what has to happen is that
there has to be this wave that goes out
that sort of resets the each of these
directions of the electric field and
that's what corresponds to an
electromagnetic wave that's what and and
it's kind of this this sort of uh
communicating the information about
where the charge was is something for
which you need photons for which you
need
electromagnetism and so there's an
analog of that in our models where again
we don't know the details of how this
works but where there's essentially what
um this this idea of sort of here's yeah
let's see how to put this so you know
when we think about this hypog graph
space is an emergent feature of this
hypergraph when we look at it in the
aggregate even though we got all these
details about all these little pieces of
hypergraph when we look at it you know
zoomed out it's it it seems like
Continuum
space
but there are
potentially aspects of this hypergraph
that are not like ordinary physical
space there are sort of details of the
hypergraph inside which we can think of
as being like some other kind of
internal
space the kind of thing that is the
standard model of electromagnetism for
example where there is kind of a an
internal degree of Freedom that is
associated with every point in physical
space that is the thing that corresponds
to the gauge field for for
electromagnetism well this idea of of
this notion of sort of a a a way of
picking a direction in this kind of
internal space this idea that you have
to make a connection between the
directions that have been picked in
different places in physical space shows
up in a very concrete way in our models
and that that kind of shows us sort of
how the whole structure of of gaug local
gauge inv variants and gauge fields and
connections and so on seems to work
again we don't know as you know the
details hopefully as time goes by will
be pinned down in in in in uh more
precisely but the qualitative picture is
as you try and figure out these sort of
internal directions internal degrees of
freedom
that we that correspond to aspects of
this hypog graph you have this issue of
how do you align what you consider to be
the you know the zero direction or
something in this hyper graph at
different places in physical space and
that's that alignment the need to have
that alignment is what leads to
connections and and the whole structure
of of local gauge gauge theories and so
on I mean you know this this whole issue
of um
uh
um of kind of what um
um you know I think you we were talking
earlier about inevitable about sort of
geometry the emergence of
geometry I make the comment that um this
rad object one of the different ways it
plugs into existing thinking about
mathematics is it's closely related to
this incredibly abstracting the Infinity
groupoid of growth and de and so on
which I thought I would never care about
in my life I thought it was just one of
those things that floated off into the
far reaches of pure mathematics and
would never be of relevance to me but
actually it turns out it is
mathematically very similar to the the
structure of this ruad thing and it has
I mean roughly what happens is uh oh I
know this gets this gets I mean this is
it's
basically yeah I mean there's just a
very elaborate piece of pure mathematics
that uh that also has as a hypothesis
the sort of inevitable emergence of
geometry and that hypothesis is is
basically closely related to the to the
emergence of kind of something like
Continuum space in our models it's kind
of the same it has it has it comes from
the same mathematical place as this
growth and de hypothesis about
inevitable well inevitable topology in
that case but in the end inevitable
geometry from these um uh from these
kinds of
setups you mentioned so this idea that
particles might be defects right it's
quite interesting because you might ask
the question you know when when I
produce a defect in my network uh how
does it arise is it is does it pair
produce right for instance sure what
does what does a um what does defect
actually mean so I I imag the picture I
have in my mind is that you you can
update at each step in different parts
of the network and over here you do some
local update and over here you do some
local update and you go forward a few
steps and at some point you realize that
those were incompatible with one another
the changes that you made down here is
that what you mean specifically by
defect or no that that's yet a different
issue I mean so in a simple case imagine
that you have a a planer graph a graph
where everything can be laid out so no
two no two lines across
okay you have such a graph now you put
into that graph something that is oh
particular there's a theorem and graph
theory that says
every graph gets to be non planer by
having a particular subgraph present or
two actually one of two particular
subgraphs present in that graph so
there's a graph if you have um like you
have three points and you have another
three points and you're joining each
each point to every one of the three
points on the other other side k33
subgraph then then sort of that's a a a
a lump of
nonplanarity that can can exist now once
you have one of those lumps of
nonplanarity you never get to get rid of
it if you are rewriting this graph but
always preserving planarity that lump of
nonplanarity is essentially a defect you
can't get rid of if you have two such
lumps they can wander around and
eventually they can cancel each other
out but if you just have one it's stuck
so that's that's kind of the the junior
version of uh of how you might have sort
of topological defects in a graph what
the more senior version of that is
that's what the graph theorist I
mentioned earlier said come back in 100
years and we may know more about it um
more or less um the uh uh but that's
something for which we have toy models
of this but it's I mean it's just one of
these things that you have to you know
by by doing a bunch of computer
experiments and by thinking carefully
about them I fully expect that we will
know a lot more about this we don't
right now but that's the that's the
rough picture of what what can happen
now in in the case of um uh in the case
of well a black
hole you really have to think not about
this hyper graph but about the causal
graph because the black hole is kind of
this this um uh lump of of um uh this
kind of causally disconnected region
inside the causal graph so it's yet a
different level of kind of of defect
that you're looking for there but I
think um I mean in terms of of okay so
how should you think about for example
pair production um okay so in
our our physical space is knitted
together by all these little update
events happening and so the usual
picture in field Theory which is rather
confused is that in the vacuum there is
an infinite amount of production of
virtual particle antiparticle Pairs and
so on um and uh the
um um actually here's an interesting
thing I just just thought about this
recently so first time I mentioned this
um the
U when you think about a particle
an ordinary particle like a photon
electron whatever in standard particle
physics it has a certain Mass it can
move around it can move with a certain
momentum it's just it's a real particle
it just you know has its definite mass
and it moves around and so on but
there's this notion of virtual particles
that's a feature of quantum field Theory
that's been thought about since the
192s where a particle like a photon can
exist for a short period of time you
know usually photons have zero Mass but
a virtual Photon can have any Mass it
wants but it can exist only for a very
short time and it is the the what one
has in in the vacuum of physical space
is lots of virtual particle antiparticle
pairs generated for very short amounts
of time that then sort of you know
disappear the vacuum will produce the
particle antiparticle pair it will exist
for a very short time then they will
annihilate again so the thing that
um
uh well essentially the the
um there's a question in physical space
a
particle is a a lump of reality that can
undergo pure motion that can move around
in physical space without changing its
character okay that's sort of the
defining feature of a particle so it it
um okay so the question is what is a
virtual particle and I think a virtual
particle is the direct analog of that in
branchial space that is that a thing
that can move around without change in
branchial space is effectively a virtual
particle I I don't know for sure yet but
I think that's I think that's how it's
going to work out um and so what why is
that well so so the picture of the
vacuum by the way in uh most of the time
there's all this activity in the vacuum
and that
activity is most of the time in our
models not readily decomposable into
saying oh there's a virtual Photon anti
you know there's a virtual electron anti
positron pair or something like this
it's it's just there's activity in the
network and it's not oh we can decompose
that into oh there's this particular
lump that corresponds to an electron
here and we can distinguish it from this
particular lump that's a positron here
um it's something where most of the time
most of that activity is much more
jumbled up than that if you insisted if
you said I've got to make a
decomposition of all these all this all
these details into something as you do
in Quantum field Theory into definite
modes like you know you've got your
string wiggling around and you say well
actually it's a superposition of you
know the fundamental note that's a
single uh you know a single sign curve
and and the and the first IC that's a
thing that Wiggles once and the second
one that Wiggles twice and so on you can
describe any shape of of curve you know
by that 3A series of of a sum of sign
curves and that's what's done in Quantum
field Theory to describe the vacuum as
this infinite sum of different partical
excitations but the fact that you can
really Identify say this really is a
particle exitation in our model you're
at a much lower level and most of the
time you can't sort of you is not useful
to say oh actually this this this just
random update here can be thought of as
a little piece of this very complicated
electron you know structure that existed
there so it's kind of um you know what
we're what we're seeing is something
below the level of these particle
antiparticle pairs um and as I say my my
my recent guess is that uh you know I've
been wondering what is motion in Branch
Hill space what is it what and what
corresponds to a particle what what is a
what is a thing that maintains its
identity through through branchial space
and my guess is that it is effectively a
virtual particle but that's a that's a
future a piece of of future future
science so to speak because I really
haven't haven't figured that out in
detail so one question I have is as you
mentioned particles are coherent Through
Time
right you can update with any rule
possible right at any at any point in
any step of the process right so how
does arrives in your
models well okay so look the the thing
is each it's complicated because with a
given
rule you you have you know if you have a
let's say you you you're dealing with a
given rule then there will be certain
kinds of for example let's say it's a
rule that preserves poity of graphs MH
then that rule will never be able to
destroy the k33 subgraph it's it's stuck
with that
a different rule would be able to
destroy that but in our perception of
the universe we are localized in Ral
space just as we are localized in
physical space so for us we're mostly
looking at this bundle of rules that are
sort of nearby in Ral space and so for
us there are certain things that will
you know that will be coherently the
case because we are localized in Ral
space now that's because we're observers
like we are if we were just like in
physical space if we were observers who
were you know where the parts of our
minds were scattered over the surface of
the Earth for example we would have a
different perception of the world than
we do I mean you know if we were and
that's a you know the fact that we
perceive the world we perceive definite
objects in the world and so on is a
consequence of the of the fact that we
are localized perceivers of the world
by by that you mean there's like a
waiting on which rules can be taken in
each update sort of like in Quantum
mechanic no I mean in in you know it's
like saying we are at a particular place
in Ral space we might be at a different
place in roal space but just like we
might live in a different galaxy but we
happen to live in the galaxy in which we
live and given that there a certain
perception of what happens in the
universe that we get you know we because
we live in the Galaxy we live
you know its Central black hole is of a
certain size and so certain things
happen in our galaxy if we lived in a
different galaxy we you know even though
the laws of physics are the same we
would perceive different things to be
going on and so I think it is in in Ral
space that because we are at a
particular place in roal Space the
universe we perceive the universe to
operate in a particular way in fact my
my view of that is every mind we can
think of as being at a different place
in roal space and mines that are closely
aligned are nearby in Ral space you know
the the humans with similar educational
backgrounds are nearby in Ral space and
by the way you can ask the question what
is the analog of particles in Ral space
and that one I think I know I think the
analog of particles in Ral space is a
very bizarre thing is
Concepts so for example in one brain
there are all these neuron firings that
happen but somehow we package up those
neuron firing ings into this thing that
we can transmit to another brain you
know as I try and yak about things you
know maybe I am communicating some of
what's going on in those neural firings
in my brain and I'm communicating them
by packaging them up into something that
can be transported to a different part
of Ral space without much change a
concept A word whatever else that you
can then unpack in your brain and get
something like the same concept so to
speak get you know get a corresponding
set of neuron firings and as we you know
as we look sort of further away in Ral
space you know we get to the cats and
dogs they have only certain kinds of
things that we can successfully
communicate we get further away to other
kinds of systems it becomes very hard to
understand the alignment between the way
we think about things and the way other
systems think about things I suppose one
distinction would be so in the real
world there's sort of nothing that we
see in between in Ron and a muon right
there's not sort of some I know that in
your writing you talk about this sort of
inter concept space right and so if if
Concepts in the space are
particles this sort of that's a good
question yeah right there's there's uh I
suppose the idea would be that you would
want these to be discreet things where
you
can't through some continuous process go
from one to a different concept
that's an interesting issue I mean so
this whole idea of interc concept space
is something that
uh I think sort of maps into this ideas
about the ruad but the place where I
kind of came to that is in thinking
about generative Ai and thinking about
if you train up an AI on kind of a bunch
of a billion human images and you say
inside the AI
all the kind of the the the kind of the
essence of those billion images has been
ground up into this underlying model and
then you say well what's in that
underlying model other than those those
existing images and what you can say is
you can identify in this kind of
space of possible meanings so to speak
you can identify this island that
corresponds to cats another Island that
corresponds to dogs and you say well
what's in between those
well if you have a generative AI That's
producing images it produces images
happily in the space between cats and
dogs and they look like things you don't
recognize they look like kinds of things
that there could be you know you could
have a name for that kind of pattern but
we don't right now and some of those
patterns maybe in the future there'll be
some art movement that's very keen on
this particular kind of pattern and then
there'll be a name for it but right now
there isn't so right now we just have
these little islands in the space of
possible Concepts space of possible
images we have these little islands that
we have names for and then we have these
vast spaces where we don't have names so
I think the thing you're you're asking
which is interesting is is um
uh yeah in in so far
as when we think about that more
dynamically when we think about kind of
let me think about this for a second
um let's
see
um the question is the things that
we
identify as transportable Concepts like
cats and dogs as compared to the things
in interc concept space for which we
have not formed kind of a coherent way
of describing them how does that relate
to yeah yeah I think it's the I think
it's the following thing okay so when we
have a particle like an electron it has
a definite momentum there's a thing we
can measure about it that's pretty
definite or it has a definite Mass but
the vast amount of stuff that's
happening in the vacuum in physical
space we don't have that way of
identifying we don't have a way of
picking it up and saying I can talk
about this it has a certain
mass and I think that's the analog I
think that the analog is that the things
we consider as particles in physical
space are the things for which a certain
measurement that we can make on them a
certain way of characterizing them is
definite like we say it has a certain
Mass which I think is similar to saying
we can call those cluster of images a
cat whereas you know so in other words
that that's our you know what is it well
it has a word associated with it what is
that lump of activity in the network in
in space well it has a definite Mass it
has a definite momentum so we can
characterize it as a particle I hadn't
thought about it that way before thank
you for for asking about that I mean
that that's a I think that the um um so
you know I think I think that's right I
think that the the question of of what
um sort of we call it a particle
because we have a definite thing we can
measure about it see see to know that
that thing was the same as it moved
through space we have to say well what
aspect of it is the same as it moves
through space because if we say let's
identify what atoms of space it's made
of it's going to lose every time it's
going to be different as it moves but we
have to say you know the thing that
moves you know the the glass that moves
from here to there you know it's made of
different atoms of space but yet we say
look it's the same glass but imagine
this was really close to A Spacetime
Singularity this glass would not
maintain its shape as it as it moves
through space the fact that it maintains
its shape I mean in in actuality the
Earth's gravitational field will be just
a little tiny bit different here versus
there and this glass that we think of as
circular here it won't really be
circular in a sense when we if it was
perfectly circular in one place as we
change the gravitational field we change
the curvature of space it won't be
perfectly circular anymore but the fact
that we say yes it's the same glass as
we move it from here here to there
that's a consequence of the fact that
the measurements we're doing on the
thing make agree when it's in one place
versus another and I think that's it's
the same that's that same idea of the
thing we are the thing we're identifying
is it's catlike so to speak and that's
and and you know that's the aspect of
this of this in in Concepts based so to
speak that we're identifying I think
that's kind of the analog of this I
think that that's a um so the fact that
we think it's the same electron is
because the things we're measuring about
that electron are things that will be
the same even though if we were to get
inside that electron and ask what atoms
of space is it made of or some other
detail then it would be
different this is a little bit out of
left field but do you think that it was
in some in hindsight was obvious that
llms were going to
work absolutely not absolutely not no it
was not obvious at all it was and and
the you know the fact that lm's work is
a scientific fact about humans and human
language I mean in other words nobody
knew what uh I should just say I mean
large language models for people yes yes
we're talking AI G seg from from physics
into uh um and u no I mean you know I
had followed these things for years I
mean I started working on I worked on
neuron Nets back around
1981 and I could never get them to do
anything interesting and I sort of gave
up and it was the big surprise happened
in 2011 when it turned out that if you
kept training a neuronet long enough if
you kept giving it enough examples and
saying you know adjust yourself to
follow these examples and you kept on
doing that for long enough the neuronet
would learn things it was completely not
obvious that that would work nobody knew
uh in fact many people including myself
sort of guessed that the right thing to
do was to try using simple neural Nets
to do simple things and that turns out
to be much harder than to use
complicated neuron Nets to do
complicated things and I finally have
understood this in fact it's something
I've been working on recently kind of
the fundamental reason that machine
learning works it's not at all obvious
it will work it's not at all obvious
that you can and and by way the reason
that something like chat gbt works is
that well okay so what is chat gbt doing
it's basically trying to continue
sentences trying to continue pieces of
text and it's trying to do that by using
the example of what's on the web so we
have a sentence like I don't know uh I
don't know why I always use this one you
know the cat sat on the and you know if
you look on the web you'll find a bunch
of web pages where the next word is Matt
and so it's it's a pretty good guess if
you saw the cat sat on the that the next
word should be
Matt but what's happening is the fact
that you can go on and make a big long
essay you won't find explicit examples
on the web of this 20-word sequence that
you have to give the 21st word for you
won't find that so what has to happen is
somehow the neuronet has to take the
examples from the web and make a model
whose extrapolation agrees with what a
human brain does
and the fact that that can be done using
these neuronet models is completely
non-obvious because it's you know and
the fact that it works I think as a
consequence of the fact that those
models are similar enough to the way
that brains are set up that they
generalize in more or less the same way
that brains generalize but the fact that
that even can be done for language is
not obvious and in fact I think what it
really reveals is that there are
regularities in language that we didn't
know were there so for example we're
very familiar with the fact that you
know in a language like English you know
sentences tend to go noun verb noun but
there are many sentences that go noun
verb noun that we would say that
sentence is just
nonsense but it turns out that there is
more structure there's kind of a
semantic grammar I think of what
sentences can make sense and effectively
what was done in these nets is they
learned that semantic grammar they
learned the construction kit of how you
can put sentences together and they've
done it in a very roundabout and
complicated way but the end result is a
kind of scientific fact about how you
put sentences together and that's that's
what you know that's the that's the sort
of miraculous seeming thing is they're
successfully able to spin out lots of
text that could have Mak sense because
it's following this construction kit
that they have effectively correctly
extrapolated from a trillion words
deduced from the web or something so it
it's um but now you know I I just
recently was working on the problem of
why does biological evolution work you
know why is it the case that you can uh
why why do you when you change the
genome just a little bit why do you not
just always get stuck why are you not
always in a situation where you can
never get better where you can never get
you know the longer neck giraffe or
whatever else and this is it's quite an
interesting thing because it's actually
relates to our friend computational
irreducibility that we started out with
if it wasn't for computational
irreducibility neither biological
evolution nor machine learning would
work and and the reason is that you're
in this in biological evolution you've
got some genome it produces an organism
so to speak that has some particular
form and the question is as you make the
small changes as you make a bunch of
small changes to that genome what
happens how how you know there are all
these different directions you can go in
this kind of space of possible organisms
and the issue is do you get stuck and
the point is because of computational ir
reducibility there's enough effective
Randomness in what happens in all those
different directions that with
overwhelming probability there is a way
to improve it could be the case that
what you'd see in all these different
directions was similar enough that if
there if One Direction didn't let you
improve no other direction would let you
improve either but because of
computational irreducibility there's
there's this that you will tend to be in
a situation you with overwhelming
probability you'll be in a situation
where there's enough difference between
these different directions that one of
them will be a way to get better so to
speak and it's kind of an interesting
thing because I found this very minimal
model for biological evolution in which
you're generating these computational
patterns and what you see happening is
you say I want a pattern that lives as
long as possible for example and what
you'll see happen is it has some
underlying rule which lets it live for
10 steps let's say and then you say well
mutate it a bit mutate it a bit it will
have a way to get better because some it
won't there'll be enough effective
Randomness produced by computational IR
reducibility that it will have a a path
to Improvement and as it gets better you
get these bigger and bigger patterns and
they get more and more complicated more
and more
onate and it's kind of looks like the
fossil record because it's kind of like
first it had one little idea then it
built on that idea then it kept building
on that idea and eventually made this
very complicated thing and by the way
there was a different original idea it
could have had that would have been sort
of a different branch in the tree of
life and so what you see but what you
see is these very ornate solutions to
the problem of living for a long time
let's say or generating a particular
output and I think the same thing is
happening in in neuron Nets and I think
what's happening is that the what you're
doing by doing all this training and so
on is you're producing these incredibly
onate patterns of what happens inside
and so when you say well what's it
really doing why does it work well it's
it it is not there isn't just some
simple mechanical kind of engineering
explainable type thing that's going on
instead and and you have to see the
pictures to to really appreciate this
that you know instead it's this very
elaborate kind of pattern of behavior
that happens to achieve the some
particular objective and that's my guess
about what you know when we nobody's
been able to really unpeel neural that's
a pretty complicated mathematical
structures and it's been very hard to
kind of get to the essence of what's
really going on in these systems you
know I tried back in the beginning of
the ' 80s and I I I I got some distance
and then I decided neuron nuts were too
complicated and I simplified them to get
to these cellular automat and things
that I've studied a lot and you know
then for the next 40 years that's what
I've been using as my sort of go-to
model for very simple systems and now I
I finally got some kind of merger of
those two kinds of things which I think
will allow one to kind of get a more
intuitive sense of what's Happening
inside a neuron that and and why why
that actually
works it's funny when we started our
conversation you talked about how we we
are now entering a new era of physics
right so for the past 300 400 years
analytics and uh calculus and you know
this sort of thing were really where
where you'd go to if you wanted to make
progress in
physics but uh now in the last few years
we have ai coming on board as well not
just computation but AI can AI really be
creative in in in the sense that can can
it really extrapolate or can it only
interpolate and within that context will
AI be able to help us solve science
solve physics at the end of the day okay
so several different things I mean first
of all in the solve science you know we
run right into computational
irreducibility here because if you are
asking the question can a neuronet you
know what we can't figure out by you
know we haven't been able to find a
formula or something for such and such a
thing will the AI be able to do that
well the problem is there just isn't any
way to find such a formula we're stuck
so the AI is not going to do any better
and in fact what we will be best off
doing is just doing the computation so
to speak so I think that's the that's
the the clear answer to that now in the
question of sort of the creativity of AI
being creative is easy the question is
whether what you get is is something you
care about in other words you can get
some random collection of pixels it's
very easy to get an an never seen before
random collection of pixels the question
is will that random collection of pixels
or what you might think of as a random
collection of pixels will that
collection of pixels be something that
we humans care about and that's I think
a you know the way that AIS have been
trained is on things that we humans have
decided we care about and so this
question of whether whether you'll be
able to find things that whether they
sort of putting just sort of randomly
choosing things will we get to things we
care about you know I've spent a lot of
my life studying the kind of
computational Universe of what all
possible programs do and what you
discover there is there are these
programs that do these amazing things
you would never have thought of and when
you first see them you say that's really
neat I don't know why I care other than
I can see it's a very intricate pattern
and it's very neat but various times in
my life least I realized oh my gosh that
pattern that I just thought was neat
turns out has some big technological
consequence or some big scientific
consequence and it wasn't just neat so
to speak it connected to something that
I care about we see the same thing in
mathematics you know you can go off and
you can enumerate all possible theorems
but most of the theorems you can
enumerate will be ones that you know we
don't have a reason to care about we
build up this kind of sort of social
structure of the paths and Mathematics
that we care about and it's the same
thing I think in in uh you know in this
this question about will we be able to
find sort of theories that we didn't
think of by by sort of rattling around
in a sense my whole physics project is
about doing that I mean it's about
starting from kind of not starting from
the universe as we know it and trying to
reverse engineer what's happening it's
instead about starting from all
possibilities sort of the the the the
creative effort of of coming up with all
possibilities and then seeing what the
consequences of that are so I think you
know as a practical matter uh you know a
lot of the technology I've spent a lot
of time building is the things that
human brains are not very good at doing
it's building these big towers of
computation that are something that we
can do with computers that human brains
don't do very well what what sort of the
current round of AI and neuron Nets have
given us is a way of doing things that
human brains do do fairly well but now
we can do them in some some kind of
automatic way that's a very useful kind
of linguistic interface to these kind of
deep computational kinds of things it
isn't it isn't removing the Deep
computational kinds of things and it
never will because of this phenomenon of
computational
irreducibility but it is still and in
terms of knowing for example what you
know being able to make sort of
analogies between different human things
that we've thought about yes that can be
very useful things done done kind of
with with the current round of of sort
of neural net AI but I think it is it is
an interesting point that in a sense the
the whole Enterprise that we've been
talking about about our physics project
and so on is precisely making use of the
kind of creativity of computation to say
we're starting off from the infinitely
creative thing that is the rou ad and
we're kind of deciding which slices of
it we humans care about because because
of the fact that we are observers of the
kind that we are and that and that sort
of slicing of the set of infinite
creative things is giving us the physics
that we are currently familiar with were
we to change the way that we are we
would perceive different physics and we
would end up with kind of a different
being caring about a different part of
that kind of creative
space well Steven it's been an absolute
pleasure thank you for coming on the
podcast thank you
and you some very interesting questions
and you made me think about some things
I hadn't thought about before so thank
you very much
