in this episode think about like what
evolutionary scientists observe like I
always was fascinated when I was in
originally I was in
primatology and I was reading these
field notes I actually went to Africa
for two summers to study chimpanzees but
I was reading these primatological field
notes of like which always get left out
of the scientific papers of like what
they saw like they would see like for
example like a infant they would see
infanticide like they would see
infanticide they would see rape they
would see
War when watching the
chimpanzees but they would just be
collecting data as external like and you
would get like these scientific reports
about like rates of infanticide in this
chimpanzee group or rates of you know
murder in this chimpanzee group or
something like a very cold
analysis but I'm saying that
evolutionary biologists and
anthropologists they're super aware of
the brutality of
nature but they can but they're always
studying it from an external point point
of
view like it's not like they aren't
getting
raped like their kid isn't like their
kid isn't being killed right they're
studying it from an external point of
view but the challenge here and this is
like the Deep challenge I think of
hegelian science is what is hegelian
science it's
that the interesting thing about science
is that it changes from premodern
philosophy where premodern philos
philosophy is just contemplating
substance and and modern science is
testing
substance it's testing it it's
experimenting with it but where the
limits of modern science are the
difference between modern science and
hegelian science is that you don't have
to you you can't only test substance you
have to test substance and
subject it's not only substance it's
also subject so you're in the system you
are under the test your subjectivity is
the test hey everyone welcome to this
conversation with the philosopher
teacher certainly a teacher for me and
the founder of philosophy portal Dr
cadel last this was a far ranging
dialogue and I've got to say um I truly
was honored to have cadell on um I've
mentioned this cell uh Offline that
initially years ago when I started
getting into Jan philosophy it was his
um ser or his lecture series on uh ja
less than nothing that really helped me
understand the book I mean it's a dense
text in in fact if you haven't seen it
this is toome I mean it's the kind of
book that you read for a lifetime and
funny enough uh I was kind of
propagandizing or pushing propaganda
let's say uh for cadell and also on
behalf of cadell for him to uh do a uh a
a philosophy portal course on this book
in particular less than nothing thing um
trying to study J's work and it's funny
I was asking for another Coast while
he's in the middle of uh the Christian
atheism Coast now the reason I'm
mentioning all of this is because well I
assume um cadell might not be a stranger
to you if you've been following my work
on this channel for a while I've
mentioned this work and a lot of the
guests that have been on the podcast
were also on cadel's podcast philosophy
portal um and I think there's a lot of
uh intermingling between the kind of the
things we're interested in but also I
would say you know I still consider
myself very much a student of what Kel
does but uh he did mention that in many
ways we have the same uh intellectual
development as to how we got interested
in this kind of lenan heelan philosophy
uh this kind of theory scene that you
see really growing online uh because
like cadel I I I too am very much
interested in the Natural Sciences and I
would say in many ways so much of my
philosophy is really philosophy of
science and that's what I'm interested
in um and Cel started off in
anthropology uh and moved on to um more
of uh his work in philosophy which
perfectly brings us to this book systems
and subjects thinking the foundations of
Science and philosophy by K last uh
primarily despite it being a far-
ranging conversation we did discuss this
work by cadel uh and we touched on how
hegelian philosophy what's its
pertinence or what insights it can give
us uh about science and the philosophy
of science and how to think of these
foundations especially uh in systems
theory and how we can think of
subjectivity when trying to understand
systems as such and certainly cadel just
do that uh in this book by incorporating
the work of the biologist B lafi and
bringing that work into dialogue with uh
mnal philosophy like Hegel hia and of
course Lon and J certainly um I should
also mention uh the recent publication
by philosophy portal Logic for the
global brain now it is also a bit of a t
so I still haven't got gotten into it
but I'm certainly looking forward to
diving into this book too um just just
so much of the ideas here resonate with
what I visually feel inside and what I
see in the world so I I I am hoping one
day I don't know if I should say this
publicly that uh I'll be at a point
where I can even contribute to a work
like this by philosophy portal um I did
really enjoy reading
uh the editor note and the forward uh by
Dan Lana from OG Rose uh and I'm already
intrigued let's say I'm already sold on
the book so uh although we didn't really
discuss much of this apart from kind of
discussing cadel's PhD thesis um a lot
of this was really a work on the
philosophy of
science I just got distracted by someone
banging loudly outd do I don't know
what's going on anyway don't worry about
it uh yes this world was mostly on the
philosophy of science um and how again
hegelian philosophy or that way of
thinking subjectivity uh should be
brought into how we think of science uh
now look as you can see I'm kind of
blabbering now there's a lot I can say
on cadel and his work and the influence
he's had on me uh so all I can say is
look I'm hoping this is the start of
many more dialogues to come uh and
please go tweet at cadell go and tweet
at him go and comment on his videos
do a philosophy portal Coast on less
than nothing keep tweeting at him spam
him email him and then eventually he'll
get to it uh all right before we
continue uh as be usual a quick PSA you
may be aware that I've mentioned
multiple times I'll never have
advertisers or sponsors on this podcast
I simply don't have anything to sell you
and I deeply do believe that we live in
a society of excess and overc
consumption and I don't want to
contribute to that by selling you more
things that that being said though
forgive the topology we ultimately live
in the world we live in and I can't
continue this project and sustain it if
I don't have any kind of financial
support So as uncomfortable as this
makes me feel I sincerely would like to
ask you to consider supporting this
podcast financially needless to State
your listenership and rivership is more
than enough support however if you have
the means please do consider supporting
me on patreon substack or even PayPal
and if you're wondering what are the
pugs what are you going to get get
nothing absolutely nothing because I'm
not selling you anything you're not
buying anything but rather if this
podcast if the work I've done has
brought you any kind of value if you've
learned something new do consider
supporting me on these platforms but to
reiterate only if you have the means all
right back to the episode as I was
saying in that note I recently did start
a patreon account so do consider
supporting my work if you found any
value here at all um there are no PS
there there's nothing behind the pay
it's not me trying to sell you anything
it's simply if you think my work is
worth paying for the free work that's
out there so yes I'd really be grateful
if you could do that um I get really
weird asking for money it's just anyway
I I'm sure I'll get over this uh a bit
of a formal introduction to Kel last Dr
Cell last is an anthropologist and hegan
philosopher who is interested in
biocultural evolution mind matter
relations and speculative Futures his
PhD thesis Global brain Singularity
focuses on all three of these topics
he's the author of systems and subjects
and to the alien and many other
interdisciplinary books Dr kelas has Tau
multiple courses on hegel's science of
logic Sigman Freud's unconscious Alan
kazap panek's what is sex and is also
the founder philosophy portal an
education platform focused on teaching
the foundational philosophical
discourses of the modern world with that
being said here is my conversation with
cadel last cool cadel uh yeah as I said
thanks for being here um I am I've been
looking forward to this for a while uh
not to uh flatter you too much but uh as
I as I told you years ago uh I used
your uh series on JX less than nothing
uh your your free series to real it was
just a real uh resource of education for
me to understand the work of J but not
just J but even kind of at the time this
sort of speculative heelan the way of
thinking um and like how to think the
negative how to how to think logic and
so on um so that being said though uh
what I permanently want to discuss today
as we planned is your book uh systems
and subjects which I know isn't your
latest book uh however it's funny I was
I was thinking Ed Johnston uh who you
know uh in one of his older interviews
he said that it's really
hard uh writing a book on J especially
cuz a living right doing work on a
living thinker the living thinker is
living and thinking uh and that's how I
felt like preparing for this podcast cuz
you're also currently doing your
thinking publicly so I have like a set
of questions I wanted to ask you last
month month but now it's they've changed
because you you're doing your own
thinking um and you do it so publicly
and so you you could be on a theory
underground podcast or you could do be
your own
podcast uh but I think it behooves me to
ask you this question because it's at
the center of your Consciousness right
now which is uh the Christian Christian
atheism cast and I think it's a good
place to for the listeners who aren't
familiar with your work just to see the
the kind of thinker you are and the kind
of problems you work through so if you
could tell us I mean it's ongoing right
now isn't it so what is yeah what is the
Christian Christian atheism coast and
what made you kind of yeah develop a
whole Coast around this this concept
yeah well look it's great to be here I
think you're really doing great work and
I'm excited to see sort of how your own
thinking continues to develop and I I
and I know how difficult it is also to
uh do the type of work you're doing and
the amount of time and effort it takes
to to to to to pull off these podcasts
so you know in some sense you know just
also just throwing back to you
recognizing you for the the work you're
doing and I think that there aren't that
many podcasts where I see the person
hosting the podcast put in the amount of
back work that I know needs to go in to
really bring philosophy to this level of
of of discourse and so I think it's it's
really important important work that
you're doing as well so let me just say
right off the bat
that I think the easiest is following a
dead
thinker the the the the let's say the
the medium difficulty is following a
living thinker that you don't
know and the most difficult is following
a Liv living thinker that you also
know and I think that level of
difficulty is is is the challenge today
and I think it is actually connected to
the ideas that I'm unpacking and
exploring with the concept of Christian
atheism which by the way keeps on giving
and giving to me in terms of H myself
exploring this concept I'm finding I'm
finding that as I continue to develop
this concept within the context of the
course I'm I'm learning something new
and evolutionizing my thought almost
every day so it's I'm in a really
interesting spot with with the concept
and and I want to bring that to the
Forefront so let me connect the central
idea that I'm trying to develop in
Christian atheism with what I just said
about the easiest is to follow the dead
thinker the medium difficulty is to
follow the living thinker and the
hardest is to follow the living thinker
that you also have a relationship with I
think that what's revolutionary about
Christianity is the concept of the
Trinity and actually I just finished
watching a movie There Will Be Blood
don't know if you've seen that movie
There Will Be Blood but in the movie
There Will Be Blood it's set basically
at the end of the 19th century beginning
of the 20th century during the oil rush
and there's this Central tension in the
movie between someone who's um basically
a Pioneer in the oil industry and this
local priest or this local Pastor who's
running a small church congregation out
in the
desert and this tension between them is
is fascinating it is in some sense a
Christian atheist tension in the movie
that's being dramatized between the the
the guy who's uh Pioneer in the oil
industry who you could say is the
atheist and this Christian Pastor who's
who's running a small town Pastor in the
desert and this pastor is basically
using the trinity in an
extremely
superstitious and I would say
non-philosophical way in the sense that
he is completely leaving the uh Trinity
shrouded in obscurantist
representation and mystery and
ultimately this causes his own undoing
and I think that what I'm trying to do
with the concept of Christian atheism is
raise the concept of the Trinity to a
philosophical concept so that it can
actually be thought by secular
subjectivity which is I think allergic
to the type
of obscurantist
representations
which often are are are characteristic
of premodern religious subjectivity so
the father is something that I'm trying
to relate to as basically the concept of
the big other the son is basically
something I'm trying to relate to as a
form of subjective
destitution and the Holy Spirit is
something I'm trying to relate to as
basically a type of network
subjectivity which is increasingly I
think necessary today and perhaps
relevant to the idea of systems and
subjects in terms of what I was saying
about the level of difficulty of
following a dead thinker living thinker
and living thinker you know I think that
following a dead thinker is basically
having a big other right it's it's
having a father and the reason why the
father or the dead thinker is is in that
is in that position of the father is
because the father doesn't actually
exist the the the Father the father is
in some sense
imaginary and that's why it's easier
that's why it's easiest to sort of have
sort of to follow a dead thinker because
you don't have to really contend with
the living thought of that thinker that
thinker can remain in some sense an
imaginary representation at a distance
and it can remain an ideal and it can
remain an ideal that's never shattered
and thus it can remain an ideal that
keeps you away from your own subjective
destitution because what do people
always say when they say don't meet your
Idols when they say don't meet your
Idols it means means that you're risking
subjective destitution in the sense that
your idolization will
collapse right if you keep the idol at a
distance and it well convenient if the
person is dead because you'll never have
a chance to meet them anyway but if you
actually meet your idol and this
idealization collapses actually what
you're scared of is your own sort of
inner World collapsing which is
sustained by this idealization which is
sustained by this figure of the big
other so you're keeping at a distance
the possibility of subjective
destitution
and then finally to follow a living
thinker I think is to uh constantly be
challenged with rethinking um and and re
like like you just said like the
questions you wanted to ask me last
month are not the questions that you
want to ask me now and perhaps next
month there'll be another set of qu you
know and if we continue relating for
years there'll be Transformations on
both of our sides that that's Network
subjectivity that's whatever
image we have of each
other uh
is is it should be broken like it that
because it's not the Living
Word uh the Living Word is the Living
Word and and whatever image you have is
is only going to be an approximate
representation of of of what that person
actually is in in in the life of their
concept so I think really what I'm
trying to go towards here is with this
idea of the Trinity is how can we
actually think
philosophically let's say the Living
Word or the life of the concept in the
reality of network subjectivity and it
could even be possible that let's say
I'm increasingly using network
subjectivity and just opposing it
against institutional subjectivity
because it could be that institutional
subjectivity
is upheld by a figure of the big
other whether it
be a professor whether it be a certain
idealization of professional attainment
some certain
upward direction that is
idealized which if it works and this is
I think the interesting Paradox if
institutional subjectivity Works meaning
you're able to build your career in the
institution you can actually live your
entire life without really encountering
directly subjective destitution because
the institution takes care of you and
right so I I I've met many forms of
subjectivity working within the
university system where I've
increasingly got this perspective inform
formed by Christian atheism that there's
a form of
negativity that people in the
institutions see
permanent that they keep permanently at
a
distance and that's not to say that
someone who spent their entire life in
the institution can't experience
subjective destitution it's just that
the institution creates uh a nice
containment which reduces the
probability of subjective destitution in
some sense like of course you could
still experience a absolute catastrophe
in your life that brings you to your
knees and absolutely transforms your you
know your subjective position but the
institution also functions as a kind of
defense against the possibility of
subjective destitution so in some sense
I think that the reason why Christianity
is becoming popular again or the reason
why it's becoming
intellectually people are becoming
intellectually curious about religion in
general and maybe Christianity in
specifically is because I think there's
also a crisis in the
Institutions and uh it could be that
people are
finding themselves encountering
something like subjective destitution
and also wondering um about this weird
notion of Holy Spirit which I think
presents us with a form of
organization which is other to let's say
institutional
structure yep I mean there was a lot
there I mean I think the part I want to
focus a bit more on his the notion of
the big ad uh and also K which I really
like I took note of this which is where
you say that you analogize uh the Holy
Spirit uh with networks to use you know
system science language now firstly uh
to dis to talk about the big others so I
think in some sense um maybe now there's
a a slight shift in the
zist uh so to speak it's this notion of
like science as the big other right I
mean and when I mean science as a big
other it's important to state that uh
okay let me let me so uh an example of
this would be the the new atheist uh for
Horsemen I I'm I'm I know for a fact
when I was a teenager a lot of my
friends who were interested in these
topics their big other were there was
either Sam Harris or Richard Dawkins
these two figures um kristofh Hitchin
bit bit before even my time and then
Daniel Denard he was more philosopher
wasn't really but Sam Harris especially
with his like you know you know uh
what's this the meditation kind of the
secularized spirituality side of him and
then Richard dokins with his just like
pure you know hard
science um and and the problem though is
and this again goes back to this
something where in this book uh systems
and science uh sorry systems and
subjects where this notion of the
Interior life so your first chapter is
D's interior which is the chapter I read
most closely cuz I think that's that's
the part where a lot of these topics of
having a big other or subjective
subtitution they speak to this notion of
that the interior life um so this is a
long withed way of me asking um how can
we how can we understand what you're
trying to introduce this thing called
interior life to our current uh
conversation our current dialogue that
that's going on amongst the kind of the
new atheist or kind of people that are
working through this kind of secular
rational you know Steven Pinker that
type of thinkers how so let let let me
put it another way U Sean Carol uh I
remember in one of his books uh the big
picture I think he says that humans are
Blobs of organized mud now he just says
it abstractly he makes this statement
right but see that the problem is
brilliant physicist but you just don't
get it none of us experience life as
Blobs of organized mud you like there's
you can tell me that all I am is a blob
of organized mud but how can you like I
wake up in the morning and I look at my
life I don't experience life like a blob
of organized SM like that's a in some
sense a meaningless statement I I don't
even know what that means so I guess my
question would be for for the kind of
the the big other of our time which is
like scientifically driven thinkers how
can we think the subject how can we
speak of this the interior life without
falling into some kind of new age
spiritualism you know yungang archetypes
that kind of kind of you know where
Jordan Peterson has go and where he's
trying to convince Richard Dawkins that
dragons are real you know so there was a
lot there I know but uh I'm just curious
to hear your thoughts on that because I
think without a doubt the Christian
atheism project is is is is is at a
philosophical level trying to introduce
this notion of the interior life into
more of these um uh questions that are
ongoing in in our kind of intellectual
Mia yeah okay so I can I can definitely
work with this and for the context for
people who are interested in getting
into systems and subjects when you ask
the question how can we think the
subject my approach to thinking the
subject and systems and subjects is
basically the challenge of
taking system science as an
interdisciplinary field par
exons and basically forming a
dialectical metad dialogue throughout
the whole book between system science as
an interdisciplinary science and
Continental philosophy because I think
Continental philosophy and so that's
like that's like on a lowkey like that's
structuring the whole book is a
conversation constantly between these
two disciplines and in some sense that
represents systems and subjects like a
system science represents thinking
systems in a scientific
interdisciplinary way and subjects is
basically I'm trying to get at the
nature of the subject through the
history of Continental philosophy which
I think provides us with the resources
to to to precisely think the subject in
a non-regressive non-reductive way so in
terms of why the book starts with
interior life in some sense the book
starts with interior life so that we can
get to a form of
exteriority which is not excluding the
subject but actually lifting the subject
up so I I think that's the problem with
a lot of science is that science doesn't
start again the type of science you were
mentioning Richard Dawkins evolutionary
biology uh Sean Carroll quantum physics
or general en
relativity and Sam Harris
Neuroscience all of those forms of
science do not really start with a they
don't start with the
interiority so they're not starting
there now I'm not ending
there right I'm starting there and that
that's the point of starting there in
the book is is again to like and and
where you start where your origin is is
is important I think that the
presupposition of classical science and
the presupposition of physics the
presupposition of evolutionary biology
the presupposition of Neuroscience it
starts with an external
gaze right either an external gaze of
the universe the beginning is the Big
Bang or so
forth uh or it starts with the origin of
Life the beginning is single- celled
organisms or it starts with the brain
neuronal connection
and wirings and so forth and then builds
up from there but you're never going to
understand the interiority of the
subject you're from starting from that
external point of view it's it's it's
always going to be something
epiphenomenal it's always going to be
something
that is kind of irrelevant like what I
took and this is my sort of like how I
got ruptured from the Natural Sciences
to speculative philosophy was that I
took the interiority of the subject and
the interiority of my subjectivity as
something that broke my image of Natural
Science and I and I had to do that I had
to do that to myself it was a self-
violence that I did to
myself like I was sitting I was in doing
my doctorate I was taking doctoral level
courses on neuroscience and cognitive
science and evolutionary science because
my doctoral Supervisor was a expert in
those
fields but I was like this doesn't have
any Rel relationship to the dreams I had
last
night or this doesn't have any
relationship to the desire I'm feeling
when I see that girl at the school
yesterday right or you know it doesn't
touch me it doesn't it doesn't move me
it's not whatever it is it's it's I'm
epiphenomenal to
it so I had
to I had to break that relationship and
so like you know regards to like someone
like Sean Caroll for example it's
interesting you brought up him because
one of his quotes always sticks in my
mind which is something like he said and
I might even be in from an interview
about this book the big
picture he said we know a lot about
physics we know a little bit about
chemistry and biology and we know almost
nothing about politics and society and I
think that he needs to take his own
knowledge more seriously and break
himself with that because if you
actually break yourself with that very
statement where it will bring you is
actually look if you really want to
think the core of politics and Society
you've got to start with figures like
Hegel and Marx you've got to start with
figures like Freud and laon there's no
way around it
because you know if if you want to
understand modern politics if you want
to understand modern society it you know
it's it's yeah I mean it's not going to
be found in general relativity
it's not going to be found in quantum
mechanics it's not going to be found in
evolutionary biology it's not going to
be found in
Neuroscience right it's going to be
found in my point of view Continental
philosophy so it it it really changes
the game and and you know on the one
hand Continental philosophy is difficult
and obscure and many people have a
resistance to really exposing themselves
to the arduous labor that's involved in
learning Continental
philosophy because it's just as
difficult as learning quantum physics or
evolutionary biology in order to
understand those fields you have to
study them for 5 10 years you have to
dedicate your being to those
fields and the same goes for Continental
philosophy you have to dedicate your
being to those fields and it changes
your
being right so in some ways you
know yeah there's a there's a high
bar there's a high bar but I think
increasingly this bar needs to be we
need to raise ourselves to this bar
because this this knowledge is is
indispensable yeah I mean I don't to
this uh Cel that idea of how it changes
your being so it's interesting uh Sean
Kelly the hiigaran um phenomenologist
philosopher he he was once uh I think on
Lex freedman's podcast and the T the
age- old now kind of like uh almost
boring question uh came up you know are
machines going to be conscious are we
going to have AG by all these Notions
right I mean it's been discussed at no
really I think and then he said well I
don't know if machines are going to be
conscious but we can say for sure that
by humans interacting with machines
humans are going to become more like
machines uh as in it's not that we I
this is really important when when we
subjectively engage with something it
changes us and and the big mistake I see
a lot made a lot in analytic philosophy
and this kind of like more like science
oriented thinking is they they can't
think the subject as to how you're
always part of the equation I mean heel
I think this is really well where the
subjects always whatever you're
observing you're already in it you can't
I mean I mean even kard talks about this
I think um however kind of that being
said now I'm probably going to I'm
probably going to hystera this
conversation a little bit and kind of be
the hysterical student so everything you
said I at a very almost visceral
existential level I agree but this is
something I've been I've been um working
through and struggling with trying to
trying to think through
because there's something in me where I
I am very averse to  the reason
I'm averse to  is because I
myself sometimes fall fall into 
but also I just I I feel like I I I I
just put out  you know like the
no  in
the technical term uh as so it's it's
not true so it's it's kind of why for me
when it comes to especially uh science
I'm like okay how can I keep 
away from science and philosophy um and
one one way i' I've been thinking about
this is like the the simple way of
segregation and categories is that so
Michael Stevens this this philosopher of
science I spoke to a few month a few
years ago actually he wrote this book
called a knowledge machine and his whole
thing is so everything you describe
everything here's where I'm going to
hyze the conversation everything you
articulated it's true about science
science will never account for
subjectivity uh in fact uh Galileo G
Galileo one of the the the the father
Godfathers of science he said that
science shouldn't account even for
Quality it should just be about quantity
um and and and he's saying that's what
sence should be sence should simply
study systems uh you know empirically
it's it's formalism and empirically it
should not think about these questions
of uh yeah interior life or design all
these questions brought up by carnal
philosophy that should be left to let's
let's call it a certain type of
philosophy or maybe more the broader the
humanities so to an argument like that
pertaining to science and since we are
after all this book is about the
foundations of science science how would
you how would you respond to an argument
like that that no science should because
if the moment you bring in the subject a
lot of  get can get in the way
and again King point would be someone
like uh Jordan Peterson who kind of
brings in like a lot of the his kind of
conservative politics into uh into
science and then brings in like Union
archetypes and and and you know kind of
almost like a to a level of like a what
like a pervert would do in the psych
analytic language uh in any cas Cas uh
yeah how would you respond to an
argument like
that great so you mentioned Jordan
Peterson and you know there was just
that huge conversation between Richard
Dawkins and Jordan Peterson where you
get this sort of ju toos between like
the archetype of a rational scientist
right like if if like there is a if
there is an archetype for a rational
scientist it's it's Richard Dawkins like
I mean you couldn't get and like he
plays the part so almost comically well
yeah like he's he's comically the part
you know and and non ironically inside
of his own subjectivity he's he's he's
playing that part you know and and what
I mean by that is like you know I if if
I'm speaking to you know the the BS
detector for science I mean it's you
know Richard Dawkins is is probably
insanely uncomfortable engaging dialogue
with Jordan Peters because he's
constantly trying to detect BS right
like and and like what like and you
could imagine like inside inside Richard
Dawkins head is like how much is this
that Jordan Peterson's saying is
complete BS or is there anything here
that I can pull out as like a rational
Colonel that I could possibly engage in
like you could imagine that's how his
his his mind's working but you know one
of the interesting dimensions of that
conversation relate to the question that
you're asking me here which is
basically Jordan Peterson was
saying aren't you open to the
possibility that a non-scientific
Dimension underpins scient the
scientific Enterprise itself and he and
he and Richard Dawkins conceded yeah
that's that's that's totally possible or
Jordan Peterson also said um don't you
think it don't you think it's possible
that Christianity uh functioned as some
sort of historical precondition
for the emergence of the scientific
Enterprise itself and Dawkins also sort
of mildly agreed and basically said
something
like um even if that's
true I'm only vaguely interested in it
or it's only vaguely
interesting and something like that
doesn't necessarily mean that I'm any
more likely to trust the truth
propositions of Christianity even if
that's true right so so but the the
point he's conceding there is that the
scientific Enterprise as a historical
phenomenon has a non-scientific
underpinning some perhaps you could say
a metaphysical
underpinning and that all metaphysical
systems are not the same there's
differences between different
metaphysical
systems and certainly the Western
metaphysical system was
Christianity and that Christianity in
some sense could have played some
historical role setting up the
preconditions for a society in which the
scientific Enterprise was possible now
in regards to I'm just sort of setting
the scene there for for what I really
want to
say which is that this question of
quantity that emerges in
Galileo okay because Galileo is really
the birth of modern science in in many
ways and his emphasis on quantity his
emphasis on
mathematization occurs at a certain
historical moment doesn't just pop out
of nowhere right it's at a certain
historical moment that Galileo
emphasizes quantity and emphasizes the
importance of mathematizing
nature as opposed to in the context of
the disagreement between Peterson and
Dawkins mythologizing nature right it I
mean in many ways this this distinction
between facts and myth can be located
right at this wedge of modern science
with Galileo and the quantification and
the mathematization of the universe
right now here's what Hegel does and
what Hegel does is he does a science of
logic right so Galileo is doing a
science of
nature Galileo is doing a science of of
physics and hegel's doing a science of
law
logic more than two centuries after
Galileo again the historical Dimension
here's not the historical Dimension here
is
important because we're talking about
setting the preconditions for something
to
arise so what happens is when we focus
exclusively on
quantity a certain quantity builds up
you can add well quantity you start
quantifying things and you can get a
cumulative
effect by this and this is what the
scientific rational mind loves that you
you have a certain Arrow you have a
certain direction you have right you
want to defend against BS because you
don't want to be bothered by all the
noise of the
universe right all the noise that could
distract you from all like you want to
focus on something where you could
reliably where you could reliably build
something right and in evolutionary
anthropology not to get too far from the
point but in evolutionary anthropology
this is called the ratcheting effect and
the ratcheting effect is what's
responsible for cumulative
culture culture that can be reliably
passed on from one generation to the
next this was actually the idea that
first let lit my mind on fire when I was
young and I started a Blog called the
ratchet which was this which is this
ratting of cumulative culture that
explodes in human beings and which you
can't really find too easily in
chimpanzees although you find it in you
find it in a very primitive
form but it explodes in the human being
right and there's this intergenerational
transfer from father to
son to bring in this I would say
Christian atheist Dimension to the main
point to the main
point this quantitative increase which
gets really formalized beautifully in
modern
science leads to something qualitatively
different in other words you build up a
quantity and a new quality
appears right naturally so the thing is
is and now in contemporary science this
is where you get an interesting split
you get the split between reductionism
and
emergentism right and
reductionists they don't think this new
qualitative emergence is relevant to the
fundamental
truth reductionists don't believe this
emergence this qualitative
transformation that opens up with
increas in
quantity is related to the fundamental
truth
emergentists think that it's just as
real or more
real than the say the fundamental base
level of reality in other words the
fundamental base level of reality
versus the qualitative emergence that
opens up in
history for the emergentist they're just
as equally interested in the qualitative
emergence that opens up in history and
that now this is where science
necessarily becomes
historicized because science isn't
just scci like the scientists can
present themselves historically as
neutral dispassionate objective
Observer but the consequences of
scientific work change history
universally you which is actually the
way like scientists the work that they
do and the quantitative methods that and
the quantitative processes that they
unleash on human
history lead to artificial intelligence
genetic
engineering um
nanotechnology robot and so forth like
and that has Universal consequences for
everyone doesn't matter so that's
actually when you follow this line of
reasoning I think that's actually like
the the most logical way out of
postmodernism because the most logical
way out of postmodernism is to recognize
science is not true because it's like
like science is not true because
it's objectively describing reality out
there science is more true than other
discourses because of the universal
effects
historically like science produces again
artificial intelligence genetic
engineering nanotechnology which changed
the conditions of of social life
historically for everyone no matter what
the culture is China Africa Europe
Americas
whatever and none of the pre-scientific
mythological narratives do
that in that sense they're all equally
irrelevant on the terms of science and
the way that I'm artic ulating science
but even Richard Dawkins is not thinking
about science in this way like when he
was thinking about like when Jordan when
he was saying like when Dawkins was
saying what truths are important to him
he said the age of the universe the age
of the Earth the history of life and
then as like a passing reference he said
like sending Rockets to Mars but like
it's actually the fact that
science could for example help us
colonize Mars
is actually a universal transformative
effect social historically like that's
actually what's revolutionary about
science and yeah it's underpinned
by human mythological systems because
humans are going to have to endure these
Transformations like like we we endure
these Transformations so I'm just trying
to say
that if you take seriously The History
of Science and and to me what I'm saying
now to me is more like in some sense
it's taking science more seriously than
science scence than like a St
reductionist
scienti because I'm saying no like we
have to think about how this is
transforming the whole
planet if you take seriously The History
of Science and you historicize science
and you pay attention to the way that
science through this quantitative
buildup leads to a qualitative
transformation which you can't predict
in
advance necessarily
it's unpredictable that's another
interesting thing because internal to
reductionist science they put so much
emphasis on predictability DET they put
so much Faith they put so much faith in
predictability that they undermine their
own ability to understand the history of
Science and the way that it leads to
unpredictable
outcomes and so what I'm saying here is
that when you understand this on the
level of what I would say is Hegel
science of
logic when you understand that way you
realize that science dialectically in
some way undermines itself and needs to
be Hyster azed into it unto
itself like in some sense like because I
started in the Natural
Sciences and through just naturally
following the Natural Sciences I had to
Hyster aze
myself right internal to science and I
think I think that's my that's my this
is my challenge for scientists is that
yeah follow science like but don't don't
be so scared that when you really follow
science to its limits that you have to
self hystera
yourself this is this is anyway that I'm
not sure yeah you can take that wherever
you want oh of course of course uh there
all I mean I think I was going to leave
this question for later but I but now we
we here so might as well ask it in the
so so the notion of Hy sterzing yourself
and the notion of this how science just
is almost like violence to a to our
historical condition what we are right
now um on the uh Theory underground U I
think the Epic Marathon live stream um
when when you you guys were discussing
uh Nick Clan and accelerationism you
asked the question and and unfortunately
I think just because of the the the time
you couldn't really go much deeply into
this you asked the question will
anything human make it to the Future uh
and I've been thinking about that
probably the past two or three years
this has really been the question I've
been deal tackling with even though I
wouldn't even call myself someone who's
worked through uh accelerationism the
way for instance Michael DS has uh I'm
kind of like just I sort of like J said
I think it's they're a bit too
optimistic they're a bit too
accelerationists um so I'm curious
Carell uh again a very open-ended
question so please take this where you
want to take
it uh along this line of dis discussing
what where where where how science
emerges the the violence it's doing to
our historical condition but even the
kind of the retroactive violence it just
even to the Past in that sense like give
it new meaning in the past yeah Will
anything human make it to the
Future Okay so in order to really frame
this in an quote unquote like as
objective as way as we can get to
it I think we have to pause it a
counterfactual and this
counterfactual is something that I'm
increasingly using because I just think
it's a fun thought experiment but
imagine the human being existing
eternally I don't
mean I don't mean you or
I but the human species
as we've known the human species say
evolutionary anthropology will suggest
that the human species modern humans
have existed for about 200,000 years or
so now again imagine the human species
existing not even for an eternity which
is absurd but say I'll be I'll be modest
on a cosmic evolutionary time scale
let's say the human species as we exist
now now exists for another 10 million
years I'm positing this as a thought
experiment which I find incredibly
generative which is when you think about
the human
species and you think about 10 million
years and I'm talking about the human
species as we exist as a planetary
technological species
today and you think about us existing
for 10 million year I don't know about
you or what comes to your mind but for
me that short circuits everything
because it it seems like the human
species in 10 million years doesn't Co
doesn't doesn't make sense when I think
about Mars When I think about the
Andromeda galaxy when I think about
almost all physical phenomena and I
think about 10 million years yeah of
course Mars will exist in 10 million
years of course the Andromeda galaxy
will exist in 10 million years
yeah of course the Earth will exist in
10 million years but the human species
as we currently exist 10 million years
seems
strange yeah because if you think about
for example ancient
Egypt or if you take ancient China I
mean these are things that existed for
on human time scales a very long
time I mean 3,000 4,000 5,000 years
I mean that's a long time for a human
sociopolitical process to
exist when we think about biological
organisms and let's say a span of 10
million
years depends on the organism but a lot
of organisms more or less retain their
form uh perhaps not over 10 million
perhaps not most over 10 million
years but again again with if we think
about what the
descendants of
chimpanzees
Dolphins Lions whatever is 10 million
years from
now probably won't be exactly a
chimpanzee a lion or a dolphin but it'll
be
something within that form
range you know it will have gone under
change there are some organisms like the
C
which have mostly remain unchanged for
hundreds of millions of years but that's
a rare
exception usually there's more and it's
environmentally determined I'm I'm
basically just throwing out this thought
experiment to
say whatever the human species is
whatever the human organism is it's
always given the appearance to me of
something that's
a process of
transformation that is much more that
that is much more a bridge to something
else than it is internally consistent
within its own identity
eternally now religions historically and
Tra and let's say premodern human
subjectivity tend towards a view of the
human that kind of
think that that really survives or holds
up to the evolutionary
universe and I mean as soon as the
evolutionary Universe sort of emerges
within science you get like philosophers
like n saying we're a bridge to the
Overman and what do you what have you
done to overcome The Human Condition
like what have you done to overcome the
human being right I'm not saying n is
right there I'm just saying that this
sort of philosophical thought emerges
here at this it and I'm not saying that
I know what the future of the human
species is a lot of what I'm trying to
do in my doctoral thesis Global brain
Singularity is kind of
revolutionize the concept of
evolution through taking
seriously what I call technocultural
Evolution as an independent evolutionary
process obviously connected to
biocultural Evolution obviously
connected to biochemical Evolution but a
qualitative emergence of
evolution which could lead to something
else and obviously that's where my
thought and Nick Lan's thought in some
ways Collide even if I would take a
different approach to
nickl it's he's trying Nick land himself
is a philosophical symptom of this
problem and and and I I think more more
and more philosoph iCal attention needs
to be brought to it in in
fact my interest in
philosophy comes from confronting this
problem because again I was internal to
the Natural Sciences I was an
evolutionary scientist I was doing my
background research in my doctoral
thesis on on trying to revolutionize the
concept of of human evolution and
internal to that struggle I recognize
the need for
philosophy and so that's kind of you
know I mean I could talk more and more
about that but I'm just saying that more
just setting the stage for like how my
mind processes that tension and and how
to think that tension you know
um ultimately the canary and the coal
mine for this issue is the question of
reproduction
and and that's an evolutionary Canary in
the coal mine and what I mean by Canary
and the coal mine for is just a metaphor
for if you're looking for the
seeds or the sign that there might be
something not quite right internal to
the human
species you have to look to reproduction
evolutionarily speaking because
reproduction is the whole name of the
game differential survival differential
reproduction natural selection sexual
selection and the weird thing about the
human species and modernity or the weird
thing about the human species and our
modern technological environment is that
we as opposed to biological
organisms tend to reduce our
reproduction when we come into abundance
abundance yes whereas as soon as we come
into abundance reproduction goes down
there's many factors a lot of it has to
do with education a lot of it has to do
with more self-reflection on our own
being the more has to be that a lot of
the things that were mediated by
religious GI
become our own existential
Choice
which is a like a evolutionary pressure
for more philosophy it's almost like
there's an evolutionary pressure for
philosophy because all of the things
that used to be handled by religious
cultural giv are now the domain of an
existential choice that you have to make
and which is actually kind
of dizzyingly disorienting vertiginous
like uh Katherine ever will say in in uh
her book on on Vertigo Vertigo yeah but
um I almost call you Hegel yeah but
cadel isn't this where is isn't this way
froi and slip isn't isn't this where I
think beautifully disconnects back to
subjectivity because you see what you
all everything you describe right now
this notion of thinking evolutionarily
in a biological system if you think
evolutionarily yes it's reproduction
that's fundamentally the question even
if you come to the level of The Selfish
Gene meme theory however however and
here's where I I think if we bring in
the psychoanalytic tool kit it's not
about reproduction it's about
enjoyment and I I I think that's where
so it's this contradiction that I'm
trying to work through this this notion
of you could you could make the
evolutionary argument for every other
phenomena you see in any kind of system
really I mean well at least any kind of
living organic system but when we when
we speak of humans we can't speak in
those terms we need to speak in terms of
enjoyment so and and that's where I I
guess once again the the the subject
that's you know that's we need we need
to startop thinking about the subject so
so uh yeah this is where I'm I'm yeah
please go ahead yeah yeah absolutely so
like that so this is the so the zero
level tension here you're absolutely
absolutely right so the zero level ition
here and how this appears and this is
also the point of systems and subject is
to is try to present these meta level
tensions that appear internal to the his
historicity of Science and so like this
is a big focus of part two of the
book which
is basically historically speaking
internal to the scientific Universe you
have a tension between Darwin on the one
hand which is of course focusing on
reproduction and Freud on the other hand
which is focusing on enjoyment and both
of them are accepting the
presuppositions of The evolutionary
universe but they're putting a different
focus on it one's putting the focus on
reproduction one's putting the focus on
enjoyment or one's putting the focus on
you could even say repetition of
enjoyment as opposed to the reproduction
of the
organism and what's interesting to think
historically and this is what I do in
the book in part two is I think about
the way in which Freud's distinction
of enjoyment repetition of
enjoyment and this is in the Death Drive
is the uh repetition
compulsion that this actually disrupts
science so deeply that it others
psychoanalysis right and it says
psychoanalysis is other to
science right and Freud spends his whole
life trying to make psychoanalysis of
science right and is always sort of
again self like science self- distances
themselves from Freud and psychoanalysis
and again
otheris because of this issue because of
this tension because it's an issue of
the unconscious subject which the ego
finds in in incredibly disturbing and
inherently disorienting because it it it
is what I try to do in systems and
subjects is say in some sense counter to
Freud's project instead of trying to get
science to accept
psychoanalysis why don't we just
raise uh psychoanalysis to a
metascience and this to me and and
because what because what Freud's doing
trying to get science to accept
psychoanalysis is in some sense treating
science like a big other like accept my
knowledge accept accept accept what
we're we're doing here accept that it's
valid right of course it doesn't work it
doesn't work science doesn't accept it
in in in mainstream science doesn't
accept it so the solution here is
just stop treating let's say mainstream
science reduction of science as the big
other it's it's it's it's not valid and
like for example in the conversation
between Richard Dawkins and Jordan
Peterson Jordan Peterson was constantly
treating Richard Dawkins like a big
other big other yes like
he was constantly trying to get Richard
Dawkins mimetic Theory to recognize the
importance of archetypes and what the
thing is is like as like as soon as you
relate to the
other as if on their on their symbolic
terms so to speak like memes is real and
archetypes are not real right as soon as
you accept that sort of unconscious
precondition for the conversation you've
lost
like already you've lost already the
conversation is going to go in that
direction so in some sense what I'm
trying to do in systems and subjects in
part two is basically say no Freud you
don't need to treat science like a big
other we can just basically treat this
as its own project which is internal to
the scientific universe but not
reducible to the scientific Universe
it's actually and this is what laon does
and like what what laon does is say
that psychoanalysis is not reducible to
science but is only possible within a
scientific Universe in other words
science was a precondition for
psychoanalysis to emerge in the same way
that perhaps Christianity was a
precondition for science to
emerge science was a precondition for
psychoanalysis to emerge and then you
could ask yourself then you could ask
yourself another further question is
what does psychoanalysis establish as
its own historical condition of
possibility for something else to emerge
right and I think that's actually where
we are where we are right now is at the
limit of
psychoanalysis and we have a question of
what does psychoanalysis make possible
which was not possible before
psychoanalysis and that's the type of
question that I'm trying to get into in
systems and subjects well yes I mean I
would say this is again as Jan so this
this the possib opening up the
possibilities that this is where where J
J took psychoanalysis from the clinic
brought it to philosophy critical theory
uh brought it to even even in some sense
uh sociology in a certain way and and
yeah I mean would you say uh sort of the
these things like well I mean that
probably is a bit unfair I was going to
say uh uh you know the notion of like
accelerationism uh all these this on
ongoing dialogues regarding like you
know will will a human make you to the
Future uh whether whether that's opened
up by what psycho analysis did but I
would still say it's more of what well
it would really be capitalism and and
science that opened up uh the next
possibility which is accelerationism um
yeah excellent cadel uh there was there
was a lot there so one thing I want to
ask I think what psycho just very I
think what psychoanalysis does is within
the context of capitalism and science
psychoanalysis gives us another
reflective tool for thinking about the
modes of enjoyment that open up within
that
Horizon right like psychoanalysis is not
necessarily interested in let's say like
the internet as such or technological
gadgets as such but the modes of
enjoyment that human subjects can
experience because of the Horizon that
now exists right and I think that for
example you know someone like Isabelle
malar is asking those questions with her
book about psycho you know basically
psycho analysis of artificial
intelligence yeah which is centering on
this question of of of Jance of
enjoyment internal to the universe of
sex spots and and artificial
intelligence and so forth yeah as in
like it's not about if you know AI can
think or AI can reason is does AI a
enjoy and that that's that's the
question right yeah it's like a toolkit
to to describe this phenomena or speak
what this phenomena okay uh I want to
touch on a bit more on your uh PhD
dissertation you know Global Blain
Singularity but also and I couldn't read
this book because I lack the time energy
the recent publication by philosophy
portal so this notion of the global
brain Logic for the global brain I I'll
ask the question this way um let's let's
speak ontology for a moment and the
reason I'm bringing in ontology here is
look I I don't think this notion of we
we've really moved to a place now where
we've kind of moved away from kind of
the almost like the 20th century Vienna
Circle atomistic kind of thinking you
know with people like Whitehead uh with
the process
philosophy uh kind of even even with
someone like color reelly that
fundamentally says what's what's
fundamental is events it's not objects
uh and then now I mean what's really in
Vogue is this new form of idealism
panarchism so or mind at Large so we've
really this question now is currently
it's on in the in the it's in the
spotlight people people are talking
about this notion of yeah of like of
systems of the whole yeah to use heian
language well my question to you would
be firstly can you like outline what you
mean by a global brain and how it
pertains to even when you work with the
systems theory but then also maybe as a
followup if you could work on from that
as an hegelian what do you think
uh hegelian philosophy in particular has
to to to uniquely speak to these
questions pertaining to idealism or even
like pan psychism or even these
questions of where yes like the notion
that you know like is consciousness
fundamental what do you think heelan
philosophy will will will will tell us
uniquely uh to this kind of thinking I
mean I know there was a lot there but um
if you could work off that
sure well I mean I
think in terms of the concept of the
global brain that was
basically how I came into my doctoral
project because my doctoral supervisor
is I would say the pioneer of the
concept of the global
brain and the reason why and his name's
Francis hilan and if you look him up
he's a whatever world renowned
evolutionary scientist
and I recommend his papers Google
Scholar Francis hilan and you'll find a
lot of good
stuff so the reason why I was attracted
to the notion of the global brain was
because it offered let's say a more
systematic anthropologically robust way
to think about technological
singularity usually in technological
singularity Theory there's just this
hyperfocus on artificial intelligence
and its own capacity to recursively
bootstrap itself Beyond itself or Beyond
The Human Condition whereas the concept
of the global brain is thinking about
the whole system of
technology so it's it's kind of it's
it's it's a kind of anti-reductionist
version of the technological singularity
that's how I think about it I think
about the technological singularity
Theory as kind of like a reductionist
version of the global brain
Theory and that's how I discuss it in
the thesis and the reason why the
technological singularity is a little
more reductionist is again because it it
it hyper isolates artificial
intelligence from the whole human system
and the network of computers and the
network of Technologies of which it's
dependent as well right and it's kind of
like the ecology in which it emerges and
interconnects everything right so the
global brain I took to be like a more
anthropologically historically
systemically more robust
concept and I thought saw that also as a
concept that was worth uh or that could
contain my my desire to develop this new
theory of human
evolution which was capable of thinking
not only biochemical
Evolution but biocultural evolution and
technocultural evolution as one process
yeah so the reason why the latest
philosophy portal Anthology is called
Logic for the global brain yeah is
because basic basically internal to my
own Explorations in my doctoral thesis
about the global brain and The
evolutionary process I recognize the
need for
both uh the science of
logic as well as a more strong concept
of the unconscious because I think what
was missing from the global brain
concept was basically the type of
philosophy that Zik's developing and the
deeper I looked into what was Zik's
influence obviously L it's the main
influences are Hegel and
lean so I went into those resources and
long story short like you know the logic
for the global brain on the on the
healan side is basically and here like
here even following like a Mainline
heelan philosopher like Stephen Holgate
who says we have not even become
hegelians yet that all of post hegelian
philosophy is kind of like
it's kind of like an anxiety about
Hegel like and here I want to like talk
about like how philosophy operates
differently than most other fields
like because progress is so slow even if
you could say there's progress like I'm
not even sure the word progress makes
sense it's more that it's more that
there's fundamental ruptures that
occur within different historical epochs
so I would say like for example you get
a thinker like Plato or you get a
thinker like Hegel like in a certain
Epoch they're like Epoch divining
defining philosophers and then either
you get like people who follow them in a
form of
imitation or you get people who just use
them as a point of
negation right and of course like Plato
and Hegel are both characteristic of
being just people's points of negation
like anything but Hegel yeah
totalit yeah anything but Plato right
anything but you know and in the same
way as like Whitehead says about Plato
that all of philosophy is a footnote on
Plato you could say that all of modern
philosophy is a footnote on Hegel you
could like I would want to like I would
I would want to say
like all premodern philosophy is a
footnote to Plato and all of modern
philosophy is a footnote to Hegel and
that this is this is and this this is
basically what am I what am I saying
here so like very like very I think
concretely cuz like Notions like
becoming Notions like process are very
popular
now basically the elemental seed of
hegel's logic is that becoming is
superficial or process is
superficial unless you understand
becoming as the vanishing of being and
nothing becoming is the vanishing of
being and nothing into each other and
this has not been thought seriously like
and now he's thinking about this
logically of course he's also thinking
about how it relates to Spirit and
nature
but I think that to me the logic of
being and nothing Vanishing into each
other is absolutely revolutionary when
it comes to thinking about the unity of
life and death when it comes to thinking
about the unity of Pleasure and Pain
when it comes to thinking about the
unity of Vitality and concept when it
comes to thinking the unity of subject
and object
this this Vanishing into each other of
being and nothing is the truest is a is
a truer form of coming and if you don't
understand that that's how becoming that
that's what becoming is that you too
easily fall into like a silly
one-sidedness so like you fall into like
a life that can't think Death Or you
could fall into a a death like a
nihilism that can't think life or you
fall into like a life or you fall into a
Vitality that can't think concept or you
fall into a conceptualization that's
disconnected from life or you fall into
an object that's disconnected from
subject or you fall into a subject
that's disconnected from object or you
know basically what the title systems
and subjects is inspired
by is the Axiom that Hegel develops in
the phenomenology that says everything
the true hangs on that the true is both
substance and subject yeah but I'm just
playing with that and saying systems and
subject and basically saying that
instead of substance which hegel's
deriving from
Spinosa that I use system which is just
I think a more modern way of thinking
substance because even if you think of
most processed philosophers
and interdisciplinary scientists today
they more think system than
substance and the re and we could go
into why that is but I'm just saying
here I'm basic that that's like the
reason why I'm making that concession is
because I'm not really responding to
Spinosa in the way that hegel's
obviously responding to Spinosa I'm
trying to get a conversation between
system science and Continental
philosophy so that sort of like so I'm
basically saying here like this the fact
that becoming is the vanishing being and
nothing is the seed which Hegel calls
the seed of the philosophical
Sciences which is not a philosophy of
science
and is not a scientific
philosophy it's a philosophical science
or the science of the concept or the
science of the idea to connect Plato and
Hegel right so it's not a philosophy of
science like Thomas  or Carl poer
and it's not a scientific philosophy
like Carl
Marx yeah yeah yeah I mean this this
notion of uh s sorry not system subject
as substance um in fact I was just
reading um rereading uh J's uh sublim
object just for some writing I was doing
and I've got the quote right here so for
instance je says that uh heel asserts a
previously unheard of division that runs
through the subject as well as through
the uh substantial order collectivity
uniting the two uh that is to say what
if the reconciliation between the paric
and the universal occurs precisely
through the division that cuts across
the TR uh cuts across the two so that
latter The Division I mean I I I don't
know how to even ask this question K
but okay what I find that's lacking in
the conversations both in like the
process philosophy or or even like these
Notions of kind of like the modern
idealism you see with people like Berard
castra is this they don't account for
the antagonism it's an unreflective one
like the that's it it's like a monad
yeah it's it's a way like I can't stress
this
enough when you include the subject into
the
truth you're asking for a lifelong
negativity and like that's much easier
to have an unreflective
one like it's it's
I can't stress like it you're going to
your life your your your life thinking
process is going to be constantly
disrupted because you and your
vicissitudes are part of the truth
correct and and there's some you've got
to think that so but it's also great
because your thought can stay
alive like your thought is constantly
refreshing Fred by the vicissitudes of
your day-to-day life but like and also
you have to like to think here's the
thing to think here's the challenge I
think to think the one and
history is the ultimate philosophical
challenge like people always just want
to think history without the
one or they want to think the one
without
history cuz both are are way easier like
right like to think the one has history
is incredibly difficult like it's it's
it's and to put it like and now I'm I'm
obviously speaking what I just was
saying there was speaking in
philosophical
terms but if I was just to speak in
common everyday terms it's like the
challenge of a long-term
marriage like to think like for example
like just to like to bring a concrete
concept like to think a long this and
this is like this is what motivates me
like to think a long-term marriage is to
think the one as
history right very concretely like what
else is it you're thinking about the one
as
history and we think about a marriage
it's two elements which are
opposite and which will never actually
be
one and which will always have a
gap and which will always kind of
misunderstand understand each
other and which will always kind of be
missing each other
constitutively and which will always
kind of be a bit of a surprise to each
other
and is always kind of like the challenge
of thinking what can't be
thought and that's what you have to and
that's the
challenge right so I'm I'm I'm now I'm
using that as like even like the best
example I think of yeah but the St yeah
but also here's where I mean in my in my
rereading of because it's funny
initially when I got into J philosophy I
thought it was deeply pessimistic it is
it is but that's it's it it doesn't end
there the thing is this the the
antagonisms this like misunderstanding
the or to use uh more
lenan Dragon this not working the the
the that it doesn't fit this is a
productive not working it's uh it's it's
not a reconciliation but this division
this cut is it's a product it's it's
what keeps thinking going I'm I I think
we need to have a more concerted effort
to uh resist and and counteract this
false idea that jijik is pessimistic in
in of course jijik will say things like
I hate life um in like joking way yeah
but no I I think
that I I think it's actually the the way
the way zuk's
thinking is the only way to be really
optimistic like there's a like like what
I mean or you could say an optimism of
the
real like it because you don't want to
have an optimism that like to me like to
me I would much rather be like I would
much rather be pessimistic than to be
optimistic in a childish or a
superficial or like a way that's just a
a a wish fulfillment or like just a
detached optimism like or an optimism
that like like like the type of optimism
that just blatantly ignores the actual
tensions and antagonisms of the
situation like I have no for me
personally my temperament I have no time
for this type of optimism
I only am interested in the op like and
here's what I here's my here's my
experience of living this like like
because I'm not just thinking this
philosophy like I live this like I live
out this way been living this philosophy
for approaching a
decade I think that what you get is and
what you learn is there is a type of ab
Bizzle confrontation here like there
like there isn't like there is an abysal
Dimension to this way of living
but if you're willing to think the
antagonisms of the moment in their
abysal nature
retroactively you can see that actually
there was a forward Advance like I I've
I've experienced that I've experienced
that in my
relationships I've experienced that in
my business or I've experienced that in
my Creative Drive that if I'm willing to
think the imminent antagonism of the
situation
that actually a higher level almost like
anti fragility
or metast
stability uh is a is a retroactive
result of of the of the taring with the
negative like the taring with the ne
like the tring with the negative does
lead the thing is the reason why it's
difficult is because in the moment of
the taring with the
negative it it literally feels like
everything is going to fall
apart yeah yeah and it feels that way
and the thing is is that because you're
in the thing like you're so like back to
the beginning of systems and subject
you're in the
system you can't like abstract like from
an external third person point of
view you know like you can't like you
can't be like the disinterested neutral
objective scientist that's not in part
of the
system and just like as it were like
think about like what evolutionary
scientists observe like I always was
fascinated when I was in originally I
was in
primatology and I was reading these
field notes I actually went to Africa
for two summers to study chimpanzees but
I was reading these primatological field
notes of like which are always get left
out of the scientific papers of like
what they
saw like they would see like for example
like uh infant they would see
infanticide like they would see
infanticide they would see rape they
would see War when watching the
chimpanzees but they would just be
collecting data as external like and you
would get like these scientific reports
about like rates of infanticide in this
chimpanzee group or rates of you know
murder in this chimpanzee group or
something like a very cold
analysis but I'm saying that
evolutionary biologists and
anthropologists they're super aware of
the brutality of
nature but they can but they're always
studying it from an external point of
view
like it's not like they aren't getting
raped like their kid isn't like their
kid isn't being killed right they're
studying it from an external point of
view but the challenge here and this is
like the Deep challenge I think of
heelan science is what is hegelian
science it's
that the interesting thing about science
is that it changes from premodern
philosophy where premodern philosophy is
is just contemplating
substance and and modern science is
testing
substance it's testing it it's
experimenting with it but where the
limits of modern science are the
difference between modern science and
healan science is that you don't have to
you you can't only test substance you
have to test substance and
subject it's not only substance it's
also subject so you're in the system you
are the test your subjectivity is the
test so the thing is is that this um
dealing with the imminent antagonisms of
life is the is the test and your
capacity to be
scientific is your capacity to do the
conceptual labor of the
negative like your conceptual tering
with the negative is the test that's
that's that's as at least as close as I
can think no I mean I couldn't agree I
just want to add this point here I mean
I I want to be mindful of the time
because I've got two really important
questions but it's really interesting
you know I've spoken with a lot of
hegelian thinkers and for some reason a
lot of them either haven't worked I
don't mean like the scholars I mean just
like generally people like me who are
neo fights interested in Hegel they
haven't really worked that much through
uh through character guide um and I
would say this ZJ makes this point in in
his interviews but also in his writing
that
character God is most hegelian when he
thinks he's against Hegel because
character God if if you read character
God he always makes this point that you
are in the equation you're in this
you're in the system in in that sense
and and this is ultimately for me even
hegel's point I mean initially I
remember because I I read character
guard before Hegel and I always thought
of Hegel as is almost like what you
describe the character version of Hegel
you know system big system and then you
know you're just like building this
abstract philosophical system uh but
Kat's whole point was that no you're in
the system you're caught up in it and
that's why says that kot is most
hegelian when you are when he thinks he
is being more anti most anti- heelan so
I I mean I couldn't agree more just had
to made that point
but yeah sorry were you gonna were you
going to comment on that I just wanted
to say that my contribution my main
contribution to Logic for the global
brain is a a a paper called concept to
being where I what I Tred to do and I
tried to do this in the course like it's
almost absurd what I try to do in the
course but like in the
paper what I'm trying to do is actually
apply the hegel's logic of the
concept and and demonstrating that it
actually allows you to map the way I've
built philosophy portal so I'm trying to
say hegel's system hegel's system is not
a big system external to me as a subject
hegel's system is system and subject
which if you actually read the science
of logic deeply and you you can model
your own subjective process your own
subjective process can be modeled using
hegel's logic it's system and subject
and in the class I was even able to
model myself to the point where I could
identify where in the logic my current
position of subjectivity was located and
the contradiction that I was in like
that's the remark thing about hegel's
logic is like he's he like with with
Spinosa you're just getting a a system
of
substance but in hagle you're getting a
system of substance and subject and that
means that like your subjective process
is it's following an unconscious
conceptual
logic and if you actually follow that
through it's not an enslaving thing it
actually brings you to a different level
of being it's not anti-life it's not
anti- beinging what it does is even in
more interesting it brings you to a I
think it brings you to a level of being
in life that you could not have gotten
otherwise so in a way you do release so
like for example like
say say I say I never started philosophy
portal because I'm just nistic the whole
thing's a mess the whole academic
systems a waste and there's no point to
teach anything or do anything we're just
living in a late capitalist
uh you 
Society
right if I never did that if sorry if I
approach that way no no point to start
because the point is is that philosophy
portal will not last
forever it's a process that will unfold
under a logic that's even partially
unconscious to me of
course but if I follow the logic of it
to its end to its dissolution philos
portal is own
end where I'll find myself is a position
in being in
life that I wouldn't have been able to
get to without the process of philosophy
portal so the point is is that if you
unfold a conceptual
logic don't identify with the beginning
this is what PE this is people can't if
this is why people can't build something
the reason why people can't build
something is because they identify too
much with the the immediacy of the
concept like I had an intuition of
philosophy portal at the beginning of
it but that doesn't do anything like
it's a nice
image but you have to follow the
mediation of it with all the surprises
and negativities and all the Practical
 of doing
it and where you where you end up if you
follow it to its logical conclusion is a
is a point of being or life that you
couldn't have gotten otherwise and I
think all people who are uh self-
revolutionizing
entities like for example I like let me
throw two uh documentaries out there
where you could watch as these examples
of self- revolutionizing entities where
I think they're heg Alan subjects in the
sense that they get to a place in being
or life that they couldn't have gotten
to if they didn't follow their own
conceptual
logic Arnold
Schwarzenegger and uh Vince
McMahon if you watch the documentaries
of Arnold Schwarzenegger and Vince mcmah
they're both crazy people absolutely mad
people and passionate as hell and driven
as hell and what they do is so Arnold
Schwarzenegger is very easy you could
even model Arnold Schwarzenegger with
lon's imaginary symbolic and real Triad
so with Arnold Schwarzenegger he had the
um
weightlifting and he followed
weightlifting to its absolute exhaustion
and then when he got to the end of it he
had done everything possible in
weightlifting he transitioned to acting
but he couldn't have gotten to acting
without
weightlifting he couldn't have done and
then he followed acting to its
limit and then he did everything
possible in
acting and then he went into politics
and he couldn't have gone into politics
without with without without the the
acting that so I'm saying that and he
couldn't have predicted in advance like
when he was a weightlifter he couldn't
have predicted that he would become in
the in in movies and then when he was in
movies he couldn't have predicted that
he would go into the Pol go into
politics so the point is is that you get
to like if you follow this Logic the
point is that you exhaust a certain
concept and when you exhaust when you
exhaust a certain
concept like everyone it's so easy to
identify with the immediacy of a concept
like have the immediacy of the concept
is me as like a big a big weightlifter
or have the immediacy of the concept of
me as a movie star or a politician but
to actually do it and to exhaust it well
that takes drive that takes crazy
Drive yeah I mean in philosophy one name
I can think of is wienstein who who does
this uh wi for sure but also what from
everything you said cadel what I what I
really want to stress on and this this
has been for me this has been one huge
take away from heelan philosophy is this
the fact that you can't predict it that
it's it's it's purely contention the
drive is there it's an absolute drive
but it's a but the event itself in some
sense is contention and then necessity
comes necessity is always made from
contingency I mean Adrien Johnson writes
of this well in his book the new German
idealism uh um so I mean gosh man that
was that was so good I don't even know
where to where to go from there uh look
I was going to ask you a boring question
about negativity and data because I I
kind of want to bring up more of this
more more Concepts from heian philosophy
into the world of uh AI but I'm going to
leave that for another time because I
need to do a bit more thinking and a bit
more writing before before I ask you
these questions pertaining to you're not
going to believe this you're not believe
this but I'm P I'm published in a
journal for AI and
Society with with a professor of
artificial
intelligence uh his name's you probably
know him his name's Thomas ham of course
I've already emailed him yes he machine
learning Professor yeah yeah so we could
we we could discuss that paper but we're
published together because we we
published on artificial intelligence and
bringing in hegel's logic that would be
and specifically the logic specifically
the logic of and we're the problem we're
trying to approach is called the
abstraction explosion that we have an
explosion of abstraction because of
artificial intelligence yeah but hegel's
logic here is interesting because
hegel's logic is actually not as you
know like thesis antithesis synthesis
hegel's logic hegel's logic is abstract
negative concrete and the big challenge
that we're struggling with today is how
to negativization towards a new
concretion and that's the challenge
that's I think the challenge before us
in regards to Ai and Society is how do
we negativ the abstraction explosion
towards actual new concrete
reality anyway so I just wanted to throw
that out there
because yeah is that paper available uh
for the public like I can send it to you
yeah I can I can get I would love to I
would love to discuss that uh in know
fup conversation especially with uh
Professor hammer and yes I I should
mention here excellent recent
conversation with reny Gerard I
thoroughly enjoyed it um especially kind
of uh how how I feel like that's
conversation was more of uh it was an
antithesis to the kind of the the tech
bro rage VC uh kind of in Silicon Valley
all right last question I I have to ask
you this because I mean I found you
through Z I found you through well
really Z's less than nothing um and I
don't know if you want to talk about
this publicly uh but we did discuss
Offline that you're thinking of doing
something on less than nothing at
philosophy portal uh I regret not being
able to join the the ca Coast because of
as you know I moved to Sydney you know
heal to skeletal lack of time energy all
of that uh but uh just if you could tell
us just for for The Listener maybe give
us a Tisa on um yeah to less than
nothing why why do you think why do you
think this book in particular is is just
a groundbreaking text and philosophy but
also uh kind of maybe give us a give us
a few insights as to how you're planning
to teach this book if you are to do a
course at philosophy portal and and from
there we'll go
yeah yeah so I've been that's the book
so like on a personal like intimate
level the less than nothing there's
there's a few books in my history where
like I encounter it and it like changes
my it changes my
world and less than nothing was was was
definitely that book from me in regards
to to philosophy and at least for
me if I'm thinking about Zik's Legacy
for me it's for me it's less than
nothing and and and I I I'd like to
think that I'm contributing in some way
to making less than nothing that uh
putting it on that level because I think
before I sort of gave it that hyperfocus
I think most people would think about um
the sublime object of ideology
as his has his real breakthrough text
which of course is like his original
breakthrough text but I think less than
nothing I'd like to think of like less
than nothing as his the same way we
think about when we think about haiger
we think about being in
time or the same way we when we think
about Hegel we think about the
phenomenology of spirit or something
like that I think less than nothing is
on that level so why why why it's
actually I think to me a shame that he
called it less than nothing because less
than nothing is actually like it's it's
a concept where I'm of the opinion like
I've spent enough time with it and like
I feel like I've wrapped my head around
it long enough I think it's okay I'm not
like super disappointed he called it
less than nothing but I don't think
that's the concept that's really going
to patch on so to
speak I think it's it's it's way
too convoluted and complex for most
people to wrap their mind whereas like
being in time is like most people can
like almost get like an intuitive
inroads to what haiger is maybe pointing
at with being in time like it's not too
much of a leap less than nothing's
difficult he actually said in one of his
interviews around the time of the
release of that book that he was
debating between calling the book less
than nothing and ersy muave and of
course the prologue of the book is
called eper muave and yet it moves
Galileo which is I think getting at yeah
which is Galileo and he does a a really
brilliant little inversion with Galileo
in the beginning which I absolutely
adore but
the the reason why I think that book's
important and this is obviously
massively
simplifying is that I think what Zik's
doing in less than nothing is actually
theorizing the immortal
drive and specifically I think we have a
theory of immortality in that
book and so of course I could expand on
it would take more time but just as a
teaser
that's that's my that's my teaser is
that I think what and so historically
why is that important
because one of J's main
claims is that Freud and he takes this
from Lon that Freud did not understand
what he discovered with the death drive
and I think that the Death Drive the
Death Drive is obviously a concept that
even someone like Alena zup ponic sees
as like a ongoing Construction
it I think if we have a zero level of
what shik's doing with it he's thinking
about death drive
as not this
uh Nirvana principle of no tension
release from tension like take for
example the difference between tension
and
relaxation what Death Drive is doing is
going to higher and higher levels of
tension like through the compulsive
repetition you have to contend with
higher and higher levels of tension
which cause types of die again die
better like you die like but it's not
dying as like actual dying it's dying
and and and and yeah death and rebirth
if you like but but like on higher and
higher levels of
tension and ultimately he's rebranding
Death Drive I think in less than nothing
explicitly as Immortal drive and I think
that this rebranding needs to happen and
that's what I really want to do I want
to Rebrand death drive as a mortal drive
because I think that could take off in
the
culture and if we get that right this
take off in the culture that's also a
way for us to get out of this tendency
to say like jijik is a Doomer or jijik
is a pessimist or like absolute
negativity is just a nistic concept or
something like that so I think a mortal
Drive could have some currency so anyway
that's that's what I hope to to do with
that book eventually well this is one
thing I appreciate even about Katherine
like yourself it's like it's the the
only way to really be optimistic is is
through kind of working through this
understanding what the The Immortal
drive as you call it now uh but oh I I
mean I can't wait I mean I know it's
it's a lot of work to put together a
coast so next year uh if you do get to
it I'm going to be propagandizing for it
I'm going to be Joseph gobl for you and
do all the propaganda uh
and and I really hope you do get to it
uh even though now I'm asking for
another Coast way whereas you're still
in the middle of the ca Coast so uh but
uh yeah that's where I am at the moment
yeah yeah that's where I am at the
moment um yeah so for anyone for any
anyone who's interested philosophy
portal. online you'll find everything
yep I'll put I I'll leave all the links
uh but no I mean yeah you you've been
you've been one of my teachers I've been
one of your students from F from from
from far for a while and I'm I'm glad
that I'm finally you know breaking that
parasocial relationship and just really
actually engaging with you as as a
person um and and in fact I was going to
ask you this which you already answer
this notion of how like being a teacher
being someone who's an educator in
philosophy and I love that you said that
you always put yourself into the
equation so philosophy portal you said
that you're always caught up in it um I
think uh yeah yeah I think that I think
that's something that to think about and
and really contemplate on um what more
can I say thank you Cel it's been an
honor thanks so much R thanks for the
work you're doing appreciate it man
