the photon is
weird sometimes it acts like a wave
sometimes it acts like a particle and
depending on the experiment sometimes it
acts like both if you're not familiar
with the weirdness of a photon I don't
know how YouTube recommended my video to
you in the first place this strange
behavior of the photon is what set the
foundation for our thinking around
quantum
mechanics also endless fod for click
bity science YouTube vide
so if we were able to answer once and
for all what actually is a photon then
there's a good chance that's going to
call into question a lot of our thinking
around quantum mechanics and that is
exactly what we are going to do
today in order to
resolve this dual nature wavicle that we
call a photon quantum mechanics has had
to come up with some crazy ideas to
explain the universe around us and the
fact that we have so easily settled on
this kind of uh lional space between an
answer is one of the things that just
frustrates me so much so it has always
been my belief that if we could resolve
the nature of a photon we would have a
much better way to approach quantum
mechanics now if you've seen my videos
before you probably know that I like to
set up the evidence and the arguments
ahead of time and then kind of bring in
my theory but after going through this
script over and over again I've come to
the conclusion that the best way to do
this is Columbo
style so like Columbo where you see the
murder first and you just get to enjoy
touching him throughout the show in this
video I'm just going to tell you what a
photon is and then we will look at all
the evidence that supports the thinking
on it so I hope that sounds good to you
here we go so here's what a photon is a
photon is nothing more than a name that
we have given to a set of geometric
conditions required for an electron to
produce certain interactions in response
to an electri magnetic wave these
conditions while having nothing to do
with particles or points in space can
build a new foundation not only for
quantum mechanics but in re-evaluating
our entire view of the subatomic
world all right if that all sounded like
gobleg to you I apologize I was trying
to create a very scientifically accurate
statement so I'm going to say that again
in
English there are no photons there are
only electromagnetic waves the problem
is that when it comes to light we
measure and observe it only through
interactions between electromagnetic
waves and
electrons and it is those
interactions that produce the particle
like Behavior having nothing to do with
the actual nature of what light
is I'm going to prove this to you so
just hang on the other thing that many
people watch my video know is I like to
be very careful to separate between what
I'm telling you that is accepted science
and what I am telling you that is my own
Theory however and this is where it gets
really tricky in this
video everything I'm about to tell you
is accepted
science the only thing that's my theory
is the thing I just told you and so
you're going to get to the end this
video probably asking yourself well
Chris if this is the way if we already
know all this and this is the way it is
why don't we think that this is what a
photon is well I've been asking myself
that this whole time so to begin let me
explain to you what electromagnetic
waves are and how they work we are going
to focus on the E in EM so
electromagnetic waves we're focusing on
the electro part it just makes the
mechanics much more simple also when
we're talking about light the magnetic
component almost never comes into it
anyway we will get to the magnetic part
in a later video you start with a source
of an electric field in this case we're
going to focus on the electron the
electron creates a negative electric
field when that electron moves however
how small it moves the entire field
around it now has to update so this is
how it works when we show the electron
and it's just sitting there
we represent the electric field it
creates through vectors lines and arrows
that we draw pointing towards it these
lines are arbitrary by the way they
could be poined away from it we just had
to pick a direction for negative and a
direction for positive just keep that in
mind so the electron is producing its
electric field the vector lines are all
pointing at it that represents the state
of it throughout the whole universe when
that electron moves the entire electric
field has to to
update as we know in this universe
information cannot move faster than the
speed of C the speed of what we call the
speed of
light so when an electron moves this
update in the electric field starts from
the new position of the electron and it
expands outward in a sphere at the speed
of C this update is the EM wave that's
what's waving it is an update of
information now the boundary of this
update what forms the surface of this
expanding sphere is what we call the
Kink that's right electromagnetic waves
are
kinky as we know Kinks can be attractive
or
repulsive yeah so when this update hits
another sour SCE of electric charge then
that source is going to have to move if
at all possible so as we know like
charges repel Opposites
Attract not always the way with Kinks
but in this case so as the electric
field
changes any any other electrons in that
field will now move to again be as far
away from each other as they possibly
can okay now this forms the foundation
of what an EM wave is however when
talking about light
waves one Kink is not
enough in order to get a light wave we
need a series of Kinks the electron
can't just move it has to undulate
moving back and forth in rhythmic
sequence oh come on what you said
undulate that's basically worse than
moist not to mention you back and forth
in a rhythmic sequence okay fair that's
my bad for any given distance an
electron travels back and forth you get
both frequency and wavelength according
to how fast it travels over a certain
distance within the same
distance an electron traveling faster
than another will produce an EM wave at
a higher frequency and a shorter
wavelength while an electron traveling
the same distance at a slower rate
produces a lower frequency and a longer
wavelength if the distances are the same
then the high frequency and the shorter
wavelength is an indication of more
energy however with different distances
you can have the same amount of energy
translated into different frequencies
and wavelengths this is because two
electrons with the exact same momentum
will travel back and forth at different
rates if the distances are not the same
some of you out there might realize that
I also just explained a good chunk of
how radio waves work that's because
radio waves and light waves are both EM
waves in this case I am just ignoring
the magnetic component for the sake of
Simplicity I want to stop for a minute
and just point out that having this
basic understanding of what an EM wave
is so
critical understanding that an EM wave
is comprised of this information update
the fact that the Universe just can't
update instantly when a source of
electrical charge changes that update
has to radiate out once that clicks it
really helps everything fall into place
it's the motion though that gives us the
frequency the wavelength and the
patterns that give us all the other
things then like light and radio waves
this is the wave so what makes light
look like a particle
so now we get to the photon at what
point does an EM wave go from being a
spherical expanding structure to being a
point right and that's the whole point
we think a photon is both a wave and a
particle because we detect it at points
but this point where we detect a photon
is actually more of a rectangle there is
no point at all what we call a photon is
just a set of
circumstances that produce this
detection
event so what I'm going to do is
describe to you those
circumstances number one an EM wave is
emitted by an electron no du but the key
is that the vast majority of the time
this is done by an electron that is
atomically bound meaning an electron
orbiting the nucleus of an atom okay
that's one number two the EM wave must
contain a full sine wave of motion to
produce a frequency and a wavelength AKA
oscillating motion oscillating number
three another electron must be in the
path of the emitted EM wave in order to
detect it as
Light number four the detecting electron
has to be free to move par
to the emitting
electron number five the detecting
electron's parallel motion or dipole
moment if you want to hold your pinky
out must be perpendicular to the
direction of the expanding wave if
you're having trouble following this we
are illustrating it so stop listening
and watch the video now those are a lot
of conditions so let me simplify this
for you to do this I'm going to refer to
what is probably the best video on light
waves on the internet right now by three
blue one brown I seriously recommend
watching this video in its entirety
after this one heck you could even pause
right now and just go watch that one
come back to this it'll just help
everything make a lot more sense they
coincidentally released this video while
I was working on this script and have
saved me and a whole lot of time in
production and 3D animation no saved me
a lot of time on 3D rendering and
animation sorry saved my editor a lot of
time on production and 3D animation
first you can see that when an electron
moves the change in the EM field
produces a full expanding sphere of
changing field vectors you could also
see that those vectors are most
significant in a ring around the center
where they are parallel to the electron
motion you can also see in this clip
that the emitting and receiving
electrons are moving parallel to each
other their electrons don't have as much
personality as ours but we'll let that
go and here you can see the emitting and
receiving electrons oscillation is
perpendicular to the expansion of the
wave there you can see with your own
eyes all the conditions required to go
from an EM wave to producing the
interactions that we currently call
photons because light waves are emitted
by electrons and detected by electrons
the point-like interactions we have
mistaken for a particle
are actually just discrete events from
the electrons and there you have it
there is no need for wave particle
duality or wavicles it's just EM waves
producing discrete
events but I have one more thing oh uh
one other thing those animations I
showed don't really prove my second
condition that I described that the
emitted electron must produce a full
wave of motion how do we know that's
true well that is implicit in the very
equation of a photon as you can see we
either use the frequency or the
wavelength of light to deduce its energy
you can't have frequency and wavelength
without oscillation okay now you math
heads might be yelling at the screen
because you know well I can use math to
take even the slightest sliver on a
graph and deduce or extrapolate a full
sine wave but it doesn't mean it's
physically there the electron can't do
math it can only respond to physical
changes so if it is going to respond to
a light wave and produce its own EM wave
it has to physically move it can't just
do math I will die on this
hill there is nothing wrong with using
logic and reasoning in science math
should be for describing our reality for
verify assumptions but not for creating
reality okay in this
case the nature of physical oscillation
is absolutely implicit in The observed
measurement and observations of
light again we know this because of
radio waves radio waves are also EM
waves the biggest difference is that
while light is typically produced by
again atomically bound electron
electrons radio waves are produced by
pushing and pulling electrons up and
down through a conductive medium that's
why the amplitude of radio waves are
very large and the amplitude of light
waves are very
small okay but if you're still not happy
with that as an explanation as to why an
electron requires a full sine wave of
motion uh just because of the equation
that we've observed just because of the
math or any of these other things
there's two other very good reasons
why we should assume this to be true
first is an electron orbits the nucleus
of an atom it's hard to orbit something
without a full circle I realize that our
kind of primitive Solar System model of
the atom is not accurate that electrons
kind of inhabit more of this probability
Cloud but it doesn't take away from the
fact that they still are around the
nucleus of an atom but even more so
there's the fact that and this is really
cool waves have inertia if you've never
thought about it before it sounds
counterintuitive when we think of
something having inertia flying through
space in a vacuum it makes sense for it
to go in a straight line until something
stops it uh it it's very easy to get
your head around something spinning and
continuing to spin in space but the
truth is waves also have inertia and
that is because waves are comprised of
vectors and circles a wave in the end is
a complete circle a sine wave is a full
30
60° and it is required for that inertia
to be communicated from one thing to
another to complete the full sine wave
in order for that inertia to take place
otherwise what you are going to
communicate to the other object is not
going to be a wave and that is the best
evidence we have to know that if we're
talking about a wave communicating its
information to another object that that
information has to be completed through
a full sine wave of motion so an
electron can only re-emit a full sine
wave of motion if it received a full
sine wave of motion okay but one more
thing ah one more thing I said before
the shape of a photon is more like a
rectangle so now if you put everything
together that we just talked
about the shape of what we call a photon
fits more accurately within something
like this cuz on this card here I have a
full sine wave
represented and what we now
know is that this wave has to pass by
the electron completely from beginning
to end in order for it to communicate
the wave so that means we have our
height the width I'm going to put a big
asterisk on we'll get back to that later
but that's basically it that's the area
that creates an effect that we call a
photon it's a
rectangle now here's where we get to the
really cool part and this is where the
the evidence for this occurring starts
showing up in all of the math and all
the experiments that we have when it
comes to photons and that is the concept
of a projected plane so here's how a
projected plane works so this card I'm
showing you right here if I'm holding it
perfectly straight at the camera you can
see that it's it's 2.5 in by 3.5 in and
we're going to call it uh card zero okay
that is the plane of the card but it's
also right now the projected plane in
other words this is in 3D space right
now and if I hold it like this the area
that you see is the area that matches
perfectly with the physical dimensions
of the
cart however if I turn the card a bit
now the projected plane the surface area
of the card that you see is less so the
equation to Now understand what the area
of this projected plane is to
you is uh our we have our new plane card
1 is equal to card 0 * cine ^ 2 45 45
being the angle of which now I have
tilted the card I'm going to take Card
zero and I'm going to multiply it by
cine 45 the area now of the projected
plane is
4.375 square in
okay and again it's called projected
because I'm taking this from a 3D World
and I'm limiting it down to your 2D
world on your YouTube screen okay now
let's say we're talking about uh this
card you know again representing the
sinusoidal uh emwa from our emitting
electron
uh in this case we're showing just one
card equaling one wavelength now
remember that in the case of light we
can't have just any wavelength because
the other part of the equation here
shows that we have to have a wavelength
that falls into a certain
Quant uh which you know extremely small
quantity in this case the plank length
that's what the h means this is both the
term and the concept that quantum
mechanics is founded on so to understand
this H in our equations what you need to
do is you need to think of the
C as like a ruler that's the full length
of our ruler and the H is notches in
that ruler so this means our wavelength
needs to be able to go from one notch to
another notch it has to meet in those
small tiny increments but if I were to
take that same wavelength
and now tilt it just a little
bit there's a good chance now that I'm
falling not on those notches but between
them due to the nature of an atomically
bound electron something which I can't
dive into yet in this video it is
impossible to produce a nonquant of an
EM wave all the waves it produces have
to fall within this predefined Quant of
wavelength however in free space I can
take this Quant constrained wave which
I'm representing with the card and I can
tilt it just a little so even though my
playing card May obey the rules the
emitted electron produced a a Quantum
bound or a
Quant increment of a light wave in free
space I can twist that a little bit so
that creates a problem and that problem
is that an electron is basically a point
in space it's very small itty bitty
teeny tiny ity bitty liing we have
estimates of how big an electron is but
we don't really know its size is
completely theoretical at this point
because it's too small for us to measure
so all this is to say that this wave
emitted from one electron going to
another pretty much has to be
communicated within line of sight of one
electron to another in other words it's
really impossible to graze an
electron so that's why they have to be
lined up so perfectly what that leaves
us with going back to our kind of you
know thinking about the pictures we
painted at the beginning of electron
moving and producing an entire expanding
sphere of change to to the electric
field we are left with a ring around the
sphere that is uh parallel to the
emitting
electron that can communicate light from
one electron to another that's right
photons are
rings now hold on that's true around
every emitting electron every electron
that emits a light wave there is a ring
of potential photons and I use that term
with big Square scare quotes okay it
sounds Absolut Ely weird we've never
been taught that but if you look at the
3D models that the math produces like in
three blue one brown you look at the
equations that we have for expanding EM
waves it's all there it's just I don't
know even though we can literally 3D
model it and see it right in front of us
we don't see it but the truth is light
waves are
rings I mean they're spheres but the
area ring around the am electron as
expands is the place where a another
electron can be stimulated and Reit
another wave I got to say this
realization was probably my favorite
part of this whole project the fact that
when we're talking about one electron
and we'll talk about why it's only one
in a minute
oscillating produces a ring of potential
photons it once that sinks in it is
amazing how many things that affects and
we're going to go through it in light in
Optics even in what we call entanglement
all of these things start having an
underlying intuitive explanation just
with that understanding and by the way I
will give credit my editor was the first
person to figure that out if an emitting
electron produces a ring of potential
photons why don't we ever experience
that well that that's for several
reasons uh the first one is because the
only way you would experience that is
for that ring to hit two electrons at
the same time and given the conditions
we just talked about that's incredibly
hard but it does happen and we'll get to
that later the other reason is because
as this ring
expands most of the stuff in our world
isn't arranged like that you know it's
getting flat or Jagged surfaces so as
that ring expands and and hits like
let's say a flat surface it's going to
hit at different times depending on
where the ring is but finally the
biggest reason why we seldom observe ve
uh a light wave as a ring is because we
mostly observe light in
streams and this is the other critical
thing for you to get to understand light
when you
hear uh science YouTubers like the chart
we show or the uh thumbnails that we
showed before talk about light you will
notice that they are very careless to
confuse the idea of a single
photon with lots of photons and it is a
big
difference beams of light as we know
them like lasers or when we're doing
experiments with
refraction um what we think of as light
going a straight line isn't a photon
going a straight line it's lots of
photons that produce a coherent wave in
a line and again I'm going to refer back
to the three blue one Brown video as you
can see here if you align the
oscillating electrons up NE one next to
the other the waves along the sides
cancel each other out and now you get
more or less a coherent wave going out
from the front and the back of those
electrons and this is the majority of
the way we experience light lasers
flashlights TV
screens uh I mean you name it uh the
only time we really don't experience
light like that is what a good
oldfashioned classic light bulb just
sticking out of a socket it's easy for
us to think of light going in a straight
line because most of the time we
experience it it is but where this gets
Troublesome is when we confuse in our
experiments a stream of light with the
idea of a single Photon and we will
cover that here as we go so to end this
section here's the bottom line bottom
line the bottom line when we're talking
about the idea of light from the
perspective of a single electron light
is not a particle it exists basically in
two main ways depending on how you look
at it and in a single Photon form it is
a ring an oscillating electron produces
a ring of potential Photon interactions
but when we're looking at a single
Photon interaction with from one
electron to another we are looking at a
rectangle where all the conditions
required for one electron to stimulate
another is contained in this rectangle
and this rectangle is basically stacked
around like a ring around the emitting
electron now that you have that idea of
what light really is and what photons
which don't exist are actually which are
just again interactions now we're going
to take a look at many of the big
experiments that we use to observe this
wave particle duality and you will see
this simple physical explanation fall
into place consistently across all of
them all right so now we're going to
talk about the first legendary
experiment that made us think of light
as a particle and that is the
photoelectric
F uh this is the thing Albert Einstein
actually won the Nobel Prize for uh
surprisingly not general relativity it
was this so the photoelectric effect was
a continuation of work by Max plank by
which we get the uh plank length from
around uh observing black body radiation
these Works Mark the birth of the ideas
behind quantum mechanics in the early
1900s uh Einstein's paper on this was
published in
1905 the photoelectric effect is an
explanation for uh two main observations
so first of all that when Shining Light
at a metal surface electrons were
ejected from that surface when light
exceeded a certain minimum
frequency no matter how intense the
light was no matter how much light we
shown at it the only thing that
influenced how many electrons were kind
of kicked off of that metal surface was
the frequency of the light light and
this was a little surprising to us
because we figured the more intense the
light or the more light there is the
more energy there must be but it was
only the frequency that mattered the
kinetic energy of the ejected electron
also depended only on the frequency of
light not the
intensity in other words the higher
frequency of light transmitted the more
energy to the receiving electrons and
the intensity of light made no
difference so the two big things that
came out of this experiment was again
this idea that that light is both a wave
and a particle but also this idea of of
Quant of energy and you know this is
where we got our original equations for
energy of a photon which we've been
using through the
script the the real reason that we got
the idea that light must be a particle
from this experiment was because when we
observed
light uh knocking off electrons on our
surfaces
it only happened at certain points so it
wasn't an you know spread out consistent
it was happening at points on the
display and that doesn't make sense if
it's a wave the whole wave should
influence the metal surface why is it
happening at specific points it must be
a particle but now that you
understand that the wave of light
emitted from an electron can only affect
another electron under certain
conditions now we know why we observed
light in points and to drive home this
point I want to show you an experiment
done by action lab here on YouTube now
he's using an electroscope to show the
photoelectric effect and ironically he's
using this video to show why light is
made of particles but we're going to
explain it a bit
differently now basically the way this
works is he has a plate on top that gets
charged he's using static electricity to
charge it and he has an indicator in the
circle that is repelled from the plate
as it gets
charged now first thing I want you to
notice is that when he touches the plate
with his finger the charge or the extra
electrons move into from the plate to
his finger almost
instantaneously it happens very very
quickly
but as this video goes on and he shows
the difference here between how
intensity doesn't do much and he
switches to his high frequency light to
now show that The High Frequency is
ejecting electrons the thing I want you
to notice is how long it takes for light
to eject those electrons we know they
can move quickly because he did it with
his finger but when he's using the light
it happens very slowly and this is
because interactions between light and
electrons works like a
lottery it takes we're talking countless
photons being sent out so that we get
lucky and have a few of those match up
perfectly with the electrons so that the
energy is communicated and the electrons
are ejected
so the reason we see these point-like
interactions isn't because it's not
waves it's because the conditions for
the waves to line up with the electrons
just right is so strict that it happens
so infrequently compared to the amount
of photons that we are shooting
off so after the photoelectric effect
experiment you know caused a Ruckus
there soon came another experiment
closely following it that really sealed
the fate of us thinking of light as both
a wave and a particle and that is
Compton
scatter so this experiment which took
place about 1923 was done by Arthur
Compton so hence Compton scattering and
basically we take X-rays and shoot them
at a graphite
surface now what they observed is that
for electrons that were Loosely bound to
the atom the high energy uh uh x-rays
which were still calling light those are
light too uh again they're all light so
the high frequency x-rays would hit
these uh electrons in the
graphite unbinding the electrons so
knocking them off and then the light
would go in uh the other direction and
they would kind of go in a
symmetrical uh split uh up to about 180
degre
what they observed is that the smaller
the angle of the split the less the
frequency of light was diminished but as
the angle increased going all the way up
to 180° with the electron going one way
and light going completely the other way
we had the
biggest uh change or decrease in
frequency of the emitted
light now in trying to figure out why
this occurred Compton went back to the
equations Einstein had from the
photoelectric effect which assumed light
was a particle and he brought those into
his math to show why this was occurring
now this is uh one of first of many
rabbit holes that we're going to have in
this video I actually intend to do a
mini follow-up video just on this
experiment so we can take a detailed
walkthrough of the math and kind of
where we went wrong the bottom line is
this all comes down to special
relativity a principle which which I
covered in my previous video expanding
on the idea of the light Compass but
basically if you have an electron that
starts oscillating but then gets shot
out of the atom and so it's going one
way but still
oscillating then you have EM waves being
generated now producing a stream angle
on the other side those are basically
just going to be red shifted there is
going to be a kind of a stretching out
relatively of the frequency of light
It's Perfectly Normal it makes perfect
sense it's just special relativity and
light waves there's no reason for a
particle in this experiment so the
biggest problem with the Compton
scattering experiment isn't just that it
sealed the fate of us thinking of a
photon as a particle instead of wave but
that it contains a logical error that
has persisted for almost 100 years that
has caused us to misinterpret Quantum
interactions and failed to understand
other things that we observe some of
which we'll get to
later that logical error is assuming
that what we observe in a stream of
photons is perfectly applicable to a
single Photon electron interaction so as
we showed you before when you have many
electrons next to each other or together
oscillating that is what gives Direct
cality to light because the sides cancel
out and now you have a stream in One
Direction when the x-rays hit the
graphite it is a stream of x-rays it is
ejecting a stream of electrons and for a
brief moment of time as the electrons
are ejected from the graphite they are
still oscillating producing a coherent
stream of light in a Direction but if we
were able to run this experiment
ejecting only one electron at a time we
would find that the photon detection is
unpredictable and that by the way my
friends is what we call
falsifiability and I'm hoping someone
with a little more money and time tries
to run that experiment all right so the
more interesting experiment and
certainly the one that takes up more
time here on YouTube and catch which is
more science journalism headlines is the
famous double slit
experiment so for those of you who don't
know what the double set experiment is
again I'm I'm not sure how you found
this video in the first place cuz you
had to have watched it like half a dozen
times before this one but anyways let's
just do a quick review feel free to fast
forward if you already know this so in
this experiment we take a coherent light
source the point is it's usually a laser
so we take this laser and we shoot
through a barrier that has two slits in
it now these slits in order to work the
the size and spacing of these slits have
to be uh related to the
wavelength uh of the light that's
actually going through them or you don't
get quite the effect that you want a
screen is placed on the other side of
that
slit and if we did this right we should
get an interference pattern on the
screen and this is the thing that helped
us reinforce that light is still a wave
because even though we're still
detecting points of light on that screen
all those points add up to basically
these lines where we can see a
interference pattern like a wave again
if you haven't if you if you have no
idea what this experiment is there's
plenty of other YouTube videos that go
into it in more depth just a quick
review so the the observations from this
experiment are as follows first of all
when just shining the laser through the
two slits we see an interference pattern
which makes us think lighter as a wave
what's even weirder is that if we shoot
one Photon through at a time and then we
add up where those photons hit over time
we still get an interference pattern
making it look like one photon is
interfering with itself which is weird
if light's a particle but even weirder
with the double sit experiment is that
if we try to
observe which slit the photon goes
through the wave interference pattern
collapses or goes away which is spooky
because it makes us think that by
observing reality we change it okay so
let's explain all of this real quick now
so first of all the fact that light
interferes with
itself that's fine because light is a
wave we've established that light is a
wave even one Photon again one Photon
going through at a time is still an
entire wave passing through both slits
the reason we only detected at one point
is the reasons that we went through
before but the thing that boggles
everyone's brain is why is it when we
try to observe which FP the photon's
going through does the interference
pattern disappear that's the one that
that makes everyone go O Okay so let's
just address that one flat
out when scientists say we are observing
which slit a photon goes through they
are line we observe Jack it as we know
all the way back from the photoelectric
effect we don't observe photons directly
we only observe light through its
interaction with other
electrons um we have an electron
emitting light we have electron
re-emitting light we have our eyes which
detect light with electrons we never
actually see the things anyway what
we're just getting is the electrons so
that's where our points are coming from
so we're not watching a photon pass
through a slit we can't it's impossible
the word observe makes it sound like
we're watching as the photon passes
through a slit but we can't we can't we
see nothing all we can do is wait until
that wave hits another electron oh Chris
but what if we built a detector well
guess what a detector is an electron
it's something that the light can
stimulate and here's the problem if you
have something that is stimulated by an
emwave what happens is that you create
another emwave now this is the
experiment when I originally started
doing this chapter that I wanted to set
up and show um thankfully we actually
found someone else already did this
experiment and I have a link to it in
the description of the video so it turns
out in 2010 Applied Physics letters
published a paper where the authors
created an experiment to try and shed
light on the double slit
experiment now I just as a side note for
this experiment they used electrons not
photons but I I I want to note that
difference but the result still proves
the point so bear with me they created a
version of the experiment that used a
low atomic number material so that means
really really thin uh to detect if a
particle passed through one side uh with
the hope of leaving uh the the electron
as it passed through
unaffected however even with the super
thin material they found that while the
particles passing through the open slit
so the one where we're not detecting it
produce what we call elastic scattering
uh basically meaning that it behaved
like a wave passing through an opening
in a barrier while the detecting slit
produced inelastic scattering which
basically means a new wave starting from
scratch and the best way I can describe
the difference between the two is just
show you this picture the bottom line is
one of these is the wave as it passes
through barrier and the other one is a
brand new wave now they don't make the
following conclusion in this paper but
you can see that with everything we have
explained about e so far it is
impossible to detect them without
changing them or making new ones in
other words the problem with using the
word observe when talking about photons
is that you can't can't observe them
without messing with them in fact you
can't observe anything in the quantum
world at all without interfering with it
and most of the time we are observing
Quantum objects it is done by shooting
them with a
laser that would be like observing the
position of runners in a marathon by
pelting them with rubber bullets and
measuring the angle they bounce off gee
I wonder why measuring them makes them
change position and velocity must be
that observation changes reality of
course you change reality when you shoot
 at it that's how reality works you
pretentious
morons the point here light produces an
interference pattern because it's an
electromagnetic
wave when you push a wave through two
slits you get two wave patterns those
patterns can interfere with each other
and produce an interference pattern
because they're waves if you instead
block one of the slits and instead
create a new EM wave which is what's
really happening when we try to detect
them then the chance of them interfering
is very small and they certainly won't
produce a consistent pattern because now
they're two completely different wave
patterns but let's not stop here the
double slit experiment has spawned a
variety of spin-offs
that have provided uh what are up until
now similarly mindblowing and confuzzled
results so as I mentioned before we also
have the single Photon experiment where
it's just one Photon at a time going
through the double slits and still
produces an interference pattern when we
add up all the detections over time and
again of course it does it's a wave but
here's the other problem I wanted to
point out with this and that's the
phrase a single Photon and here's where
I want to elaborate on this a bit there
is
no Universal definition for what a
single photon is a single photon is kind
of determined by the experiment for
example during the photoelectric effect
a single Photon was described as however
much energy it took to uh um eject an
electron um in other experiments it's
based on just what's the lowest amount
of energy we can detect Photon see
here's the thing we're not quite sure
about when I say it takes a full sine
wave of
motion uh to produce a photon we don't
know if it's just
one or
two or three depending on the experiment
this thing could be 3 m
long we don't know the smallest a photon
can be is one sine wave and I'm
skeptical although it certainly might be
possible that we've ever had an
experiment that confirms one sine wave
of
detection so just a little clarification
for you guys too when you're playing at
home now on that note that brings us to
the next crazy double slit experiment
you guys may have seen somewhat recently
the headlines about this idea of a Time
slit Photon experiment so this is the
idea that instead of setting a photon
through slits we just uh create these
basically ATC very very tiny bursts of
light and we shoot them in a straight
line and to our amazement we still get
an interference pattern so I have uh
references to these experiments in the
description you can go and look for them
uh at them for yourself now the fact
that
shooting uh these small amounts of light
one after another in a straight line
producing an interference pattern led to
the
headlines photons interfere with
themselves backwards through time
oh no they just interfere through space
because they're waves this is very
simple to deduce if I take water and I
just drop little drops of water in a row
you see that the as the waves expand
they interfere with each other it's it's
completely understandable why this would
happen they don't need to be traveling
backwards through
time now some of you if you're really
paying attention might notice though
there is one small problem with this
analogy of water droplets I'm using for
the light but I'm going to wait and see
how many of you catch it and cover it in
the follow-up video the point here is
that all these interference experiments
and their spin-offs are all easily
rationalized and explained once you
understand that what we call a photon
again is just a small area of
interaction with geometric requirements
of an expanding spherical EM wave but to
really pull the quantum nuttiness out of
photons we got to dig out the whole root
so let's talk about
polarization so we are going to discuss
a few observations around photons and
polarizations but first let me explain
what polarization is and how it works
going back to our playe card right here
the direction of the Y AIS is the
direction of polarization so if this
were coming at you this is the
polarization up and down side to
side so so this direction of oscillation
uh that electron is moving is
technically called the dipole moment it
just means it Wiggles back and forth on
that axis but scientists love to come up
with esoteric terminology for
things there are three ways light can be
polarized so it can be polarized
vertically it can be polarized
horizontally or it can be spinning so
circular polarized light or it can be
unpolarized but that's an we won't get
into that right now that just basically
means it's a ton of photon no light is
always polarized individually when you
just get a ton of them together they all
kind of average out and we call that
unpolarized sorry to give you the whole
background of polarization just bear
with me this will be important one of
the little experiments that get a lot of
potenti on YouTube here is the three
stacked polarizers with the context of
our new understanding of light I'm going
to revisit this for two reasons one it
further drives home the nature of light
is a wave and a photon is just a
geometrically uh conditioned interaction
and number two the true nature of
polarization has a lot of ramifications
for quantum mechanics so let's talk
about the three polarizers what happens
is we shine light through one polarizer
and it only allows light that is
oscillating at a certain uh Direction so
that's our polarization to pass through
so if I have sunglasses they may only
let horizontal polarized light through
or they may only let vertical polarized
light through um that's how we get less
light through sunglasses but if we take
that now and we add a second uh
polarizer oriented 90 degrees to the
first one then that is going to block
out all the light because one of them
blocked out everything horizontal the
other one blocked out everything
vertical but if we add a third polarizer
between them at
45° the really weird thing is that we
actually end up getting more light
through than with the two and that
doesn't make sense when you think of
light as a particle
because if you have two filters that
filter out 100% adding a third filter
should filter out more so what's going
on but again this is only confusing if
you think light is a particle if you
think light are waves it's very easy to
explain the whole thing so first of all
what you need to understand is that uh
these kind of polarizers that we're
talking about here uh they work by
having a material where the atoms are so
close together on one axis and farther
away on another that it basically
constrains the electrons and forces them
to move along only one AIS the direction
the electrons are free to move again the
dipole moment is the direction in which
the polarizers will polarize
light if we go back to our Photon card
analogy the direction of oscillation of
the sine wave again now has to match the
axis of the electron in our polarizer
where it's free to move in order to
perpetuate the wave that's the key to
understanding this whole thing
polarizers aren't actually filtering
light at all they are producing new
light waves based on how they are
stimulated none of the original waves
actually pass through the polarizer
their energy is transferred from the
waves that hit the polarizer to the
electrons in the polarizer and this is
all according to an equation that we've
had around for a very long time now
called malice's law and we'll explain
the math of that in a minute but first
let me just drive home the mechanics of
how this works the light which matches
the polarizer will stimulate a new wave
pretty much the exact same intensity as
the one that hit it but the light
perpendicular to the polarizer is just
turned into heat and the light that is
in the middle kind of does both half of
it is turned into more light and half of
it is turned into heat and the way this
works and we're going to go back to our
cards again is think about if I take
this card and I throw it through a slit
if that slit is aligned to the same axis
as the edge of the card the card will go
right through without any energy loss if
I throw the card at the slit and the
axises are misaligned the card may still
go through but the energy is lost to the
friction and the uh Collision of the
sides of the card in the surface lastly
if I throw the card at the slit where
the axis is completely perpendicular it
won't go through at all it'll just hit
and fall off the purpose of this analogy
is to show you why the effect of light
on a polarizer and many other
circumstances in fact follows that of a
projected plane which we talked about
before however instead of the plane
being calculated by how flat it is
compared to your view in this case it's
calculated by how aligned the wave is to
the dipole moment of the electron so in
other words when we're looking at the
electron's point of view this would be
100% of the energy and this is where we
start getting lost so it works like this
and now we'll get into the the math of
malice's law here so for the first
polarizer let's say the initial light
source has an intensity of we're going
to just call it I KN okay or I zero and
it is unpolarized light
after the first polarizer in which case
in this case oriented vertically only
the vertical components of the electric
field get through reducing the
intensity
to uh i1 equal I divided by two again
assuming half the light vibrates
vertically and half horizontally which
is most of the case with unpolarized
light in a stream of unpolarized Light
which again is countless EM waves the
the average alignment percentage of
horizontal and vertical will almost
always be half and half because we get
it from the Sun and that thing's
shooting off things like crazy so for
the second polarizer which is now
horizontal according to malice's law in
this case Theta is 90° the intensity
becomes zero no light gets through
because the cosine of 90° is zero now
take a second and notice that our
equation here from malice's law for
determining the intensity of light
through these polarizers is the same
equation that we used earlier to
calculate the area of a projected
plane let's add in now our third
polarizer we have the first one the
second one's 45° from the first one the
next one's 45° and what's basically
Happening Here is that instead of
blocking the light the intensity of the
light is simply being taken down at each
step based on this equation so half the
intensity from the first polarizer is
have again at the second one and is
haved again at the last one but as you
can see for each polarizer we are just
stacking our projected plane equation
from the beginning the bottom line here
is that there is no probability about
this there's no there's no kind of a a
Quantum Randomness except for the fact
that from the first beam of light we
don't know what percentage is what
polarized it's simply taking two vectors
and calculating the remainder Vector of
motion visualized here the reason three
polarizers at 45° allows more light
through than two at
90° is because the entire plane of the
EM wave is getting reduced as it passes
through each polarizer the angle the
electron's dipole moment is misaligned
to the angle of oscillation of the EM
wave reduces the plane experienced by
the
electron the point here is that
polarizers work the way they do because
one light is a wave not a particle two
only the part of the wave where the
oscillation mostly matches the dipole
moment of the electron is being detected
as light interaction and three because
the motion of that wave over time
produces a plane and we can calculate
its effect on an electron via a
projected plane all right now we're
getting one of my favorite applications
of this we are going to talk about
nonlinear crystals
now to be clear this is more of an
observation than an
experiment but nonlinear crystals have
baffled
physicists in a nutshell here's here's
what they are why they're called
nonlinear we think light is linear
because we think it's a particle so
light should go in a straight line um
the problem with nonlinear crystals is
there certain crystals we find that when
we shoot light through them they can
produce a split beam and the craziest
part about the split beam of light is
that each
split has half the frequency of the
original light that we sent through it
now sometimes it's not perfectly half
and half sometimes it's 30% 70% things
like that but the point is it is taking
the original frequency of the light that
we shot through the nonlinear Crystal
and it is not only splitting it into two
other beams but it is Distributing the
frequency total between them there has
not been a good explanation for why this
happens but now that you
know that when we have a single
electron and light interaction that we
get a ring of potential
photons the explanation for how
nonlinear crystals Works becomes
perfectly clear so what makes nonlinear
crystals special is that they have an
incredibly uniform and symmetrical
molecular
structure which allows for this very
unlikely arrangement to occur where two
electrons are equal distance from an
emitting electron so you can have an
electron stimulated by a light wave
oscillate producing its electromagnetic
wave and that expanding ring hits two
electrons at the same time and that is
how we get this reaction where you have
two split uh beams of light the reason
the
frequency is cut in half is because you
have two
electrons responding to the change in
the electric field at the same time if I
were to take a certain amount ount of
force and push a heavy box that box will
move at a certain speed but if I take
that same amount of force and I push two
boxes now uh both of the same original
weight they're both going to move at
half speed and this is why the frequency
lowers because since we have two
electrons and they're both kind of
rebalancing the field as they move it
takes away from the acceleration causing
the frequency
to diminish and they diminish equally
again it doesn't have to be 50/50 the
point is it's it's
diminishing um basically distributed
across the two electrons both equaling
the original frequency this is an
incredibly classical intuitive and easy
to understand explanation for something
that we have never had a good
explanation before the up until now the
one of the most popular explanations for
why this happens and I I don't even
think I could perfectly describe it but
it's basically blah blah blah uh vacuum
energy effects just so you guys know
vacuum energy which does exist but it's
kind of the quantum electrodynamics
version of The Underpants Gnomes you see
fil one collect Underpants fil two Phil
three prefit oh I get it uh it it's just
kind of a general we saw something weird
that's how we're going to explain it so
another part of this explanation that
I've been giving you about what light
really is that nonlinear crystals really
drives home is this idea of light as a
lottery that a lot of the interactions
we observe are often a certain amount uh
connecting from one electron to another
and a certain amount missing when we
observe light through a nonlinear
Crystal it is not all the light that
gets split it is a small percentage of
that light uh in some cases uh as low as
like 1 in
150,000 and that just really drives home
the fact that even in a nonlinear
Crystal where you have a uniform and
symetrical molecular
structure the the chance for a photon
ring to be observed as a ring and
actually stimulate two electrons at the
same time is still incredibly low
probability so it explains why this
reality mathematically has existed in
front of us for a while now but we've
just seldom ever observed it but
nonlinear crystals show that we have
observed it all right now there are
rabbit holes here okay that I
tremendously appreciate and I hope that
maybe this thought inspires some other
optic engineers and you know optic
researchers uh to to dive down this
Rabbit Hole even further but sadly I got
to move on but again I I just can't
stress enough how this the nonlinear
Crystal interaction has been showing
this whole reality right in front of our
faces we just never had a good
understanding to explain it and know
what was going on okay let's move on to
the showstopper quantum mechanics
so when talking about quantum mechanics
what do we mean for most people
including fans of the Marvel Universe
what most people think of when they
think of quantum is just very small and
maybe bad CGI but the term
quanta was meant to refer to small
discrete amounts it's where we get the
plank length that we've been referring
to earlier in the video and it basically
means this idea that there's this
smallest possible unit that we can
measure and observe this this world
through Over time however quantum
mechanics has grown to incorporate some
rather dubious strange and Fantastical
ideas that physicists are still clinging
to for dear life and I want to start
cleaning that up so when we're talking
about quantum mechanics here's some of
the main Concepts we're talking about
number one discrete energy we just
talked about that in quantum mechanics
energy is communicated and works through
discret Quant this one I'm actually fine
with for now so we're not going to mess
with that one that's fine you can keep
that number two is Duality so that's
what we've been tackling through this
whole video the idea that photons and
other uh subatomic particles are
basically both waves and particles and
depending on the experiment sometimes
it's wav sometimes it's
particle so that one obviously I have a
big problem with that's that's kind of
the point of the whole video so number
three is probabilistic nature uh and
underneath that we kind of have two main
things we have the wave equation and we
have superposition and these are two
that get talked about ad nauseum so the
wave function is a mathematical tool
that is representing a statistical
probability uh distribution of where we
might find a particle in any given
situation and superposition refers to
this idea that a particle exists in more
than one uh State often referred to as
spin or polarization at a time until it
is detected and we're definitely going
to talk about that a lot number four is
entanglement now uh we might argue that
entanglement in many ways is uh the same
thing as superp position but but I'm
mentioning it as a standalone concept
here because it is a persistent
interpretation of
superposition and it is the thing that
it probably draws the most mystery and
you know crazy ideas and all the things
that that we're just bothered by when we
talk about quantum
mechanics entanglement is the
idea that by measuring the
superposition of one particle an
entangled particle will now be affected
when we measure its
superposition that's the idea behind
entanglement it's the idea that there is
some
information being communicated through
space faster than light and that these
two particles that are entangled meaning
they either have opposite spin or
opposite
polarization uh can affect each other
instantaneously when we measure it and
that is a big problem so now that you
understand this model I've presented for
the photon as just a word we've given to
an
interaction and now that we've gone
through all the experiments let's apply
the consequences of these things to
these Concepts in quantum mechanics
number one discrete energy as I said uh
we're fine with that for now we're just
going to leave that alone least
problematic of all the different
concepts here moving on all right so
duality let's talk about that well
that's what this entire video has been
about there is no need for
Duality it's a wave a photon's wave it's
not a particle at all however there are
geometric conditions that exist that
will produce point- like interactions so
at least for the photon we don't need
Duality at all no more
mystery as a matter of fact eliminating
The Duality as we showed with nonlinear
crystals clears up a lot of issues with
how photons work but I'm only mentioning
this again because I do want to draw a
line and say no there's no Duality with
a photon I haven't talked about what an
electron really is I haven't talked
about any of the other particles in the
standard model there is and we will
discuss in later video a difference
there is a line that is crossed from a
photon to other things so for now I just
want to say we don't need Duality with a
photon but that already changes a lot I
believe you will find that even when we
cross the line into other uh particles
and other parts of the Senor model there
are similar explanations number three
probabilistic
nature so this is one that is honestly
still
debated the there's still lots of people
who do look at the wave equation and say
this is just a math tool it's just just
something we're using to manage the fact
that it's very difficult to measure
these very small things and because they
move around a lot there's a certain
probability of detecting them in
different places fine but the
madness around this idea of wave
function collapse that the wave function
disappears when we detect a you know a
particle and in case of a photon when we
detect an interaction first of all
nothing is collapsing we made up the way
equation it's not reality it is a tool
we are using to
cope with an imprecise way of dealing
with reality that we
have and that's it so that we don't have
to have any mystical or metaphysical
things to to handle that but also I hope
you've learned through the course of
this
video that when you see these
experiments on photons and light talked
about on YouTube or in science books or
in these other things I hope that you
can now be vigilant to see how lazy they
are about distinguishing between
observing a single electron interaction
with light and a stream of electron
interactions with light or a coherent
light
wave and this failure to distinguish
between the behavior that we observe
from coherent light with what light
really is at that singular level is one
of of the laziest and one of the most
destructive things that we have done in
our conversations about quantum
mechanics okay now what about superp
position much the same thing can be said
about superp
position saying that uh light or a
particle can be in one of two positions
until we measure it just simply means
physically it could be either it's like
flipping a coin don't know which side is
up until I measure it again it's it's
it's mysticism we are inserting into the
math when the math is simply a way of
managing
uncertainty but the thing that has made
people take
superposition to this next level of
magic is the idea of entanglement so we
are going to spend the majority of this
time and the rest of this talking about
entanglement the most important thing to
realize is that we call photons in
Tangled when their polarization is
correlated and that can mean both that
we have two photons with the same
polarization or we have two photons with
opposite
polarization one of things that's just
interesting with photons versus all the
others is in you know when we're talking
about tingled electrons they have to be
opposite but with photons we often call
them entangled when they're the same or
when they're
opposite and the the reason this we do
do this with photons is because it
depends on how we quote unquote
entangled them and it depends on the
nature of the experiment itself and
whether or not two photons have the same
or opposite polarization is something we
likely already know based on how we
constructed the experiment so you might
be asking yourself that doesn't sound so
spooky what's the big deal with
entanglement then that is an excellent
question adding to this you need to
understand that polarization is relative
going back to the card here
that's right there's nothing
inherent to the nature of a polarized
Photon the photon is polarized
horizontally if it's if it looks like
this to me or to you or to however we
observe it it's polarized
vertically if it if it's line like this
to you or me so what that means is to
change the polarization of a photon all
I need to do is change how I measure it
so if
polarization is not an inherent
property of the photon
anyway why do we think it is so
significant when we talk about
entanglement that is an excellent
question so if polarization is relative
and how we determine the photons are
entangled is with polarization that
leads to the question are photons
entangled at all I say no that's right
when it comes to Photon entanglement
it's just more
math whoa whoa wait wait wait uh don't
do that now we'll ruin an entire video
with a copyright strike let's do that as
a followup video oh fine a photon is
maical and entanglement is pure maic I
am introducing this word maic to mean
anytime we take a mathematical equation
that simply allows us to describe our
observations and instead add a whole
bunch of Mythos and extra interpretation
to then imply uh something weird with
reality I hope you like it my wife
thought of it the reason we thought
photons were entangled to begin with is
because of our experiments with
polarizers which we covered earlier now
the difference between the experiment we
went through and the experiments that
they often use to show that uh photons
are entangled is that with ours we were
stacking the polarizers one after
another but in these entanglement
experiments they often take the
polarizers and spread them out sending
the light from from the first polarizer
now to two other polarizers so I don't
get accused of
misrepresentation let me take a second
and play the description for this in the
words of YouTube's most respected
science communicators so we haven't
proved hidden variable theories are
impossible just that any hidden variable
Theory would have to have the
interaction between the particle and one
filter affect the interaction of the
particle with other filters we can
however rig up an experiment where the
interactions cannot affect each other
without faster than light communication
but where the same impossible numerical
weirdness persists the key is to make
photons pass not through filters at
different points in time but at
different points in space at the same
time and for this you need entanglement
for this video what we'll mean when we
say two photons are entangled is that if
you were to pass each one of them
through filters oriented the same way
either both pass through or both get
blocked that is they behave the same way
when measured along the same axis and
this correlated Behavior persists no
matter how far away the photons and
filters are from each other even if
there's no way for one Photon to
influence the other Unless somehow it
did so faster than the speed of light
but that would be crazy now if you have
been really grocking this video you
might have already caught the problem as
these assertions of entanglement are
based on the same misconception there is
a certain percentage of particles
passing through the
polarizers there are two problems with
that statement the first is the word
particles and the second is the word
passing
through for the first we have just spent
this entire video showing that a photon
is not a
particle it is just a wave there's no
really Photon there it's just word we
give to an interaction can't say it
enough you can definitely say it too
much okay the second problem is the term
pass through the reality is that zero
photons pass through a
polarizer as we mentioned earlier with
the double slit experiment anytime you
stimulate an electron you are creating a
new EM
wave when the light hits the polarizer
nothing passes through there is just a
certain percentage of the energy that is
converted to new light waves and the
rest is converted to heat side note for
the real technical out there actually EM
waves never stop they're just canceled
out um if that's bothering anyone we'll
cover in a follow-up video and if it's
bothering that individual they
understand this well enough that they
can probably move on to the next video I
would agree with you there in other
words all the assertions of entanglement
rely on the Assumption of the
probability of particles passing through
a filter when what's really going on is
just the conversion of a projected plane
based on the oscillation of the wave and
the dipole moment of the electron
Bell's theorem shown
here is a simple probability statement
that requires particles in an absolute
State the x y and z are three options
for spin up down uh horizontal not
really a statement in
between uh p is the probability of any
of those two measured States matching we
don't need to break down the math for
our purposes here and there are other
reason sources to do that I'll link
below if you really want to understand
it but the obvious flaw here is the
equation itself that the percentage of
intensity of light is being
reinterpreted as a percentage of
particles passing through again a filter
based on spin rather than a product of
the vectors which determines the
amplitude of light resulting from the
interactions of the EM wave and the
electron dipole
moment because of this it makes sense
that our measurements are consistent
across vast distances of entangled light
if two wave sources have the same or
opposite polarization then their their
detections will either be the same or
inverse relationships of malice's law
which we've gone
through said another way we have been
using the math of a coin sorting machine
to imply spooky relation ship between
two cards being tossed through slits the
particle nature of light is the false
assumption that was piled on top of with
further nonsense in reality all these
entanglement experiments with
light had to have such a spooky
explanation because we couldn't just
admit we were wrong about the particle
in the first place so I just want
everyone to let that sink in for a
minute this equation Bell's
theorem and
yes there have been experiments showing
that the equation you know uh is
consistent we had uh entanglement
experiment when win the Nobel Prize so I
realize you're taking the word of a
random jackass YouTuber over a Nobel
Prize winner but Nobel Prize winners
have been wrong before it doesn't matter
that this equation works because all
this equation does is tell you what it
think wouldn't happen if there were
hidden variables into particles it
doesn't really predict what would happen
and that's the first logical fallacy and
I can't believe it's made it that far
but again it's not even about fixing the
equation it's a statistical equation
when we know what's going on you don't
use statistics I talked to a
statistician about that because I
wondered if you know maybe we can just
fix Bell's theorem no we can't because
it's statistical once you understand
light the real equation is just mice's
law that's it it's just we've never
interpreted M's law to be what's really
going on we've always thought there was
you know some other spooky explanation
behind it when in fact it's just
literally describing what's going on but
wait Chris if Photon entanglement is
bogus isn't that what's going on with
quantum computers don't they use
entangled photons that's right what is
going on with those quantum computers
anyway weren't they supposed to change
the world and destroy the internet
already how are they coming look behind
all those mythical explanations of
quantum computers it just comes down to
the fact that we've created a mechanism
to juggle a one and a zero until we need
to measure
it this is only useful for very specific
calculations and I'm not diminishing the
fact that it's a very useful technique
for solving very specific calculations
they have shown the ability to do that
however
it doesn't even require entangled
photons to achieve we could use other
mechanical processes to do the same
thing and we
have in fact many Quantum calculations
have been proven possible to be done
just as efficiently by non-quantum
computers now I'll stop there because
the only reason I can get away with
saying this is because I'm just a random
crazy person on YouTube with a small
following but for me personally I will
not be investing in any quantum computer
companies so let's wrap this up in
conclusion I believe the evidence is
extremely clear I have provided not just
a breakdown of all the weird experiments
that got us into this problem to begin
with but I have provided a few ideas for
some re further verification of what I'm
saying can be shown to be true there are
no particles here when we're talking
about light there are just
interactions and the pointlike nature of
it just has to do with how many
conditions are required for those
point-like interactions to occur and
depending on how you look at those
interactions sometimes they are confined
to what we would call a
rectangle and when we're looking at the
actual potential for those interactions
from a single electron we have a ring
contained around in the middle of a
sphere but let's talk about why this
matters I don't know about you but for
me I just like having a consistent and
intuitive theory that explains all these
experiments and observations
without any of the weird and very
overused sci-fi plot tropes more so it
matters because as I said at the
beginning our theories around the photon
formed our foundation of quantum
mechanics and while I admit there is
nothing particularly Earth shattering
about what I presented here by using
this as a foundation you will see in
future videos that I can now build off
of this to create a whole new approach
to subatomic interactions
this simple geometry of what's really
going on when we are talking about light
gives us a
pathway to reinterpret the exchange of
energy into equations that are nothing
more than distance and relative
acceleration that's where we're going
all right but Chris what about extra
Dimensions so I started this series
talking about extra dimensions and I did
uh and we didn't talk about any extra
Dimensions uh in this video and that
again because I had to clean up the ones
that we
have but as we get into the next video
and we start talking about the m in
EM this becomes again a solid intuitive
foundation for us to build the logic for
the rest on top of so I hope you will
forgive me for having a video that may
be less sexy but I hope more useful so
fear not the next video it's going to be
a doozy so all good theories need to be
falsifiable and provable well here's the
thing if we were starting in the late
1800s and we didn't have all this plaque
built up around our thinking then all
the experiments we covered today are
pretty good evidence to prove this
Theory and I've even added a little more
when talking about nonlinear crystals
but if we need even further Evidence the
best experiment would be if we could
suspend a single electron in the middle
of a ring of
detectors then we could oscillate the
electron at a light detectable frequency
and see if different detectors are
activated at different times and if you
are a regular viewer of this Channel all
two of you thank you very much you will
notice that's very similar to the light
Compass idea okay but is this
falsifiable sure I'll tell you what you
can do real quick to falsify this whole
idea suspend a photon go ahead just do
it we can suspend an electron we can
hold electron we can caress it we can
cuddle it we can keep it in a box but we
can't do that with a photon because it's
always moving because it's a wave if you
really think that a photon is a particle
just show me an experiment suspending
that Photon still in space and
everything I said is complete hogwash is
this Theory
comparable meaning how does this stack
up to other theories of light well let's
just take a minute and look at the
scoreboard probabilistic wave function
collapse the idea that light just exists
as wave until we detect it and then the
whole thing collapses and observation
creates
reality come on we have the Min worlds
or Multiverse Theory and while I know
that that theory is fun and makes for
very mediocre movies except this one
this one's good it is absolutely absurd
that we have had to insert multiple
universes just to explain this all of
the observations we have had about light
taking up every possible path at once
until we measure it can be easily
explained by the fact that again a
single instance of electron generating
EM wave is a ring and the fact that
often when we observing light it is as a
coherent stream that's all we need we
don't need Earth
612 we also have pilot wave
theory which admittedly is one I have
drawn a lot of inspiration from and when
I was getting into physics really
fascinated me and I I think that pilot
wave theory is one of those that I am
grateful for because at least it was
driven by some logic and deduction but
we don't need pilot wave theory with
light we we don't need a wave carrying a
COR pusle or that's what they call a
little particle along we don't need that
with light we'll talk about that a
little more with electrons so where do
we go from here I want to take a minute
and clarify what this Theory does not do
it does not disqualify or disprove
current thinking on quantum mechanics or
entanglement alt together a photon is
just one square on the standard model
Bingo
chart it does go a long way to call in a
lot of our assumptions and our
interpretations into question but until
I cover these principles in the context
of actual particles which an electron is
we we will not have unraveled the whole
problem the convenient part of focusing
on light is that most of our
interactions with light only take up the
E inem I was able to ignore the magnetic
component completely for this entire
presentation so the next essential step
is covering and creating a similar
intuitive and easy to understand
explanation for magnetism I also want to
acknowledge that there's a lot of nuance
to everything I covered and a ton of
rabbit holes uh every experiment I
covered here could take up an entire
video and Lord knows my editor knows
that I've been tempted to do so there is
also a whole world to explore
specifically for the ramifications for
nonlinear Optics I can hope I Inspire
some people to maybe take some of the
ideas and run with
it I am almost certain this video will
need a followup to still patch some
things or clarify some things so I'm
definitely going to do that as
needed I never know which aspects of
these videos are going to be the most
problematic or the most confusing uh
this video I have gone over with more
people than probably any other like I
said including people that are actually
experts in this field but as we open up
to the broader audience it's just hard
to know and most of them been with me
the whole time so they're used to it all
anyway so please keep your eye out in
the description as I will post
clarifications or Corrections or other
things as comments come in at the least
I hope you appreciate and find Value in
having a consistent intuitive and
practical framework for light I
encourage you to go back to your YouTube
feed or how your research Rabbit Hole or
however you best approach this material
and look up all the other videos papers
on light and photons I believe you will
see this framework holds up and offers
better answers than anything else out
there it's a
wave it's a wave with geometric
conditions for interaction it's a wave
okay finally I want to say that during
my series I have argued against many fun
and popular ideas entanglements a fun
idea multiverses are a fun idea I've
shown that time travel is impossible I
I'm resolving wave particle duality and
I've p to Hole In entanglement it seems
like I'm just sitting here trying to
kill off everything fun and sexy about
theoretical physics all I can say is
that we have to get rid of and move on
from our old toys before we get new ones
and let me promise you I have new toys
to play with please keep your eye out
based on the comments I get in I will be
doing a follow-up live session Q&amp;A it'll
be the first time I do that and in the
live session Q&amp;A I will also talk about
other things like expanding into patreon
or uh other means I don't know yet
whether I'm going to do the live Q&amp;A or
a follow-up video first it will just I
need to give this minut to simmer and
and see what the reaction is so that is
going to happen please keep your eye out
for that as always I appreciate the
encouragement that all of you have have
given me and and push me forward this is
very very difficult it's tons of work uh
emotionally it's difficult because I am
well aware of the hubus of the whole
thing nevertheless I'm very excited
about where this is going I hope you're
excited too and thank you as always for
the time also anything you can do to
help this grow share like And subscribe
most of all leaving this plane in the
background to increase the watch time uh
while you're you know doing other things
like chores around the house uh is is
actually probably one of the most
effective things you can do to help the
video rank on the YouTube algorithms
this video took a year of work the next
video will probably take even longer
this takes a lot of research it takes a
lot of validation checking work takes a
lot of Animation work thank
you um in the meantime obviously as I
did before I'm going to take a break do
some other topics in the meantime that
are easier to work on I have some other
things I'm passionate about and I just
ask everyone to keep an open mind and
please try out some of the other videos
that I'm doing I'm very proud of them
too so I just want to say once again
thank you many of you for your support I
look forward to hearing from all of you
even the
trolls and until next time everyone
sleep well and keep
learning that is an excellent question
