hello and welcome to factually I'm Adam
Conover thank you so much for joining me
once again as I talk to an incredible
expert about all the amazing stuff that
they know that I don't know and that you
might not know both of our minds are
going to get blown together and we are
going to have so much fun doing it now
before we get going I want to remind you
that I'm going back on tour this year
doing a brand new hour of stand up for
anyone anywhere who will care to listen
to me if you're in Austin Texas I'll be
there from March 23rd through 25th if
you're in San Francisco I'll be there
from May 5th through May 6th if you're
in San Antonio I'll be there from May
11th through May 13th and if you're in
Batavia Illinois just outside Chicago
I'll be there from June 8th through June
10th head to Adam conover.net for
tickets and I'm going to be posting a
lot more tour dates there soon oh and by
the way if you want to support this show
you can do so on patreon head to
patreon.com Adam Conover for every
episode of this podcast add free you can
join our community Discord we even do a
live Community book club over Zoom it's
so much fun I hope to see you there now
on this week's episode we're going to be
talking about mergers corporate
consolidation and capitalism if you saw
my video that came out just a few weeks
ago on YouTube you will know that
America is plagued by mergers of all
kinds with disastrous results for our
democracy when larger companies buy
smaller ones and dominate entire
industries that doesn't just raise
prices for consumers and lower wages for
workers it is bad for everybody it's bad
for everybody that just a handful of
companies control ninety percent of the
beer market and that the four largest
Airlines control two-thirds of Industry
Revenue in fact a study a few years ago
looked at 893 Industries and found that
two-thirds of them had gotten more
concentrated in the decade after 2007.
if it's felt like monopolies are all
around us yeah it's because they are and
I want to be clear this is a problem for
the entire economy but it's an
especially big problem for the industry
I work in the media industry sure it's
all well and good to have a First
Amendment that protects you from
interference by the government but if
there's just one one or two companies
that control what art gets distributed
to which people that controls what
artists get to say that forces artists
to work in a certain way to meet their
mandates and that's the only way that
they're messaging it out there well what
use is Free Speech to begin with if we
live under a society like that you know
YouTube I think was the canary in the
coal mine for this problem right because
as soon as YouTube arose it became the
only place online to watch videos people
don't go to nbc.com to watch SNL clips
anymore they go to YouTube and that
means that anyone who wants to
distribute video over the Internet like
I'm doing right now has to play by
YouTube's rules you have to feed the
algorithm you got to make the kind of
thumbnail that YouTube likes you have to
make sure you don't swear in the first
15 seconds or you'll get demonetized
YouTube exerts control over everybody's
speech in society even though they're a
private company that is not answerable
to the public at large and that is
simply undemocratic period and of course
it's not just internet video in live
music Ticketmaster and Live Nation
dominate the entire industry controlling
who gets to play at what venue in book
publishing there's just a few gigantic
Publishers and one really big
distributor called Amazon TV and film
companies keep buying each other up
resulting in less platforms for artists
like me to put our work on and in news
both print digital and broadcast there
are fewer options than ever things are
simply getting more Consolidated and
therefore worse so what the hell do we
do about it well on the show today we
have one of the very best writers and
thinkers on this issue his name is Corey
doctorow and he has been working on and
evangelizing about this problem for
literal decades it's the second time on
the show and my last interview with him
was one of my very favorites and I know
you're gonna love this one please
welcome to the show Corey doctorow Corey
thank you so much for coming back on the
show oh thank you Adam I am so delighted
to be back so I just look I just had
this video come out about mergers media
mergers consolidation oh you enjoyed it
I enjoyed it I watched it in Australia I
really I as a reader review for so long
I it's my goal to make you happy and
proud of me
um but it really I actually as I was
writing the video I was referring to uh
the advanced copy you sent me of your
new book choke point capitalism which is
about many of the same topics I love
that phrase what is choke point
capitalism mean yeah so that that thing
I wanna that we're always at Payne's to
describe is how checkpoint capitalism is
different from other forms of like
intermediation right we're not just
talking about a record label or a
publisher or whatever they they can be
abusive too I mean the Beatles used to
split one penny four ways after their
label took 15 out for breakage and then
they paid 10 to their manager right it
can be very bad even in those
circumstances but choke point capitalism
describes the circumstance usually built
around digital Platforms in which you
have a company that's able to Corral an
audience they can use digital Rights
Management so you can only use their
devices for uh for your media they can
pre-sell you a year shipping the way
Prime does they can lock you in by using
predatory pricing to stop everybody else
from entering the market and so anyway
you end up with this audience that
either doesn't want to leave or can't
leave or some combination of both and so
then you have suppliers who really need
to reach that audience and there's a
choke point in between and that choke
point allows large firms to relieve
those suppliers of anything they have on
the way to the audience and this kind of
resolves this conundrum which is how is
it that we made copyright like last
longer cover more Works have higher
penalties make it easier to prove
infringement and get those penalties
made the industry larger and more
profitable and yet the share of income
going to creative workers has declined
it's because like giving people more
copyright when there's you know five
Publishers and four Studios and three
labels and two ad tech companies and one
company that does all the ebooks and the
audiobooks it's like giving your bullied
kid extra lunch money it's just like not
an amount of lunch money that will get
them fed actually if you just keep
giving them lunch money the bullies have
enough money left over to do like a
national advertising campaign think of
the hungry school children of America
give them more lunch money yeah still
not going to get any of it and so choke
point capitalism is about this Market
structure an hourglass shaped Market
with a firm squatting in between
customers on one side suppliers on the
other yeah and there's so many metaphors
that can work choke point is a really
good one you said bully I think of like
the mafia asking for protection money
it's or a troll across
it's like this it becomes this middle
person who is not just demanding rent
from everybody in order for the artist
to meet the audience but also defining
the terms under which that entire
interaction happens like even here on
you know this this video podcast that
we're doing is gonna go on YouTube and
I have very little power over how many
people see it even though I have close
to half a million subscribers now on the
channel that doesn't mean those half a
million people are going to even be
shown the video yeah unless the video
plays with you know YouTube's algorithm
properly unless I give it just the right
thumbnail unless I do all these things
that are just designed to make YouTube
happy I can't swear in the first 15
seconds now because it'll be demonetized
I have to like make sure I'm if I want
to monetize the video play right with
you there's all these things that are
actually shaping the work and you know
and there's only one company in the
entire country that provides this
service there's only one platform yeah I
mean you're describing something that is
like very distinct to platform economics
digital platform economics you have
these firms they're really like
undisciplined by the regulation or
competition they can buy all their
competitors remember YouTube wasn't a a
Google company Google had a video
company that failed and so they bought
the one that succeeded they forgot that
that's true Everything Google has done
except for search and their Hotmail
clone they bought from someone else
everything they built in in-house failed
right right they mobile stack they add
stack server management stack
um you know video calendar docs all of
it are Acquisitions yeah right they're a
buying things company not a inventing
things company yeah and they like to
think that they're Willy Wonka's
chocolate factory but really they just
got access to the Capital Market
remember when they were like oh we're
gonna cure death yeah all the moon shots
yeah yeah but they've never invented
anything smart cities Wi-Fi balloons you
know not all of them were terrible ideas
there was some cool stuff in Google Plus
not all of it but there was some cool
stuff on Google Plus they can't if they
make a good product they can't make it
succeed yeah right they just have this
kind of bad culture this bad Innovation
culture that they call the world's
leading Innovation culture so in
platform Dynamics
you have these companies that have some
Surplus right they've got investor
capital or they're making profit because
they're cross-subsidizing they've got to
add business they're subsidizing some
other business with and they take that
Surplus and first they hand it to
customers right so you sign up for
Facebook when Facebook first goes public
you know their pitch to you is we are
the Privacy forward alternative to
Myspace unlike the crepulent Australian
billionaire who owns Myspace we're not
going to spy on you right uh and all
they show you is like stuff that people
you care about that you told them you
cared about have to say yeah right and
then once they get all those people
locked in because there's this problem
right once you and all your friends are
on Facebook you can't leave Facebook
like you can't even agree on where to go
for dinner how are you going to agree on
like when to leave Facebook right yeah
and so what's happening with Twitter
people keep trying to leave Twitter yeah
okay let's all go everyone we're going
all right cars started everyone get in
the car we're leaving Twitter and like
looking around I'm like I have a Mazda
on account but I'm like not everybody
got in the Mastodon sure like I still
got to go back to Twitter some times I
don't have a choice yeah I mean you
watch all two and a half hours of
Fiddler on the Roof and it's just two
and a half hours these poor bastards
getting the  beaten out of them by
Cossacks and not leaving right and when
they finally get kicked out they're like
well what are we gonna do next right and
it's well I'm going to New York and
you're going to Chicago he's going to
Krakow and they they lose each other
yeah and you know that that we matter a
lot to each other and so we stay so you
so once the audience is locked in then
they start reallocating those surpluses
to business customers they start spying
on users right so they're taking a
surplus from users and they start
handing it to advertisers they tell
Publishers hey you come and you show us
uh like three sentences of your article
in a link and we're just gonna stuff it
down a million people's eyeballs turn on
the traffic flood and so the Publishers
start to get very acclimated to it and
then at a certain point they take that
Surplus away from the Publishers and the
advertisers and they hand it to
themselves yeah so the Facebook ad
Market is full of fraud they colluded
with Google on a legal program called
Jedi blue to rig the ad Market
Publishers uh they never show you they
won't show show you the things that you
subscribe to unless the publisher puts
the full text of the article and no link
so they can't get any of their own
native advertising only to share that
Facebook gains to give them you as the
user
your feed is just full of stuff you
never asked to see the more Facebook
shows you stuff you ask to see the less
room there is to show you stuff that
someone's paid Paola for right
advertising or stuff that someone's paid
to boost right I call this the
initiification cycle and and one of the
things about initiification that that
makes it I have to say but you you
coined this term maybe a month ago you
did a couple threads in an article about
it and I have seen this word and
shitification all over the Internet
you have coined a technical term I feel
like this is going to be an academic
papers now and yet  is in the middle
of it and I really salute you yeah well
thank you thank you I do my best to work
the swears in uh not in the first 15
seconds otherwise obviously otherwise
we'd be demonetize but so this
initiification cycle like one of the
things that makes it possible is it's
really easy to twiddle the knobs on the
back end of these services and change
how those surpluses get allocated right
if you're running a grocery store and
you want to price gouge on eggs as they
all are right now
um you've you've gotta like send
teenagers out with pricing and guns
right it's hard to like do a b tests
when you've got to pay teenagers with
price and guns to run your A B test when
you've just when you're just like the
the sound guy at Laser Floyd with 10
million sliders right and you can just
like twiddle the knobs all day long so
you know you talk about this platform
criminology you do where you're like the
thumbnail has to be like this and I
can't do that or whatever these are like
reverse engineered rules yeah right
Google is like and all the other
platforms they're bosses who dock your
pay with every paycheck for breaking
rules but won't tell you what rules you
broke because if they told you what
rules you broke then you'd know how to
break the rules without them finding it
so you're just like trying to reverse
engineer what your bad boss wants yeah
and it may be that what they want from
minute to minute changes for reasons
that are completely opaque to you so you
know if you're on tick tock Tick Tock
the one thing everyone agrees about
critics and fans is they had an amazing
recommendation algorithm that was using
you know surveillance data to pick
videos for you uh and it just came out
in this amazing article in Forbes that
they had this thing they call the
heating tool yeah and it's just a knob
they turn and then they just like
non-consensually shove your video down a
million people they pick and choose
videos they're like this video we're
deciding we're gonna go is gonna go wide
yeah yeah you know you go to the county
fair and like by 10 a.m there's some guy
in the Midway with a giant teddy bear
that he got by throwing three balls in
the peach basket he didn't like throw
three balls in the peach basket the
Carney just didn't work the like the
scissor thing in the bottom that knocks
the balls out or he said oh you got one
ball in do it again and I'll let you
trade the key chain you won for the
giant teddy bear the point is to have
someone walking around with a giant
teddy bear okay right uh they're not in
the business of giving out free teddy
bears they're in the business of getting
five dollars and not giving up and this
is by the way I I need to make an entire
YouTube video about this but people are
always saying like oh all these kids are
getting rich on Tick Tock you can get so
rich onto no one's getting rich on Tick
Tock like one
he's the guy with a giant teddy bear Joe
Rogan in his 100 million dollar Spotify
payout has got the biggest teddy bear of
all yeah right so but no one else is
making money on Spotify I'm not making
no no no and if they give you that
traffic they're also going to take it
away because what they want you to do is
retool so that your production is uh is
uh Tick Tock forward it's got that
vertical video format there's a whole
bunch of other like uh conventions that
make it very tick-tocky hard to put it
on YouTube or Instagram even though
they've got look-alike products and so
once they do that they're like you know
there's only so much Surplus our viewers
have right they're not going to sit here
and watch Tick Tock for 20 hours so we
want to take back some of that Surplus
maybe we want Sports Bros to start doing
tick tocks we're going to take them away
from the the atoms of the world and
we're going to give them to the morning
Zoo guys of the world yeah to get them
to lock in and then someday they're
going to come back to you and do what
Facebook and all the other platforms
have done they say oh you want to reach
the audience who explicitly subscribed
to you and said I want to see what Adam
has to say pay to boost yeah right and
so this is like endemic to platform
economics and and again you can see how
like this is completely unrelated to the
tool that we give creators to manage
their bargaining leverage with
intermediaries copyright like more
copyright less copyright doesn't matter
right like all of this stuff is
independent of it and you know maybe
we'll talk about Spotify later one of
the things that happens when you do give
creators copyright that firms can
expropriate as the creators head out to
Market is it gives these firms these
very long-lived arsenals of regulated
monopolies copyrights that they can use
to structure the future of the market
which is how Spotify ended up giving
giant shares of equity to the three
companies that own 70 of all the music
recordings in the world uh Sony Warner
and Universal which means that they are
now running the future of the music
industry because they were its past okay
let's let's get to that point in a
second I just want to talk about digital
media platforms sure a little bit more
that thing where they then say they
finally say you need to pay in order to
reach your audience I mean I remember
when face Facebook made that shift and
that's why I don't Facebook is the one
platform I don't participate in at all
I'm a Zucker vegan yeah I I don't do it
I fully deleted my account partially
because they had a really great export
tool I was able to export my entire
Facebook account and go read all my old
messages from 2011. right um but I'm not
on there at all because I was like I'm
not going to build a platform on
Facebook where once I've got you know X
many followers on my page that need to
pay to reach them but unfortunately like
Tick Tock has been that way from the
get-go like I have 1.2 million followers
on Tick Tock wow but if I post uh you
know and if I do my normal sort of like
hey guys here's like a horrible fact
about the world like that gets pushed
out very nicely but if I say hey guys
I'm going on tour please come see me in
Boise like literally 10 000 people see
it and if I put out of them are in Boise
none of them are in Boise and if I put
at the end of the video hey here's a
like I'll I have to do this crazy dance
where I go to a city and I'm like hey
here I am in Boise here's a weird fact
about Boise by the way here I I'm I'm
here and you can come see me and I say
that at the end that does a little
better that'll get 70k or something a
couple more people will see it but it's
all the point is like the followers are
meaningless because the 1.2 million
people if I post something 1.2 million
people don't see it so what is the
follower what right and and so we've
gone from an internet where you know I
was like hey I'll just post whatever I
like and people will email it to each
other they'll see it it'll spread widely
Etc to if I don't make the exact thing
that the platform is demanding that I
make which is a silent invisible mandate
I don't know what it is well actually
sometimes it's silent invisible
sometimes they tell you directly if you
look at twitch or YouTube they'll be
like enter our creator boot camp where
we tell you exactly what to make and
then if you make that exactly right you
might get paid for 10 minutes a little
bit right until they change the rules
yeah too many sliders yeah but this is
this is work for me to do this for me to
like this is not dissimilar to if I want
to make a television show show uh you
know for Apple TV or for NBC they say
hey here's here's what we're looking for
this month and then I go in and I pit
I've done this right I go into pitch
exactly what they're looking for and
that's the way you get the show on the
air and that feels reasonable because
they're people who have a bunch of money
and presumably they're going to pay me
if I do it right
um but you know the the promise of the
internet was this place where we
wouldn't have to go through those
Gatekeepers where we'd get to just make
whatever we wanted and people would see
it and guess what we still have
Gatekeepers there we have just as few of
them as we did in the 70s ABC NBC CBS
right those if you want to get on TV in
the 70s that's you have to go to now you
have to go to YouTube Tick Tock
Instagram and you know the other five
giant companies that turn the internet
into five giant websites filled with
screenshots of text to the other four
yeah exactly and they don't pay and so
you know the promise if you were gonna
erect a defense for these companies it
would be well hey they're allowing so
many people who didn't have voices in
the media to get the word out there and
that's true to an extent except that
they do tell you what you can say
because if you don't say exactly what
they want you to nobody sees it so this
is the thing where the the right wing
weirdos who are pissed off about Shadow
Banning they're not wrong about the part
where where we've allowed our
competition policy to fall asleep for 40
years so that the internet is controlled
by a small number of Gatekeepers and
those Gatekeepers do exercise editorial
judgment the answer isn't to like
prohibit people who provide speech forms
from having editorial judgment yeah
right if if we said that like the no
politics at the dinner table Cafe is is
going to be legally allowed to take
hedge fund money buy every restaurant in
town and then use most favored nation
deals with all the restaurant suppliers
to keep anyone else from owning a
restaurant if we said okay well the
answer is that we're gonna have to
regulate restaurants so that they they
can't say no politics at the dinner
table where they they have to allow
certain kinds of speech within certain
things that's a crazy remedy right a
much better remedy is like why don't we
just have lots of speech forums right
why don't we just have lots more places
where we can go so again maybe we're
getting ahead of ourselves here but
people who read the first half of this
book get very angry uh it's it's there's
this I I read it and I was like I'm
already angry about this yeah but this
is some good extra context you know you
know the finance term uh Migo my eyes
glaze over right these like super
complicated scams like you know like
this the scammy or the the uh investment
is the thicker the perspectives because
they want you to think that like a pile
of  this big must have a pony
underneath it yeah so we're doing you
know what you do all the time or what
John Oliver does which is kind of
unpicking these for the first half and
you know you open the Matryoshka there's
a smaller doll there's smaller doll and
smaller and then the middle is just like
cholera right like there's never
anything good in the middle so you know
that's the first half and people are
like by the end of the first half I've
got this high-pitched noise in my head
and I think it's a rage aneurysm but the
second half of the book is addresses
itself to systemic uh interventions
really detailed shovel ready technical
proposals that aren't just like vote
harder or shop better right these kind
of individualized consumer solutions
that are really about like hey you know
anything that can't go on forever will
eventually stop there there have been
like these punctuated crises in the
internet and creative economies for 40
years every time we reach this crisis
point we just do the same thing again
but harder why don't we like establish
socialize kind of get it get into our
heads some bigger broader more effective
Solutions so that the next time the
European Union as they did in 2019 says
what do we do about copyright
infringement online we don't say let's
make it mandatory to install 100 million
dollar copyright filter like YouTube has
that means that only YouTube and
Facebook are going to be able to provide
online speech forums we can do something
that actually will make money for
artists the crazy thing about YouTube is
it almost started as a monopoly like as
soon as it appeared it was the only
place that you could post video there
was never really a competing challenge
or even Vimeo and things like that and
to me in many ways it was sort of the
canary and the coal mine of like the
death of the open internet because
before that you could post anything
anywhere and YouTube offered this
solution to the difficult technical
problem of video hosting that
immediately became dominant and has been
for the 15 years since so I think that's
a little bit of an odd case but a lot of
the cases you're talking about in the
book are from companies aggressively
moving into areas that were
decentralized and centralizing them like
Ticketmaster like Tyson chicken both of
which I talked about in my video you
actually describe uh Ticketmaster as
Tyson chickenifying the live event
business so so tell me a little bit
about those types of companies that uh
you know that that create a choke point
aggressively on purpose in order to 
over everybody yeah so you know you know
the Tyson chicken story in Purdue and
the other the other chicken companies
you can summarize again sure there's a
term out of labor economics to describe
it it's called chickenization right
right and it's the three big poultry
companies they divided up America like
the pope dividing up the new world such
that each farmer gets one poultry
processor and you can't go to anyone
else and then they tell you what birds
you have to use they tell you what to
feed them they tell you when to feed
them they tell you how much they tell
you what vet to use what medicine they
tell you what kind of coop you have to
build when the lights go on when the
lights go off everything except how much
they're going to pay you wow right and
they use this to do things like like a b
testing right they've got the they're
twiddling the knobs they're like hey how
about if we ask this farmer to give his
chicken less feed and like you don't
know that you're in the experimental arm
right it looks like being on the B Arc
and Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
right it's like why are my chickens
dying oh I'm in the I'm in the
experimental arm right so then you take
your birds to Market and they've got a
bird's eye view of the whole market and
they know how much to give you so you've
got just enough to roll your loans over
and not enough to get ahead yeah and so
that's what they do and you have nowhere
else to go I mean it's something I I got
very close to explaining in my video
about it was a little bit too technical
it was the concept of concept of
monopsony where we're familiar with the
concept of a monopoly where there's only
one place to buy things from and that
means that company can jack the prices
up we've all experienced that with a
cable company or anything else a
monopsony is when there's only one place
you can sell things to and that means
that if you're the person selling your
labor to an employer like I am as a you
know writer and there's fewer platforms
than ever or uh if you're a chicken
farmer trying to sell chickens well
there's nowhere to compete that'll give
you a higher price you literally have to
take whatever price they offer you
um and that's honestly almost more
anonymical than a monopoly you know
buyer power is actually much easier to
distort markets than seller power
markets where a buyer controls 10 of the
market uh often end up tipping towards
that buyer having all the power in the
market so you know when Amazon launched
a thing called project gazelle where
Jeff Bezos ordered his Executives to
find small presses who were weak and
could be forced into unsustainable uh
discounts like the picking up the weak
gazelles as a cheetah chasing the flock
wow the only thing the lawyer is
objected to about this was naming IT
project as well so that there was there
was one press Melville house that said
oh we're not gonna We're not gonna do
this and at that time there were only 10
percent of Melville House's sales yeah
but when they took the buy button off of
every Melville house title Melville
house stopped being economically viable
there are very few firms that can
sustain a 10 instantaneous drop in sales
volume yeah right and so they caved and
they went back that's so predatory terms
super predatory so you know this is this
is endemic to to wherever you have all
this buyer power and one of the things
that happens whenever you have a
monopoly is it usually becomes a
monopsony as well so here we are in
Burbank
um almost every medical facility within
about 10 miles of here is owned by
Providence and the way that that
happened is first we allowed the Pharma
companies to monopolize and the farmer
company started jacking up prices that
they charged hospitals and so the
hospitals got together and they form
Regional monopolies like the Providence
Regional Monopoly where they said to the
farmer companies you're not going to be
able to sell your cancer drugs to anyone
who lives in Burbank unless you give us
a more competitive price right fight the
buyer power as to fight the seller power
they have to make buyer power then they
turned around to the insurance companies
and said guess what it's going to cost
10x what it used to cost for a hospital
bed so the insurance companies also form
Regional monopolies here we are with
like three or four and this is part of
what happens uh I feel like I've seen
that in the book publishing industry
where the book publishers say we need to
get together in order to fight back
against Amazon against the other company
but at the same time and there might be
some truth in that like they're not
wrong like in general I'm like book
publishers I'm kind of on their side I
know they're predatory in many ways but
like hey they're they're just trying to
make  books someone needs to make
them right Amazon's squeezing them okay
maybe that's the right thing to do
except that Publishers are also the
buyers of authors that's right and so
this is the thing about if we go back to
healthcare there's two groups of people
who never form a monopoly healthcare
workers who now get worse wages and
worse working conditions and patients
who now pay more for Worse outcomes
right so when we allow this
monopolization and the supply chain it's
it's like there's never just one ant
right once there's one Monopoly they all
become monopolized because they do it
defensively and eventually you just get
workers and customers who are at either
end of the supply chain who just get
squeezed and whatever else these
different players in the supply chain
disagree about random house and Amazon
or uh you know Pharmacy benefit managers
and pharmacies whatever they disagree on
the one thing they all agree on is that
we should pay as much as possible and
get as little as possible right that's
that's the that's the kind of the class
solidarity among the markets you just
described a great motivation for forming
a union or any other sort of collective
and organizations and so on but again
like how do you how is it that our Union
uh rights have been so eroded over 40
years we allowed monopolies to
concentrate to extract Monopoly rents
and then when a company is down to a
sector is down to five companies they
can all agree on what they want from
their policy outcomes right if there's a
hundred companies in the sector then
when there's like a regulatory for a
proceeding or a law going forward some
of them it'll be good for and some that
will be bad for like net neutrality
right if we had a lot of different isps
some of them would be like sign up with
Adam's ISP where the fiber Loop that
gives you all the packets you ask for as
quickly as you can and then there'd be
like sign up for the Warner ISP we give
you a discount on Warner stuff and we
slow down everything else and you know
they would show up at the FCC and say
you know Madam chairman uh if we are
forced to give people all the data they
ask for we'll have Network management
problems and you'll show up and you'll
go you know I got a million customers
it's not true right so you get these
facts and evidence yeah when there's
like three companies in a sector two one
you never get that and so you get these
this this regulatory capture that isn't
like inevitable it's an EPA phenomenon
it's Downstream of Market concentration
yeah you know they never have to sit
around a table and agree on their
lobbying priorities all you need is for
people who work at this firm to jump
over to that firm people who work from
that firm to jump over to this firm for
all all of them to be godparents to each
other's kids to be the executors of each
other's estate to have their kids play
on the same Little League teams and they
just Converge on a single culture and a
single set of lobbying priorities it
also seems like correct me if I'm wrong
it might be a little bit more stable if
you're trying to build a choke point uh
you know company to to do this it's a
little bit more stable to have two that
don't compete with each other rather
than one like if you compare
Ticketmaster right which I'd love to I'd
love to get in your version of the
Ticketmaster story but Live Nation
Ticketmaster is a true Monopoly they're
the only game in town AEG their their
biggest competitor is like 10 the size
or something like that yeah
um and Ticketmaster has like come under
a lot of scrutiny over the last month
we'll see how that plays out
um but if you look at say the cable
monopolies where you know what do you
actually have three or four large
companies that have divvied up the
country between themselves so in essence
here in in California or my neighborhood
there's only there is a true Monopoly of
only one company but my friends in Ohio
have a different  that they
hate yeah and so those companies can
sort of like work the FCC separately yet
together and say well there's more than
one of us sure there isn't just one
giant uh thing like in the days of ATT
well look I just think that um the
mistake that we make especially with big
Tech but also with with other big firms
is we think of them as like Evil
Geniuses right they're they're just
ordinary mediocrities yes right
unconstrained by the things that
constrain their predecessors the thing
that stopped Alta Vista from becoming
Google isn't that Google was formed by
people who are smarter or more wicked
it's that Alta Vista was functioning in
the last gasp days of antitrust scrutiny
where out of control mergers were not
available to it and the capital markets
wouldn't hand you a blank check to buy
every potential competitor right and so
that's what that's what constrained them
the thing is that they these guys are
ordinary mediocrities which means that
eventually they kind of trip over their
own feet right they overreach right like
think of how easy it would have been and
for Ticketmaster to have a Year's notice
that Taylor Swift was going to do her
first concert the names and email
addresses of everyone entitled to buy
tickets in the initial sale right a
whole Year's notice and to have gone out
and just like even they could have even
just played one of those scumbags like
Deloitte to build them a system for
right they could have just tooled up the
servers for this one thing right so that
it wouldn't cost it's like it's like
being the Crooked uh Construction
Company who gets hired to build the
podium for the mayor's acceptance speech
and you like you build it out of chewing
gum because you can't be bothered to pay
for screws right yes like you just end
up eating your own Seed corn right if
you're disciplined like even in the
smallest Way by competition right if you
have people within the firm who view the
outside opinion negative publicity
competition any of these things is a
Potential Threat rather than as is
usually the case in these large firms
the biggest competitor that any
executive has is another executive at
the same firm oh yeah and they're all
looking at each other yeah stabbing each
other in the back I mean you have worked
in big Studio companies that's the way
it works I the the president of my
network was like decapitated by you know
a rival executive like there was a power
struggle that was lost and as a result
the network I worked for everybody was
laid off do you remember the 15-year
period where Yahoo bought every
successful Web 2.0 company and then
different prints links within Yahoo
destroyed them right this is like
Machiavelli was an optimist yeah right
and so often these firms undisciplined
in any way overreach in this way that is
just like Beyond The Pale no longer
deniable like it would have been so easy
just not to screw over Taylor Swift do
anything you want to anyone just not
Taylor Swift yeah and then they would
have had plausible deniability yeah but
instead they have to bring the biggest
draw in the nation making a statement
denouncing the Monopoly yeah apologizing
for having to use the Monopoly and then
they got Congressional hearings and they
get made to look like  in front
of the whole country and like yeah Katie
Porter gets out her whiteboard yeah
we're in the  State of the Union
Address yeah basically like that was
like a whole Applause line yeah from the
president
um I wanna I wanna ask I just want to
jump back something you said do you not
give what you know Google's rise yeah
like I do remember when Google came out
and was like holy  this is much
better you know they were better yeah
and you know the page rank algorithm and
all that there was that sort of big bang
moment of that company do you not give
that any credit for that no it was great
but like all of these companies had
great ideas when they started right I
mean that's they're not unique to that I
work for silicon graphics for a while
for one of their you know for an oem
like building you know big pre-press
systems we they had totally kick ass
weird Unix workstations they had one
great idea they made a bunch of money
from it a lot of people got to do
amazing things with it and then someone
else had a better idea yeah right that's
fine right right now I think a lot of
our emphasis on these platforms is on
making them better on like sort of
prolonging their senescence right so
that they so that um they the people who
rely on aren't injured like that's kind
of the best faith interpretation as
we're trying to see that's like people
on YouTube complaining like the
algorithm should stop Shadow Banning me
right and everything will be fine right
and you know
like it's not it it's that's it's not
wrong to prioritize the individuals who
depend on these Services right when
people say oh well like I'm I'm worried
about losing Twitter because it is the
most effective way for cities to warn
the people who live in them about
hurricanes it's not wrong right I think
that is wrong
there are places where it happens right
there are places where if there's an
ongoing emergency there's a flood and
you want to know what streets are open
or whatever City management is on
Twitter posting updates yes right that's
true and that that is like a very common
thing so you know we we've put a lot of
energy into sort of prolonging these
Services what we could do is switch to
making sure that they fail gracefully
right so we can enshrine on the one hand
a right to exit so the only reason you
can't send messages to Twitter when
you're not on Twitter when you're on
Mastodon is because Twitter blocks
interoperability interoperability is
latent in computers we only know how to
build one computer it's the universal
touring complete Von Neumann machine it
runs every program we know how to write
so Twitter has to do extra effort to
stop you from sending messages to
Twitter from Amazon right so so we could
we could just say like look we had this
old idea called the the end to end
principle where anyone who wanted to
speak and anyone who wanted to hear them
would get their packets delivered we put
it in at the service at the network
level now let's put it into the service
level you know it's a very easy to
administer remedy we could say to
companies like Amazon if I search for a
product and you have that product that
should be at the top of the search
results they have a 31 billion dollar ad
Market that's not as it's just Payola
it's making people who sell the products
you're trying to find bid against people
who sell the products you're not trying
to find yeah which is why the first five
screens of Amazon results in an average
search are 50 ads the whole first screen
is ads and then of the remainder a
significant fraction are products that
Amazon has cloned from its eventually
and this this is such a striking example
of acidification oh yeah because Amazon
used to be the and I'm sorry that I cut
you off no no no no go please go back to
your original point I will finish this
parentheses but like Amazon was
originally the the ultimate customer
satisfaction company this was like I
bought things on Amazon so happily for
over a decade because like well it's
faster it's cheaper it always has the
thing that I want they take Returns come
do they take returns yeah exactly
they've like streamlined all of retail
into this beautiful degree and now I've
I've I have sworn off Amazon partially
because you know for moral reasons I
don't want to support the company I I
own a Kindle I occasionally will buy a
book but I don't I try to avoid buying
anything shipped there but also because
I literally don't trust what I buy on
Amazon anymore like if I go on and if
somebody from Amazon is listening send
this email to Jeff Bezos because
everybody feels this way and I don't
know if they're tracking the facts oh no
they are people people when they go on
Amazon you search for something you no
longer trust that you're going to get
the thing that you want so what they're
doing now is they're using that as a
pretext to extract higher rents from
those third-party sellers so what they
say is you've got to fulfill by Amazon
you've got to put it in our in our
system you've got to pay us fees for it
you got to pay pay fees for verification
validation whatever so more than 50
percent now of the revenues from Amazon
Marketplace go to Amazon and junk fees
and they have a most favored nation deal
which means that you can't buy direct
more cheaply from the vendor so the
vendor raises the price on Amazon and
everywhere else which is why the DC
attorney general is suing Amazon because
the prices at Target are higher because
Amazon is taking 50 of every sale and
junk fees wow so this is this is crazy
so anyway back to this point you know if
we had end to end and right of exit then
like if you're trying to run a mailing
list you mentioned email before email
these days it's run by three or four
giant companies right and um what part
of email is run by three uh um the major
number the largest number of accounts
right so like most businesses are using
Outlook as their back end even if it's
got like an at company name.com address
that's its outlook on the back end or
it's Gmail uh so these three or four
companies they block independently
hosted servers in the name of fighting
spam right but
there is no way for you as a Gmail user
to Mark something that has been put in
your spam folder as this sender is not
spam this person is someone who I want
to hear from there's there's no
um technical challenge to Google having
a rule that says if the user explicitly
says I want to hear what this person has
to say never put it in my spam folder
again there's no technical challenge
implementing that but if you uh use one
of the big mailing list providers like
MailChimp or whatever they have back
channels into Google and so this is a
this is an opportunity for Google to
further consolidate so we could
concentrate on making sure that willing
speakers and willing listeners could
hear each other yeah and that people who
wanted to leave a platform could leave
the platform that you could take your
Kindle books with you if you quit Kindle
or your audible books with you so
audible every book sold on Audible has
mandatory digital Rights Management that
means that it's locked to Amazon's
platform forever it's a felony to remove
digital Rights Management encryption uh
punishable by a five-year prison
sentence and a 500 000 fine I I gotta
say I'm a felon if that's the case I
mean not convicted well I mean more
formally it's a felony to provide you
with that tool so whoever is okay got it
all right but somebody else is a felon
because they gave me i as the rights
holder of an audible audiobook cannot
give you the tool to remove the DRM so
that if I quit Amazon you can follow me
somewhere else right only Amazon can it
is possible and this is a very weird
sentence to violate copyright law
without infringing anyone's copyright
and the statutory damages are higher
than for an actual Bonafide copyright
wow right so Amazon does all of this and
you mentioned their great returns uh
they have this platform ACX the audible
content exchange audible is 90 of the
audiobook Market in most genres audible
content exchange is what Independent
Producers the weakest lowest bargaining
power producers use they used to have
very bad terms until the Scandal I'm
about to tell you about if you
self-finance your own audiobook they
would make you make it exclusive on the
platform for seven years and they would
lock every copy you sold with DRM that
no one could ever remove legally and so
they you know this great returns policy
if you were an audible subscriber and
you got your One credit every month they
would in implore you to do a return they
would just like there'd be pop-up
notices there'd be emails hey that book
you bought a whole year ago that you
listened to three times which they know
because they can spy on everything you
do because that's their ecosystem if
you're unsatisfied with it for any
reason we're such good natured slobs why
don't you return it and we'll give you a
credit back and what they weren't saying
is that to make that subscription more
valuable and keep you locked in the way
that they were financing it is they
would claw the royalty back from the
author who produced the audiobook that
you returned wow they didn't tell the
authors either the author's got net
accounting so what they would see is you
sold five copies this week and what you
didn't know was it was 25 copies and
Amazon convinced 20 of your customers to
return their books even though they like
them and they thought that they were
just taking advantage of Uncle Jeff's
Relentless focus on customer service
yeah right not getting ripped off so one
of the people they ripped off an ACX
authors woman named Susan May who's a
retired forensic accountant who now
writes crime Thrillers and she went
through this when the Scandal broke
because they dumped three weeks or sorry
that's calling crust Susan May was the
author who discovered it and calling
cross was her colleague so um they
dumped three weeks worth of return data
in one go and uh all these authors who
had been getting ripped off this way
looked at the their their royalty
statements and they were like how did I
sell minus 11 copies last week that
doesn't seem like it should be possible
so cross goes and starts auditing this
because again there's never just one ant
and she's like oh you know what when you
get a return they then hold another
royalty back in reserve because now
you're the kind of author who gets
returns so it's two returns sometimes
three returns not only that but this
whole thing about how they're
calculating royalties is just a lie so
hundreds of millions of dollars in wage
theft from ACX authors wow right so this
was called the audible Gate scandal it's
still ongoing one of the amazing things
about it is that although these authors
were completely screwed they had all had
to click through a binding arbitration
waiver that prohibited them from suing
or joining a class action oh my God to
sell on the platform just the moral
outrage was enough to get Amazon to do
full accounting uh with like a full p l
and also to end this seven year
exclusivity deal but they still have the
DRM deal yeah and you know back to our
point about Google Amazon didn't start
audible audible was a competitor of
Amazon's right that Amazon bought
because it had unlimited access to the
capital markets and then it linked it to
its ecosystem of services so that it's
almost impossible to sell audiobooks
anywhere else which is why they now
control the whole sector there's there's
a couple like I just bought an audiobook
on libro.fm if there is there some yeah
so there's some independent ones okay uh
but and I love Libro I'm a massive Libra
Stan Libro sponsor this podcast if you
are watching Mark Pearson if you are out
there Adam is worthy I saw Mark
yesterday at the American booksellers
Association in Seattle he is a very
hoopy fruit uh so
so sorry just the 14 year old nerd
inside of me all right well I'm a
science fiction writer you know yeah so
um so Libro
if you've ever bought a thing from Libra
you know that they have this weird
workflow where you have to go on the web
to buy the book right you go on the I
just did this I I I was like I was
listening to a podcast and they were
talking about a new book and I was like
this book's not going to be available at
my library because it just came out I
have to read it I want to download it
right now right and I went to the Libro
app and I searched for the book and it
said we have this book but you can't buy
it through the app you have to go to the
website and buy it and then come back to
the app later and I literally had to put
a note in my to-do list because I was
like walking to the bus stop right to
like go home and open my laptop and buy
the book and then I was finally able to
die and the reason for that is all of
mobile is controlled by two companies oh
we're talking about a different choke
point it's a new choke point that's a
new choke point right all mobiles
controlled by two companies and they
extract a 30 fee for all transactions
within their platforms and so Libra's
net margin because I I self-publish my
own audiobooks because I won't go on
Audible so my Publishers are nice this
way they let me retain my rights I do um
you know kickstarters for them and then
I put them on all the platforms that
aren't audible uh their margin to me is
20 percent so if they're paying thirty
percent tall Apple they lose money on
every sale yeah now you may have noticed
that Apple has a competitor
to Libro as does Google right Apple
Apple Books Google Books Apple Books was
and I think still is a front end for
audible so that's there's joint venture
without with Amazon is it really I
didn't know that because I bought an
apple audiobook or two and those are
that's actually I'm buying from all the
audible exclusives are available on
Apple Books wow so okay so you know the
market is sewn up right you can't enter
that that's not competition at all yeah
so you know like this is a bit like so
Amazon at one point uh there was a
company that decided they were going to
try and move into one of the big
consumer package Goods categories that
Amazon had started to take control over
and it was they were called diapers.com
oh we told this story on Adam ruins
everything years ago but please tell us
again so they're selling diapers pretty
straightforward business the
subscription they'll send them to you I
remember my kid was in diapers it would
have been useful Amazon tries to buy
them they won't sell so Amazon lost a
hundred million dollars in a month
giving away diapers basically for free
wow and drove them out of business and
that might sound like a lot to just take
over like one category in consumer
package Goods but it was a message to
anyone who might capitalize arrival to
Amazon right like abandoned hope all ye
who enter here like we have an unlimited
budget to destroy your company if you
ever try to cooperate or compete with us
which is why Venture capitalists call
all the adjacent lines of business to
all the major platforms the Kill Zone
because you can't compete in those in
those zones right and so like there's
like a Jeff Bezos turret like alerts and
just yeah that's right they just they're
like buy them out boys like that
Simpsons line right you know so this is
the this is the um this is the shape of
this market and so again getting back to
the thesis of this book that like giving
creators more copyright as against this
Market structure problem is of no use
yeah and it doesn't matter whether the
market is being structured by
entertainment companies OR tech
companies because they're not especially
evil or especially virtuous you know it
is true that like the Napster era one of
its it's beneficial effects was that
there was suddenly a competitor to the
big three labels or the big seven or
eight labels back then uh and so they
started to offer better terms the the
royalties got higher everything got
better for musicians but eventually
there was a consolidation on the tech
side too so you have YouTube which is a
major music platform that gives a
terrible deal to musicians and then you
have its major competitor Spotify
as I mentioned before is significantly
owned by The Big Three labels Warner
Universal and Sony they wouldn't license
their catalog to Spotify unless Spotify
gave them Equity Stakes so now they're
in this conflict of interest right
because on the one hand if they earn a
dollar in royalties because they're
charging for streams that's a dollar
they have to share with the artist if
they earn a dollar as a dividend because
they're shareholders that's a dollar
they get to distribute as they see fit
yeah right every dollar they take as a
royalty is a dollar that is not
available for a dividend and it's also a
a a barrier to the cost structure of the
firm that is after all steaming towards
an IPO which will make those pre-ipo
shares they have blow up into billions
of dollars yeah right and so the um they
negotiate these Rock Bottom deals for
the streams now they also negotiate a a
monthly minimum payment a guarantee
which is unattributable royalties which
they get to distribute as they choose
they can give you know a performer a
giant teddy bear and make the whole
Arrangement seem really good they can
they can spend it for development which
turns out to be hiring a bunch of their
buddies they can give it to their
shareholders they can put in their
mattress whatever they want to do right
and they have most favorite Nation so if
you're in the 30 percent of labels or
Independent Artists who aren't owned by
Sony Universal and Warner the ceiling on
your earnings has been set by those
three companies but you don't get free
advertising you don't get minimum
monthlies and you don't have an equity
stake in the company wow and then we get
to this point where they're about to
have their IPO and if you're like a
neoclassical Economist who likes
building models who thinks of the whole
like economic world is like a perfectly
spherical cow of uniform density on a
frictionless plane you know this is the
moment where you go okay well the IPO is
coming up the deal is about to expire
they have to negotiate a new deal before
the IPO this modify has to negotiate a
new with you all their labels okay right
so this really have Equity Stakes three
of whom yeah the three businesses so you
think that if you're the big three this
is the moment at which you're like all
right we want a lot more per stream like
so much that basically you would have to
fail if or or you know you're at the
brink of failure because otherwise you
can't have your IPO like we have you
over a barrel but remember they're
stakeholders yeah right they're
shareholders and so they negotiate a
lower rate on the eve of the IPO which
is then forced on the 30 of artists who
are not signed to them so you have
um longer copyrights right these
copyrights last for 90 years that's
effectively forever there's no one who
listens to 91 year old recordings except
for a few weirdos with you know shellac
discs and and you know wax cylinders out
there so you have an effectively
Perpetual copyright you have 70 of the
catalog they didn't invest in that
catalog they just bought out other
companies because there was no merger
scrutiny because we put antitrust in a
coma for 40 years right and so they they
have the stuff that they bought they
didn't make it and they are able to use
that to structure the whole future of
the industry in such a way that it is
detrimental to artists and and a cruise
advantage to shareholders right and this
tells you that it's not just that giving
longer copyrights to artists that they
immediately surrender to intermediaries
is is not good at getting the money it's
actually bad at getting the money yeah
that you end up handing these durable
advantages to the intermediaries that
are stealing from them it really is as
you say if you oh we want to help
artists okay let's give the artists some
kind of benefit some kind of legal
protection Etc well if the market power
of the person that the artist is selling
to or the organization that is the the
company is so uh massive that they have
to sell it away uh then it's no
protection to begin with and you know so
there are rights that work and so we're
getting now maybe into the second half
of the book and the solutions yeah let's
take a quick break and then we'll get
into that we'll be right back with more
Cory doctor hey folks if you're trying
to get your body a new way to get all
the nutrients it needs well you might
want to consider kachava kachava says
that they're a plant-based super blend
made up of superfoods greens proteins
omegas vitamins minerals antioxidants
and probiotics in other words they say
they are all your daily nutrients in a
glass some folks choose to take it as a
found Foundation of a healthy breakfast
or lunch while others lean on it as a
delicious protein-packed snack to curb
cravings and reduce grazing you can just
add two scoops such excuse me you can
you can I'm in a hurry all right I I
took too much kachava before the ad read
and it's it's super charging me all
right if you're in a hurry just add two
scoops of kachava super blend to ice
water or your favorite milk or milk
alternative and get going or you could
blend it up with some fresh fruit a
handful of greens and a spoonful of
peanut butter they have five awesome
tasting flavors I enjoy chocolate and
matcha I drink cachava sometimes before
lunch you know keeps me full gets me
over that little uh that little hump
that you feel sometimes and you know
what it makes me feel quite nice and get
this kachava is offering 10 off for a
limited time just go to kachava.com
factually that's
k-a-c-h-a-v-a and get 10 off your first
order kachava.com factually okay we're
back with Cory doctorow uh for let me
just ask really quickly how how the how
the hell do you rattle all this stuff I
thought I could rattle off stats and
facts and figures and things that I
learned and connect them but how are you
able to thirty percent of the you know
I've been in the copyright Wars for 20
years yeah right and also I've been
touring this book since last September
of course so it just becomes it just
becomes rote right and and also you know
I'm an activist uh so my my mouth runs
ahead of my brain sometimes uh and I
co-wrote this with a brilliant lawyer
Rebecca Giblin who's at the University
of Melbourne who's who's done all kinds
of great empirical work on this she runs
a thing called the author's interest
project and I have often in my activist
career worked with lawyers because we
make a good team right like we're always
sort of checking each other uh and so
she would kick me under the table every
time I'd forget that the mandatory
termination right was originally 25
years and not 20 right she would hear my
mistake coming up and I like I'd see her
winding up for the kick and I'd be like
oh yeah right so we got good at it we
got good at like polishing each other's
rhetoric and making sure each other were
like bang on accurate and that that's a
great con combination Rebecca was an
incredible co-author she's the lead
author on this book and her work is is
important and it's an Incredible Book uh
but I want to ask about this about the
second word capitalism before we get
into the solution sure because it was
something that struck me as I was doing
my own research for the video is is how
much when you when you look at this you
say well maybe the some of the tenants
that I learned about capitalism in
school when I was in 10th Grade or
whatever some of them seem to actually
be true that you need competition sure
the competition like that's that's the
capitalist Maxim and I don't call myself
a capitalist um but I I look at this I'm
like well it sure seems true that
competition is necessary and yet when
you look at every single case study in
this book or any other book you see that
capitalism breeds a lack of competition
it really it seems to lead directly to
this Monopoly which almost makes me
sound like I'm I've not read marks
thoroughly but it sounds like the sort
of thing that Marx would say that
there's an inherent contradiction in the
soul of capitalism where it relies on on
a competition in order to be successful
because let's be clear when you have a
choke point like this it's bad for
capitalism it's bad for the economy it's
bad for other businesses yeah it's only
good for a couple of people which makes
the whole system work less well and yet
the system itself seems to lead to this
type of concentration because we see it
in almost every Market Under the Sun
well so Mark's coined the term
capitalism right okay so so he he was an
authority on it he he uh if you read The
Communist Manifesto second chapter of it
is just like all the amazing things that
capitalism can do and then he attends to
its problems uh just as a sidebar China
Mayville wrote an incredible book from
Haymarket that is uh called A specter or
haunting which is his modern take on the
The Communist Manifesto so that's
neither here nor there but it's a great
book if you want to know I I mean I read
the comments Manifesto sophomore year at
college right you know what I should
dive back read what China has to write
about it because he's really trying to
synthesize 300 years of commentary and
critique of of uh manifestos great so um
it's true that capitalists themselves
don't like capitalism very much right
and one of the things that the state has
always done is intervened as the kind of
referee to save capitalists from
themselves and so today we've kind of
abandoned that Doctrine yeah I think you
talked about Robert Bork in your video
is that right yeah so you know bork he
he had this idea not just that the way
that we did competition law was wrong
and like we should have different laws
he actually had this what amounts to a
conspiracy theory that we were reading
the laws wrong right that that uh the
Sherman Act from 1890 and The Clayton
Act and the FTC act that all these laws
write Patman that their legislative
intent was to preserve monopolies except
where they were harmful to Consumers
yeah this is very clearly not the case
like like this this is a bananas thing
to assert but it worked I mean he
convinced the entire legal profession
yeah that this is what the laws meant
this is how they should be interpreted
and the judges have done that ever since
and that's why when you know the justice
department is unable to block the ATT
Time Warner merger it's based on the
process reasoning yeah yeah and so 40 40
of the federal Judiciary at one point
had attended these manned seminars in
Florida I think you talked about those
these junkets where um you were just
schooled in this Theory so that's how we
got here and it's how we get you know
the cuddly billionaire
um uh Warren Buffett you know with his
rock hard persistent erection over
sustainable moats around the businesses
that he invests in you know Peter Thiel
out there saying um uh you you know
competition is for losers he said that
correctly yeah yeah I mean that's this
is the doctrine of the of the of the
self-described kind of Super Genius
capitalist is that competition just
makes me waste my time attending to what
lesser people and that is what the
robber barons of the early 20th late
19th century said as well they were
capitalism sorry competition is
inefficient and it's wasteful and like
look at how efficient it would be if I
just run all the railroads myself I can
schedule them so efficiently blah blah
yeah and you know so no matter whether
you're a skeptic of capitalism or
whether you're its biggest Stan you
should want competition like if I'm up I
am also a skeptic of of capitalism Adam
you and I and uh you know I think that
um one of the things that a lack of
competition does is it uh means that the
the all the people who hate workers
don't have to fight each other and they
can just fight workers right and so like
one of the things that competition does
is it opens space for workers to fight
back because it prevents the capital
class from unifying behind a single set
of firms they're always trying to seek
advantage over one another yeah and it
creates it sews division that allows uh
worker power to push back and so that's
the reason I want competition but you
know what if you're like sitting there
with your copy of uh Atlas Shrugged with
the pages all stuck together you should
still want competition you know like you
we're on the same side on this one right
um so
we won't dwell on why the pages are
stuck together uh just you drop them in
the bathtub while you were making
pancake Senators okay that's much more
wholesome than what I was thinking yeah
does everyone mix their pancake batter
in the back anyway
um so you know the the
um the thing about about uh copyrights
and about rights for creators and rights
for workers yeah is that they do
sometimes work and one of the things we
we go through the book on is some case
studies of times when it's worked and
oftentimes those are collective rights
that don't belong to one Creator but
belong to all creators so for example
once you've recorded any song
anyone else can record it every musician
has the collective right to record every
other musician's music and that's
because since time immemorial musicians
have performed each other's music yeah
and you know that's part of like a
current in music that um especially has
come back in the last 20 years of an
understanding that music is a collective
Endeavor right that you know brahms's
ninth was our brahms's first was
Beethoven's 10th right like he was
basically a Beethoven tribute act right
and and that you know Jazz solos where
you're blowing a horn and you drop in a
couple of bars of someone else's song
that's not like a copyright violation
it's just part of how music is made
right and so we've had this in that kind
of Creative Commons everything is a
remix stuff but we still have mostly
focused on giving creators individual
rights now we have this Collective right
to record any song it turns out to be
really good even for powerful
individuals so Taylor Swift you will
know uh her bad ex-boyfriend and his
private Equity weirdo friends uh owner
Masters and we're you know rubbing their
hands together and thinking about how
they could kind of keep her in Venture
for the rest of her career she switched
to Universal she was able to record new
versions of her song not because she
owned the rights but because she didn't
because everyone has the right to record
a Taylor Swift cover including Taylor
Swift wow right so this is a collective
right I didn't realize that that was
what that right was based on it was I
assumed it was her songwriting ride or
something like that no she has she had
well that's right so the compo the comp
the publishing rights are are owned
right but she has the right to record
anything and pay pay money to the
composer or whoever the composers uh
whoever holds the composer's copyrights
she doesn't hold the I don't know if she
holds the publishing rights or not but
it doesn't matter it doesn't matter she
can make new Masters yeah right Sid
Vicious didn't have to get Paul Anka's
permission to record my way right you
could record my way I can record my way
everyone can record my way because this
is a collectively hell right now with
samples and this is one of the stories
we tell in the book with samples
um originally people just assumed that
there was no copyright clearance
necessary that it was like doing a
couple of bars in your solo not not like
say licensing a song for sync rights to
put in your YouTube video saying and you
had albums like it takes a nation of
millions to hold us back by Public Enemy
Paul's Boutique by the Beastie Boys the
most successful albums of their day if
they'd had to clear those samples they
would have had to charge a hundred and
fifty dollars per copy to turn a profit
on yeah right so then we create a
proprietary right in sampling right and
that that proprietary rate originally
there's just a brief moment where a few
Heritage acts that had gotten a very bad
deal get some money from it but
immediately the labels say you're going
to have to license samples in order to
use them we are not going to license to
you unless you're assigned to one of the
big three labels and when you do sign to
the big three labels you have to sign
away your sampling rights so they
immediately get a Stranglehold on
sampling so you know tugoy the dove just
died from De La Soul yeah this
incredibly important hip-hop band yeah
none of their music is available for
streaming the first album is going up
for streaming in March he didn't live
long enough to hear it because they
could never clear their samples yeah
right now we could have done a whole
bunch of things with samples we could
have said it is not a copyrightable
subject matter it's not as a copy it's
not a use subject to licensing go ahead
and do it if we didn't like that if we
wanted to make sure that people got paid
we could have created Collective
licensing right we could have made that
the right of all musicians similar to
the cover right yeah and and took over
the Dove's music would have been
available and instead we did the same
thing we do with everything which is we
created an exclusive right we gave it to
the Creator and we pretended that the
Creator was an entrepreneur of the
portfolio right you are like even as
though we've abandoned the idea that
creators create on their own we say they
go to market on their own that they are
that they are like a 1099 independent
contractor small business person
bargaining with another business B2B you
and Sony Music doing the doing the deal
just like Uber drivers are supposed to
be doing individual deals as small
businesses with everyone else this is
the kind of rise and grind you know
everyone should be an LLC mindset and of
course when you have a tiny little
business and a great big giant business
and the tiny little business tries to a
bargain they lose and so De La Soul lost
right so there are lots of ways that we
can think about rights for creators that
don't fall into this trap of of rise and
grind LLC everyone's a corporation you
know Neil Stevenson dystopia and so I
assume this is one of your Solutions is
that if we were able to and shine into
law a couple more Collective license
yeah we have some other things too like
um you know if you have a royalty
bearing contract right because you ride
or you make games or you make podcasts
or music or whatever yeah you typically
have the right to audit your studio or
your label or your publisher because
it's really easy to cheat on royalty
statements and when you do we cite a
company here in La that has done tens of
thousands of audits over 30 years of
record contracts you will often find a
discrepancy and for reason that I cannot
possibly begin to explain in every
instance except one those discrepancies
favored the label and not the artist
that's a funny calculator that always
does the math wrong I think it's like in
One Direction yeah I think it's a really
vexing localized probability storm that
makes things very hard for the CPAs at
the labels right and so when you find
that discrepancy and we we talk to one
person off the books off the off the
Record rather who had a six-figure
discrepancy in his favor that he
discovered this way
um when when you discover these
discrepancies and you go I'd like my
money now that you stole from me they
say oh you artists are adorable but you
really can't do math we don't owe you
any money but because we don't want any
bad blood we'll give you a settlement a
share of what you think you wrote all
you have to do is sign this
non-disclosure agreement you can't tell
anyone else where we hid the money we
stole from them and your accountant has
to promise that they'll never audit us
again right this is like the accused
murderer being like hey forensics team
dig anywhere you'd like in my back
Garden just not that one corner I'm very
sentimental about it I mean this is
something that you know our Union The
Writers Guild does constantly with the
studios and the networks as auditing the
you know the residuals and and the and
like literally you know there was a bit
it was in the news there was a big uh
you know the uh the The Guild Got Back
40 million dollars or so that that the
that Netflix was underpaying
screenwriting residuals and they were
just like no it's it's uh one percent
not two percent and they had to go we
had to go get the money right but it's
it but the thing is that's a powerful
Union that had that represents ten
thousand we tell the story as a writer's
Guild and their 22-month strike as an
example of one of the most powerful I
belong to the animators Guild the agency
yeah we talked to David Goodman about
that and he's great but and we should
talk about that too but to put a button
on this this royalty stuff all of these
contracts are settled in four states
Washington California New York and
Tennessee because Nashville right that's
the nature Monopoly uh contract laws
state law state law is easier to amend
than federal law regulation if we amend
state contract codes to say that as a
matter of public policy non-disclosures
can be enforced where they pertain to
material misstatements or omissions in
uh royalty statements that were down to
the detriment of creative workers at the
stroke of a pen you put more money in
the pockets of more artists than 40
Years of copyright term extension
combined wow right if copyright
extension is the right to be angry at
your audience for reading your books the
wrong way this is the right to put
braces on your kids teeth a roof over
their head and and you know Groceries on
the table right this is like you know
back to Marx this is materialism right
this is about making material changes in
the distributional outcomes of the
artistic markets so that
um the pi the share of the pie that goes
to artists is bigger and you know Robert
Bork one of the pieces of his Doctrine
is that we shouldn't measure who gets
what share of the pie all we should care
about is that the pie gets bigger which
is a insane thing to think
okay but let's let's get back to Power
though because okay let's say I I love
your this is sort of a technical law
based intervention right and I love
interventions like that you're a little
tweak no one no one else really knows
about it you tweak it and you create a
legal mechanism by which a lot of
creators can show more money back so say
I um try to go Advance this in uh the
California state legislature which is an
incredibly dysfunctional and you know
corrupt in many ways as many state
houses are
um but uh I try to get it through I get
some of the creative unions together or
whatever I you know I get I get
musicians on my side
um and I start to advance it and then
hold on a second the legal departments
at Disney yeah sure they got very angry
they get very angry and they go call
their favorite legislators and they kick
my  ass right no they're not so
you've got it backwards so so
um this is more like what happens when
Ticketmaster screws Taylor Swift and
it's in the State of the Union Address
and people say something must be done
yeah right then you want to have the
shovel ready idea right there because
the reality is that we are uh they're
gonna Lurch from crisis to crisis
forever ever I mean do you remember
Disney must pay pay the writer the Alan
Dean Foster thing so our friends down
the road here at the Buena Vista studio
uh they had bought lucasfilm uh
lucasfilm had made a very important
movie called Star Wars and when they
were making Star Wars before they had
done all of the principal Photography
they asked a writer named Alan Dean
Foster to write a novelization and it
was so good that they changed the movie
to match it and that novelization has
sold lots and lots of copies only Dean
Foster has done lots of work for Lucas
and for Sony and fox and he's you know
he's now a sick old man his wife is sick
uh and Disney took the position that
when they bought Lucas they bought its
assets and not its liabilities and they
stopped paying him royalties they said
we bought the right to publish your book
but not the obligation to pay you for it
wow which is a bananas thing to say
crazy right and it became a huge Scandal
and they wouldn't talk to him without a
non-disclosure and he refused to talk to
them and so their position was oh we'll
talk to to Alan Dean Foster whenever he
wants yeah sure so long as he can't tell
anyone what you say right this is that
moment if we had had this proposal kind
of in The Ether then and you had the
Creator guilds and you had State
lawmakers you have Federal lawmakers you
had people you know the whole fan
Community up in arms about this guy just
getting robbed that would have been a
moment we could have said what we demand
if the say the state uh AG investigates
Disney and they enter into a settlement
with them which they will always do
because they never want to go to trial
they never want to litigate they want to
spend 15 years in court when they offer
them a settlement that settlement
shouldn't be a cash settlement it should
be a binding Covenant never to use a
non-disclosure in settlements related to
royalties right like that's the kind of
thing where you know you've got them
between a rock and a hard place what we
need are well-developed proposals for
the crises right like yeah
I I know this makes me sound paranoid
the Patriot Act is like 400 pages long
yeah and it was introduced like two
weeks after 9 11. I don't think anyone
wrote that in two weeks right I think
people had their wish list ready I think
there was a wish list I think someone
had someone had said Someday I'm charged
with the safety and well-being of my
fellow Americans someday millions of
them will be in enormous distress and
that will be the moment at which I can
cram through my evil agenda right I
think that's actually like a much
scarier conspiracy than anything in
loose change right that that like there
are people that they sort of you know um
yeah
authoritarians out there like just
writing these like Furious like crazy
overreaching laws against the day like
that's how they prepare for disaster
yeah they don't prepare for Disaster by
like where are we gonna stockpile the
water and the bandages they're like what
laws could we cram through when the
crisis arises right how much how much
can we enshrine Bitcoin as a legal
currency the next time something really
bad happens right so I think that like
this is this is um uh our version right
this is this is the progressive shock
doctrine that we prepare these ideas we
socialize at these ideas we make them
part of our discourse we explain how
they would make material changes in the
distribution of the creative economy and
in other economies and then when the
crisis arises when there is an outrage
when there's
um something that can't go on forever so
it eventually stops that's when we are
are prepared to all go in and because we
all understand it it's not a new idea at
that point it's a thing that we've been
talking about for a long time I know
that this is unsatisfying it doesn't
look like a novel plot right and as a
novelist like I'm keenly aware of how
you write I want to go break up
Ticketmaster yeah that's what I want to
do it took 69 years to break up ATT we
should totally break up Ticketmaster but
while we're trying we should have a
bunch of things that we can do today to
help the performers so that's why like I
see the FTC going hey we're gonna end
the use of non-compete agreements um in
in hiring and I'm like is that a big
deal but it sounds like you're saying
that kind of thing can is a big deal so
that you know that that big deal is
prompted by a bunch of crises in the
labor market great resignation all this
other stuff people are saying something
must be done well here's Lena Khan who
is like a genius and a Titan and an
amazing person that we should all be
thankful for yeah who says hey you know
I've been reading this thing called the
FTC act and it turns out section five
gives me broad authority to do
rulemaking to prohibit any uh deceptive
or anti-competitive or unfair conduct
right which like no one's used Section 5
or 40 years it's right there it's right
there it's like the fifth thing down
that's why it's section five you know
what this is an unfair practice right
making that the cashier at the Wendy's
stay at Wendy's because and not go to
Burger King and get 25 cents an hour
more because the majority of
non-competes are low-wage workers many
in the food service industry right
that's in denture yeah right and the
idea that they're going to steal the
trade secrets of the Wendy's cash
register when they go to Burger King
yeah and it and it turns Wendy into a
monopsony if you can now like okay you
if you can't go work for any competitor
then there's only one person you can
work for they can pay you less and then
it's you know it's Hotel California
right workers check in but they can't
check out right and so this is you know
this is the kind of thing that the FTC
has brought authority to do it's the
kind of thing that AGS have brought
authority to do and then it's also the
thing that doj AGS and and
um FTC have brought authority to do as
part of settlements because a lot of
these cases never go to trial or they
the trial never goes to judgment instead
The Firm says like we don't want to
spend 20 years in court how about we
just settle with you yeah right and and
you know I want to like defend like Long
Court uh trials like they're worth doing
too you know um Microsoft got off the
hook right after a seven year thing but
the deposition of Bill Gates which if
you've never seen it as a banger it was
like the first viral video went viral on
VHS cassette wow and it's just Bill
Gates in full Glory as this like mean
Petty
thin-skinned like like long before The
Cardigans right like this is this is
Bill Bill Gates in like a fully
operational battle station Bill Gates
and he comes off so badly it was so
personally humiliated by it yeah that
when Google came along they didn't do to
Google what they did to Netscape because
no one wanted to see Bill deposed again
and like in 2019 he told Kara Swisher
when she said why didn't you buy Android
uh she he said oh we were still we were
so distracted by the antitrust stuff
yeah the Android cell was eight years
after the antitrust stuff ended it
stopped Microsoft sort of monopolistic
Tendencies yeah even though they won the
case and were not broken up it it
chastened them the process is the
punishment right at T wriggled off the
hook after 12 years but they understood
that one thing the doj really didn't
like oh and it's hard to overstate like
just how crazy the ATT or that the IBM
case was uh did I say ATT before and
then IBM so IBM got off the hook after
12 years they called it antitrusts
Vietnam because the IBM outspent the
entire department of justice antitrust
division on outside Council every year
for 12 consecutive years and then
eventually got off the hook but the one
thing they knew was that the doj really
didn't like tying software to hardware
and they didn't like commanding your
whole hardware supply chain so when they
built a PC they built it out of
commodity components they didn't go
after Tom Jennings who lives around here
who's the guy who reverse engineered the
ROM and made uh the the Clone ROM for
Phoenix that Phoenix then sold to
Gateway and Dell and Compact and they
didn't make their own operating system
they hire Bill Gates and Paul Allen to
take someone else's operating system put
their name on it sell it to them and it
created a decentralized ecosystem of the
IBM compatible that's right and so
that's how we got all this kind of
innovation and all this consumer benefit
you know and so like it's okay to do
long antitrust but we have to have
something in between so so is there a
way to because like let's go back to
talking about the internet you know
because I remember when Twitter first
got started you know around 2007 2008 it
felt like an open time on the internet
everyone's talking about apis and
there's going to be different software
that plugs into different oh you can
make a bot and you can make like a
remember when like map mashups were like
a big thing was like I got Google Maps
I'm going to plug in data I got from
somewhere else and there was like a
whole thing on the internet about this
and uh that was like the culture it was
the culture of the internet Twitter was
building their site for interoperability
and so were most of the other ones you
know in in large ways you could see uh
and you know flat fast forward to you
know barely a decade later and they're
all doing the opposite and in fact
they're trying to create choke points
like you describe here Twitter's only
you know less successful than the others
because they failed to do it in many
ways yeah so so how uh
I can ask about how do we change the
culture how do we enforce these things
more except that we did enforce
antitrust with great success um against
Microsoft we did have a culture of
openness and technology and it all
collapsed uh because of the overwhelming
power of monopolists who wanted to grow
bigger and and the fact that they want
to create choke points sure how do we
stop this from happening again even
after we unwind this latest batch so
there's a story about gen xers like you
and me who got on the internet early
don't call me uh you're a millennial I
don't believe in these things okay yes
technically I'm a millennial okay Elder
Millennials and younger gen xers who got
on the internet early uh there's a story
about us which is that we saw the power
of the internet to connect everyone and
we completely failed to appreciate the
power of the internet to harm people and
that we just sort of blindly pushed on
with this kind of universal connection
mandate and I think that that's not true
like nobody starts the Electronic
Frontier Foundation because they think
everything is going to be fine and they
just want a front row seat like people
are very alive to the potential harms of
surveillance and control and so on but I
think what we all missed collectively
was that antitrust had been shot in the
guts and it was bleeding out you know
because like for me I was born in 1971
and so we got our first Apple II Plus in
1979 uh it was part of like a foment
that was possible because of the what
had been done to IBM during that that
that 12-year period they were in year
eight of their antitrust enforcement
then a couple of years later we got a
modem and there were bbs's everywhere
because at T had just been broken up and
they couldn't block modems anymore and
then Along Came the PC and suddenly
there were PC clones everywhere and
computers were cheaper than they'd ever
been they had all kinds of crazy amazing
new features and then like Microsoft
became super dominant but they got
smacked down and we got we got Google
and I think we can be forgiven for for
failing to understand that these were
like vestigial actions right that this
was like this were like the last people
at the doj who cared about this stuff
using the last of their political
accounts it's hard to know where you are
in his history like there's so many
there's so many stories I've done where
it's like we thought it always was this
way but we were living in a blip yeah or
we thought that this thing in the past
was how it was always going to be but
that was the bliff and this is the
default reality like like democracy
maybe right yeah but a lot of us are
worried about so you know I think that
you you know the the causal links
between that led to this monopolization
they're not hard to identify right like
we used to put down rat poison we didn't
have rats we stopped putting down rat
poison and a bunch of apologists are
like you know the great forces of
History bore down upon this moment to
create a plague of rats it had nothing
to do with us no longer putting out rap
poison right and so that you know like
what do we do well you know we we passed
the digital name Copyright Act in 1998
made it a crime to reverse engineer
program uh tools to make interoperable
ones yeah right do you remember like I
was uh which is how the which is what
the the guy did to IBM PCS that's what
IBM became illegal I was a CIO in 2000
uh like working for little smes little
small companies like wiring up their
offices for networks and getting their
PCS together and their Macs and stuff
and we had this problem that like most
of the network would be PCS there'd be a
couple of Macs it'd be like a designer
maybe the CEO had a power book and the
tool that they used to connect to each
other was Microsoft Office and there was
Microsoft Office for the Mac but it was
like the most cursed piece of software
that Microsoft ever made you just wave
the install floppy around a computer and
all the files on it would be immediately
corrupted and you know we we like the
way we dealt with that is like first we
gave the designer a PC to sit next to
their Mac that they would use to talk to
all of their colleagues and then that
became so unwieldy that we put a big
graphics card in the PC threw away the
mac and got you know Adobe and and Quark
for them for the PC Steve Jobs saw that
that was happening he understood he
didn't ask Bill Gates nicely to make a
better version of office he got some of
his technical staff to reverse engineer
the office file formats and they made
the iWork Suite Pages numbers in keynote
which read and write all of those file
formats perfectly yeah now if you did
that to iOS 10 today and made your own
run time for iOS that could run all of
the iOS apps and play back all the media
that you bought from Apple's verticals
yeah they would reduce you to
Radioactive Rubble they say you reverse
engineering which is a dmca violation
you violated terms of service which is a
cfaa violation it was tortious
interference with contract you violated
their Trade Secrets maybe you hired one
of their Engineers they've also created
incredible technical barriers to doing
anything like that I mean you're you
know everything on on Apple devices is
so incredibly locked down to like retina
scans that like it's all encrypted but
even but even if you could bypass it
because yeah I think they want you to
think that this is impossible to bypass
and there's definitely some real
technical challenges but I think the
major challenge the thing that that
keeps them from doing it is the legal
challenge yeah you know uh and the same
is true for plugging in an overlay to
Facebook that just shows you the stuff
from your friends there was an Instagram
thing like this the Og app that um it
threw up like a webkit browser which is
the inbuilt browser on iOS every browser
on iOS is Safari with a different skin
because they won't let you put a
different browser engine on so it pops
up the webkit browser tries to log in
Instagram Instagram of course queries
you for your login and password you put
type that in it barfs up a session key
they steal the session key put it in the
app and then they go to Instagram they
get all the waiting messages for you
throw away the ads throw away from
everything from everyone you don't
follow and put the rest in Reverse
chronological order wow Apple kick them
out of the App Store in less than 12
hours they said that section 522 of
their of their developer agreement
prohibits violating any other firms
terms of service wow right uh Google
kicked them out too so they're just gone
right they basically don't exist I don't
know what they're doing now they're I'm
sure they're trying to Pivot but but you
know it's as a technical matter we can
do all kinds of things to these
platforms they want us to think that
they can win the Guerrilla War the the
reality is that when it comes to
interoperability these companies really
don't want to fight Guerrilla Wars
because there's an attacker's advantage
right for them to stop you from making
an interoperable product they have to
make no mistakes for you to make an
interoperable product you have to find
one error and slide in and so what they
would much rather do you know if you
think about what they did to Og app or
what Facebook did to another thing
called Power Ventures or what Apple did
to Cydia or the other third-party app
stores or the runtimes like you're Tim
Cook and you walk out of your office
there in Cupertino and on the left
there's a building full of Engineers and
on the right there's a building full of
lawyers and you don't go into the
building full of Engineers and say stop
these guys you go into the building for
the lawyers and you say make an example
out of them yeah because if your
engineers are engaged in guerrilla
warfare it presents this kind of
unquantifiable risk you never know when
there's like a lurking defect that one
of your Rivals is going to exploit to
open up your platform your your
technical staff have better things to do
and if it turns out that like something
works that you didn't plan for like
something works that wasn't like on on
the road map and your quarterly earnings
don't meet Street expectations well we
saw what happened to Facebook first
quarter last year 280 billion dollars
left off their share price in one day
and who holds most of those stocks like
whose portfolios are most heavily
weighted towards Facebook Facebook
Executives and program manager who make
the decision to block interoperability
yeah so if you want to hit them where it
hurts you give them the choice between
playing nice and guerrilla warfare or
actually I I've got another book that
Verso is coming out with in September
called the internet con how to season
the most productive guy I've ever met I
write when I'm anxious I have seven
books in production
so yeah that's the secret that's the
secret yeah just Channel don't go to
therapy just start yeah that's right
that's yeah exactly so yeah so this is
this is you know a way to make like a
structure a remedy we've got a chapter
on this too radical interoperability how
to structure a remedy so that the firms
want to make interoperable interfaces
because the alternative is that they
have to fight Guerrilla war with New
Market entrants who've got nothing to
lose in everything to gain and so that's
a that's a it's a powerful idea and what
it does is it unleashes the people of
Goodwill right the people who want to
make things better for their users uh
and and it pits them against the people
who just want to do maximum extraction
yeah and it does so in a way that is
regulatable because you can say rather
than right now like whenever Facebook
blocks an interoperator so there's a
thing out of NYU engineering school
called ad Observer so they in their
settlement after the 2016 elections they
said we're not going to allow paid
disinformation anymore paid political
disinformation and so you're not allowed
to buy a political ad if it's if it's
got disinformation and I think they just
relax that policy but they were this was
part of their settlement and so they had
their own ad Trove where you could go
and inspect the ads and it was really
incomplete and so at Observer the NYU
engineering school made a browser
plug-in that you could voluntarily
install that would take every ad that
you were shown and upload it to a
repository called the ad Observatory and
Facebook blocked it and threatened to
sue them because they said it could
potentially violate user privacy so it's
very funny to have Facebook electing
themselves uh you know the the Lord high
executioners for user privacy but you
know the question is like if Facebook
shouldn't be the ones who make the
determination about when someone who's
doing scraping or something else
violates user policy or user privacy who
should it be it should be a federal
Privacy Law and that Federal Privacy Law
could bind Facebook and Inter operators
and so rather than just saying like
Facebook you can you you've got it's
your call or even Apple you know Apple
talks a big game about privacy they gave
you that one click so you could block
Facebook tracking 96 of users clicked
that one trick yeah so much for like
Facebook and like people don't mind ads
they like targeted ads whatever you know
96 presumably the other four percent
were confused or worked for Facebook
right but Apple secretly was gathering
all the same data as Facebook even if
you opted out and using it for their own
ad targeting right so you can't leave
these companies in charge yeah right
there it's fine for them to set the the
floor under under which privacy abuses
can happen but they can't set the
ceiling and so you know there's there's
a means by which we could open up these
platforms for new kinds of creators
creators who could leave the platform
keep reaching Their audience using
interoperability have a single publish
once reach everywhere there's a thing
from the Indie web movement called post
own site share everywhere Posse where
it's what I do with my pluralistic
newsletter where you've got your own
permanent link adamconover.com yeah but
everything you post just automatically
sort of flows out to all the different
platforms you could do that with
third-party tools scraping autopilot all
this other stuff and then if it turned
out that your tool was like doing
something Shady like Gathering uh
invasive information about everyone who
watched a video then the Federal Trade
Commission could come after you the
Attorney General because we could have a
law a Privacy Law rather than saying to
Facebook
if you if you prohibit something in your
terms of service then it's prohibited
otherwise it's fine and if you carve out
something for yourself Apple then it's
fine too
do you feel like any optimism that we're
going to move towards this I mean
because like again we're seeing you know
the change that the FTC at the doj we'll
see how durable those are right you know
the next time we have an election
um but you know we are sort of both
parties ripped into Ticketmaster because
they've made themselves no friends
anywhere uh you know are we is the
culture politically changing enough that
we can actually put some of this in
place there are some very good signs
it's not just the US so Canada's got one
of the worst uh competition laws in the
world and they've just opened hearings
into revising it because it's so bad uh
the uh UK competition and markets
Authority has this huge digital markets
unit 70 full-time Engineers the Chinese
cyberspace regulation is full of
competition stuff one of the things you
hear from Facebook apologists like Nick
Clegg used to be the Deputy Prime
Minister of the UK sold us all out and
then went to work for Facebook of four
million a year to sell Facebook to other
governments he says if we don't keep
Europe Facebook intact European
cyberspace will be owned by the Chinese
because they have these national
champions China doesn't think that its
tech companies are working for China
right uh you know and no more than
Facebook is working for America Facebook
is working for Facebook
um the European Union has got the new
digital markets Act and the Digital
Services act these very far-reaching
Tech regulations that include
interoperability mandates so there's a
current all over the world and you use
the word optimism I hate the word
optimism because it's just it's just
fatalism optimism is the idea that
things get better and fatal and
pessimism is the idea that things get
worse but both of them presume that
nothing we do matters right and instead
I brief for Hope which is the idea that
even if you don't know how to get from A
to Z because life's on a novel when I
write a novel I know how to get from A
to Z in real life I don't know how to
get from A to Z all I need to do is
materially improve my circumstances in
some way and after I do that I might be
able to see some other course of action
that will allow me to mature really
improve my circumstances even further
and the fact that the terrain can't be
mapped because it's too complicated
doesn't mean that there's no root
through it it just means that we are
better served by following a heuristic
that goes towards the world we want then
by assuring ourselves beforehand that
we're taking the shortest path I don't
care which path we take I don't care if
we have to double back sometimes I just
want us always to be moving towards that
goal of a more pluralistic more Humane
world that's sustainable where artists
get their fair share where audiences and
artists understand that they're class
allies where firms are are tamed because
you know what the people who go to work
for big entertainment companies they
don't hate creators right and they're in
the same bind as us if you work in
publishing there's five companies that
can give you a job you don't think that
suppresses wages and lowers working
conditions if you work in music there's
three labels that can give you a job
yeah right if you work in mobile
platforms there's two companies that can
give you a job if you want to serve
ebooks there's one company of any size
that can give you a job that acts on
them too we are our class allies with
those workers not with their bosses but
with those workers and so I want that
world I want that world where like those
companies are cut down to size do what
they should do there's nothing wrong
with intermediaries you shouldn't have
to be your own video server right it's
fine when I was a kid growing up in
Toronto we had this author crad colodny
who was this like character he would
publish his own books buying them
himself stand on a street corner with a
sign around his neck that said very
famous Canadian author buy my books he
also had a son that just said Margaret
Atwood which was very funny I love crad
he was great he wrote weird Arts
Outsider fiction it was awesome there
are lots of people with things to say
that I want to read do not want to buy
in their own books yeah they're not
qualified they're not going to stand on
a frozen Toronto Street Corner after the
bars get out he used to secretly record
his conversations with drunks and then
sell the cassette tapes uh like you know
there are lots of people that's not Jam
it's
we want there to be see lots and lots of
intermediaries who are help meets and
who don't just get get too big for their
britches and let them and think that the
point of a publisher is the publisher
and not the writers and the books or the
point of a bookstore is the is the is
Jeff Bezos and not the books that they
sell but I love what you say about just
taking the steps that move us towards
that world on a daily basis that's the
way I I should stop asking this optimism
question because I I believe you don't
need to have optimism to continue moving
forward I'm low all the time right like
don't get me wrong right like it's it's
crazy out there and you know if you
spend a lot of time with the news uh
it's hard not to feel scared and sad and
whatever and what I channel that into is
is not fatalism but hope right like what
can I do that will make it a little bit
better today so that maybe tomorrow I'll
see something else I don't know if we
have I know we're short on times can I
tell you one anecdote about my friend uh
Ada Palmer is this incredible person
she's a great science fiction writer her
she's a librettist and a singer she
wrote an opera about the Icelandic
Mythos she's just she's just wild she's
also a tenured professor of Renaissance
history at the University of Chicago
where she studies Renaissance Florence
and the inquisitions and specifically
heterodox information banned information
the pornography witchcraft heresy
whatever I like this person already
she's amazing and every year she does a
four week long LARP on campus where her
undergraduates reenact the election of
the medici's Pope and she gives each of
them the like the name and character and
kind of background of a real Cardinal or
great family that's in the running they
spend four weeks horse trading
backstabbing and then they go into this
like fake Gothic Cathedral on campus at
uu Chicago and she's got an alert out
for a Google alert for uh uh theater
companies selling costumes and she
dresses them all up in Renaissance drag
and then they elect the pope and every
year of the final four in the running
two of them are the same people because
there is the forces of History bearing
down on that moment there are important
families that are always going to have a
chance to get in the lead and then
there's two other people who have never
been the same because there's always
room for human agency yeah right there's
we are not foreordained by history there
is there we can maneuver and you know to
the extent that our Maneuvers are
constrained by this historically
contingent moment yeah it's because of
Maneuvers that people before us made
it's never because gravity has moved us
into this position it's because people
like you and me did it I I helped write
something called the access to knowledge
treaty that became the Marrakesh treaty
on the rights of people with
disabilities under copyright and when we
were writing it um it was run by this
guy called James love who's like an old
naderite and we were in Geneva and we
were in the basement of medicine
Frontier on us early on a Sunday morning
before a plenary session of the world
intellectual property organization we're
all there for that meeting all these
different ngos and someone said to him
like Jamie what are we doing here how
are we ever going to make a difference
in the world when there's with so much
power raid against us yeah he said You
know here we are in Geneva right just
like a couple of kilometers from the
palleta Nations and a few years ago
people know better than us men in a room
within spitting distance of here and
wrote the WTO treaties right they
weren't smarter than us they weren't
better than us yeah and if they could do
it we could do it  yeah and we never
got the full access to knowledge agenda
but we got the Americas treaty and it's
huge and it's got multiple signatories
all over the world and it is making big
material differences in the way that
people with disabilities access
copyrighted Works incredible if we did
that we can do it again Amen to that
Corey thank you so much for coming here
the book is called uh choke point
capitalism I for some reason I almost
forgot what it was I was wait we talk
about it all day the book is called
choke point capitalism where else can
people uh find your work so I write a
daily newsletter at pluralistic.net it's
mirrored on uh Twitter Mastodon Tumblr
medium there's an RSS feed you can get
it as a surveillance free text-based
newsletter uh I my books are available
everywhere uh anywhere you buy books
Corey doctorow I I write science fiction
novels books for young people a picture
book for really little kids I've got a
Middle grades graphic novel about to
come out I also write nonfiction so
that's everywhere there are bookstores
and then I I work for the Electronic
Frontier Foundation eff.org and they're
the kind of OG civil digital Liberties
organization that has been caring about
your human rights online since 1992.
they're incredible well if you want to
pick up one of Corey's books you can
head to factorypod.com books Corey thank
you so much for being here it's been
incredible I've really enjoyed it well
thank you once again to Corey doctorow
for coming on the show I know you love
that interview if you want to pick up a
copy of his book you can get it at
factuallypod.com books and when you do
you'll be supporting not just this show
but your local bookstore as well I want
to thank our producer Sam Rodman our
engineer Kyle McGraw and everybody who
supports this show at the 15 a month
level on patreon I'm gonna read a couple
names we got yet another mic we've got
Pat we've got Hayden Matthews and we've
got snickerdoodle
you got to put down a pronounceable name
if you want to join them head to
patreon.com Adam Conover and put a name
that you think would be fun for me to
try to read on the show uh and when you
do you'll be supporting this show and
I'll thank you for it once again if you
want to find my tour dates head to Adam
conover.net please come see me live I'd
love to see you and give you a hug at
the meet and greet after the show and
until next week I'll see you next time
on factually thank you so much for
listening
a podcast Network
