hey everyone so I frequently get
requests as to what to debunk next and a
lot of you linked me to an interview
with a guy named Chris Langan I'd never
heard of him maybe you have maybe you
haven't but I gave it a peek and felt
like I had a few things to say so let's
get started before watching the video I
looked around the internet and found
that Chris is consistently referred to
as the smartest man in America or
sometimes even the world due to an
alleged IQ of 195 as stated in this
article in Esquire then I found some
other interview here's a good
introduction as to what this guy is all
about if we can base insight to God on
binary logic we got it
made we don't need Faith anymore it's
extraneous
irrelevant I am closer to absolute truth
than any man has been before
me do I think that makes me better than
everybody else no I still work in a bar
that's right everyone strap in for some
forced intellectualization of blind
faith that constitutes nothing more than
Pander to the working class this is for
people who think Goodwill Hunting was a
documentary fantasized about themselves
as the struggling genius who is
overlooked by the The Establishment in
their Ivory Tower and are easily lulled
even deeper into that Fantasy by the
emotional musical score let's check out
another snippet or two my IQ would be
somewhere between 190 and
210 210 seems very very very
high does seem that way doesn't
it Albert Einstein was estimated at
between 180 and
190 Charles Darwin was way down there in
the toilet at
135 are you a
genius well you're kind of putting me on
the spot here aren't you yeah I mean
yeah you're you're for you're forcing me
to either say no in which case you know
it's all hype or you're forcing me to
say yes I I'll say probably yes I am a
genius by most of the criteria the
definitive criteria of Genius I think
you'd have to consider me a genius yeah
apart from demanding that we take his
word for it about his IQ notice the
subtle as a bag of hammer jab at Darwin
which will make sense later the main
takeaway is that Chris insists he's a
genius because trust me bro is there
anything we can do to independently
verify that he's really so smart in that
Esquire article he is compared by IQ to
figures like Da Vinci and dekart I don't
know what those guys sounded like when
they went on podcasts but they did a lot
of stuff that we can point to Da Vinci
obviously painted some incredible works
of art but he also designed many
churches and other buildings invented
many things like Mechanical Devices
hydraulic machines and more he even came
up with designs for things that would be
invented later like parachutes bicycles
helicopters and airplanes he also
Advanced the fields of anatomy zoology
botany geology Optics and many others
most of which admittedly were in their
infancy making it easier to contribute
but still the dude was a genius
how about dayart he was a philosopher so
he said a bunch of smart stuff like I
think therefore I am but he was also a
scientist and mathematician he developed
analytic geometry and the cartisian
coordinate system which we still use
today along with the notation he created
an he provided the basis for the
calculus that Newton and livits would
later develop he was a genius too what
has the illustrious Chris Langan done
most people would say absolutely nothing
he just talks but Chris of of course
would claim that he has done something
remarkable he has a theory of everything
and it's called ctmu the cognitive
theoretic model of the universe wow that
sounds neat what's it all about
cognitive theoretic model of the
universe the
ctmu it shows that we're all a part of
the same Universal
self all men are related in ways they
can't necessarily discern on this plane
of reality we're all the same
we all share a basic fundamental
identity with each
other which means that we should all be
trying to help each other and cooperate
with each other to make this a better
place to
live wow what an amazing revolutionary
theory he has absolutely broken all
current paradigms of science with this
breakthrough Insight which can be
summarized as let's all work together
and get along how did he do it so
essentially Chris has done absolutely
nothing of even remote significance in
any area of human inquiry but he's a
Super Genius anyway because he says so
got it with that context taken care of
let's get to the video that everyone
linked me to it's titled Chris Langan
the interview they didn't want you to
see which has already gotten over 5
million views in just a few weeks now
who could they be well the person
conducting the interview is Michael
nolles from the daily wire which is a
concern ative propaganda Mill in case
you didn't know that means the daily
wire filmed this interview and didn't
release it rather curious I gave it a
quick Google to see as to why that would
be the case all I could find was a
Reddit page with no answers and a blog
post from Chris himself where he sounds
perplexed but then arrives at some
conspiratorial conclusions at any rate
he somehow got the rights to the
interview and published it on his own
channel and that's what we'll be
checking out but very quickly before
doing that we can already say a lot just
from reading the description it says
that Chris is joining the show to
discuss his Theory of Everything God
psychedelic drugs and Aliens his Theory
of Everything Is him musing on random
topics like a college freshman who got
high at a party for the first time this
demonstrates that the smartest man in
the world does not know what a Theory of
Everything Is He also does not know what
a theory is let's define these two terms
right now so that it will be very clear
to you during the video that he is no
idea what he's talking about first up a
theory a theory is a scientific
construct that correlates large amounts
of data and explains them simply and
coherently theories must be testable
they must be falsifiable and are
typically based on quantitative data if
it doesn't make predictions that can be
tested it's not a theory so contrary to
popular belief baseless speculation and
mental masturbation do not qualify as
theories then a Theory of Everything
also has a very specific meaning it does
does not mean whoa think about it bro
this totally explains everything in the
universe bro it is a term that stems
from theoretical physics and the attempt
to find a Quantum field theory that
applies to all the fundamental forces in
the earliest epochs of the universe it
is understood that all the forces were
unified then through symmetry breaking
events they rapidly split up and became
the four fundamental forces we know
today those being Gravity the strong and
weak nuclear forces and electromagnetism
electromagnetism and the weak nuclear
nuclear force were successfully unified
in the electro weak Theory which
predicted particles that were
subsequently confirmed in high energy
particle accelerator experiments such
efforts have also been quite successful
in combining the electro weak with the
strong nuclear force to yield a grand
unified theory this is the current
Forefront of the standard model of
particle physics and many of its
predictions have been Vindicated though
there is still more work to be done the
last step after that would be to unify
such a model with the last remaining
Force gravity which is currently
described by Einstein's general
relativity a Quantum field theory that
unifies all four forces should it be
possible would be a theory of everything
as it would be a single Theory and by
Theory we are talking about a rigorous
mathematical model that describes all
four fundamental forces that's what
theory of everything means and that's
the only thing it means Chris is
therefore even worse off than the
charlatan Eric Weinstein who at least
typed up a bunch of advanced math to
pretend he has a theory of everything
Chris doesn't know how to do that and
probably can't do much math Beyond
algebra which is why when describing his
non- theory he just spews word salad
instead of referencing math okay let's
get into this ridiculous interview
welcome to my extremely ethereal and
trippy new set I feel as though I am
floating in a cloud here in this
allwhite venue and perhaps that is
fitting all white and daily wire that
definitely is quite fitting Chris has
one of if if not the highest IQ ever
recorded somewhere between 190 195 and
210 you'd think that if every single
interview with this guy is going to
center around this singular statistic
that we'd have seen some physical
evidence of this test result at some
point no just me okay continue and Chris
is not here by way of some fancy
distinguished professorship at such and
such brand name University nor did Chris
just get off of his private yacht out of
the south of France and come here to
leave his billion dollar company Chris
came here from a farm in Missouri after
a career as a bouncer at bars around New
York that's right he's not one of those
educated jerks or one of those Rich
jerks he's uneducated and poor just like
you that means you can trust him and
blindly believe everything he says so
let's meet him why is the smartest man
in the world why is he not just buying
and selling all of us all the time why
is why is he living on a farm in the
middle of
Missouri well that's a good question and
it's that uh I was never actually
interested in money when I was a when I
was a kid we my brothers and I my family
we were not exactly the richest folks in
town we seldom had enough money to buy
you know food or or clothes and uh so I
sort of immersed myself in in books in
reading and decided that what I wanted
to do was pursue knowledge
now as far as the making money is
concerned one thing that I found out is
that there are certain
ingredients uh certain certain
advantages that you need in order to
become rich of course it helps to be
born with money that's the also that's
the easiest way and it helps to have a
lot of connections yeah okay the right
kind of connections and it helps not to
alienate the people who have all the
money because then they'll exclude you
and cancel you you know that's what they
do that's what cancel culture is
basically people being frozen out of the
economy okay and I found myself getting
frozen out of the economy that way from
an early age I mean I was you know I
tried to go to college but uh ran into a
couple of problems Personnel problems on
the faculties of the colleges in
question and that stopped me you know
that basically when you get you know
when you you you can't get a college
education you are cancelled economically
we can give them the born poor part
that's an obstacle no doubt but Chris
wants us to believe that he now senior
citizen despite being the smartest
person in the world hasn't figured out
how to make a decent salary his entire
life because the mean University people
and the mean money people excluded and
canceled him the whole way that's a
pretty big pill to swallow has he never
heard of financial aid every single
University in the country just couldn't
handle his unparalleled Brilliance even
Will Hunting the janitor once he showed
them he can do math they set him up with
a nice cozy job and treated him like an
equal didn't Chris ever find any math
problems on some Blackboard that he
could solve and get something going that
way also this statement that not getting
a college education cancels you
economically is ridiculous there are
many billionaires without college
degrees Zuckerberg Bill Gates hell
Richard Branson didn't even finish High
School aren't you smarter than all those
guys Chris so what's your problem you're
obviously you you've got a high IQ than
than anybody in the room you're
obviously extremely smart you're
extremely self-educated so you get into
college it should be a total Breeze for
you well it was a total Breeze for me
too much of a breeze for me so much of a
breeze in fact that it's swept you right
out of those Halls and you've never done
anything since awesome you know you ask
the wrong kinds of questions of people
who are full of themselves and think
they have all the answers you know like
you know in a Calculus class you know
say well you know why don't you explain
exactly how what an infinitesimal
interval is and how you can Traverse
from one end to the other and you know
they'll look at you as though you've got
two heads I asked that all the time I I
ask my waiters I yeah I guarantee you
that any calculus teacher can easily
answer that question and they don't fail
you out of college for asking questions
you just can't pass a Calculus exam and
we probably never enrolled in any
calculus course in the first place even
though it's intermediate math that is
commonly taught in high school why you
taking this particular approach to it
and he looks at me and he you know
Asperger's victim right and you know
looks at me looks T his thing he ISS
well you know some people just don't
have the mental Firepower to be
mathematicians well what was I supposed
to do hit the guy I wanted to hit him
right you were supposed to take the
tests and pass the class which should
have been easy for you if you already
understood calculus better than him you
could have also hit him but that
wouldn't have helped much despite this
long story which I only gave you the end
of and which is undoubtedly fabricated
real students sometimes have real
teachers which aren't that great they
still study and pass the class you could
have too so you leave College presumably
you're much more intelligent than anyone
that you're going to meet on the faculty
and the students presumably or
fictionally so you leave College what is
it
about being a a bar bouncer what what is
it about that that physical activity cuz
presumably even without a college degree
you could have done some middling paper
pushing job and it probably wouldn't
have been very lucrative or fulfilling
for you uh but presumably you could have
done something like that instead of a a
tough physical potentially dangerous job
like you're being a
bouncer could have but there are certain
there are certain problems I you know I
can't for example when I was in New York
I got a job in a grommet Factory okay it
was Stimson grommets that you know that
you had gromin aircraft there you know
they got military defense contracts I
think they were working on f-16s at one
point and then there's a you know there
was Simpson grommets which produced
these aircraft rivets for these
airplanes and I had this machine and man
the the sound the noise from this
machine wham wham wham no hearing
protection no nothing was issued to
anybody yeah and I started you know like
losing my hearing and and uh and so so
forth and I figured well I can't stand
this anymore I got to get out of here so
I was about to leave but I had a
girlfriend and she said no I want you to
stay so I figured okay let me see if I
can get another kind of job so I went
and took the civil service exam and was
offered a job by the IRS and that of
course was a moral dilemma I had exactly
exactly how awful do I want to be as a
person you know do you notice how his
stories never make any sense Mikey asked
why he became a bouncer instead of
something more Luc that he wouldn't
enjoy we get a story about a factory job
that he didn't enjoy then an offer to
work for the IRS which he pretends is
the devil guys any Democratic Nation
collects taxes many at much higher rates
than America and there has to be a
department to oversee that process
anyway we thought we were going to get a
story about how he didn't want some
fancy job that he hated because he
preferred to do this or that other thing
but he's just telling us about crappy
jobs that he hated couldn't he have used
used this big brain to do one that made
him some money that's when I started
doing the bar bouncing thing right but
and I wasn't making that much money I
was working for $40 a night coming out
of their bloody you know with ripped
shirts ripped off my back you couldn't I
couldn't even pay for the shirts you
know right that I was making so I forur
okay what I'll do is I'll take the civil
service exam again now this is I don't
want to sound insensitive but at that
point in New
York there was a a protocol whereby you
take the civil service exam and if you
are a minority if you are a non-white
you get 30 extra points yeah well this
there there's nothing insensitive this
is just a fact I mean it's a fact of our
law just a fact they've been doing it
for a long time it's called affirmative
action of course and uh when that
happens you know and I'm applying to be
say a police officer right and uh all of
these other guys these non-white guys
are you know looking also to be police
officers you learn that there's a a line
of 3,000 guys in front of you Ah that's
why Chris is here at the daily wire or
one of the reasons at least those filthy
minorities in their affirmative action
Dei  that and immigrants that's
what's ruining this country am I right
but Chris since you're the smartest
person in human history shouldn't you
still have outperformed them even with
their 30 handout points you know white
police officers in New York but almost
all those guys are connected they've got
some kind of uncle or acquaintance or
somebody who's on the police force that
will put in a good a good word for them
I didn't have anybody like that and
Merit made no difference whatsoever this
is not a meritocracy we live in yeah you
can take any number of these tests and
outscore everybody else and get nothing
and nowhere ah of course top scores
don't matter if you're not part of the
inner city white click or a minority of
some kind it's physically impossible for
Rural white people to become cops in the
big city got it so what did you end up
doing just reading books like go to
library sales and and found a little
bookstore you know that had some
academic books in it and just get
whatever I could I always had to uh I
had to basically read whatever I found I
couldn't afford to order a book you know
I mean even back then books were
expensive yeah so I couldn't go to a
bookstore and pay full price for a book
so I was constantly buying used books
which were you when they were textbooks
they were used and therefore outmoded
you know the field advances the book
stays the same that's right if you read
a chemistry textbook from even two years
ago everything is completely different
the periodic table changes all the
elements every couple years oh wait no
that's idiotic advancements at the
frontier of any scientific field rarely
change what's in textbooks for
undergraduates even one bit he's just
admitting he's never actually studied
any science you know working as a as
punching cow stacking hay irrigating on
this Ranch and uh and I took two books
with me and one of them was a book by by
Albert Einstein on the theory of
relativity and the other one was a book
by Bertrand Russell okay and I I would
read these books I was living in a
covered wagon they call it a sheep wagon
these days but l no literally I'm not
kidding I mean that's what it was you
know kosan lamp in a in a sheep wagon
out in the middle of a field of a
reading Bertrand Russell and Albert
Einstein reading Bertrand Russell and
Albert Einstein and it occurred to me
these two things really need to be put
together what an image reading a book on
a wagon Mike is tickled pink about it
anyway putting Einstein and Russell
together what does that mean what about
Bertrand Russell and how do you shove
that into physics equations want to get
a little more concrete and then you know
once I decided that I started putting
them together and then I found out about
Kurt gerell and the undecidability
theorem and and yes absolutely okay so
no explanation on that combo and then
goal 2 are you sure you aren't just
listing smart people from history and
pretending to be as smart as them okay
you see because reality isn't just
geometric which is what Einstein thought
it was Nor is it just linguistic it's a
blend of the two right Russell saw it as
being linguistic Einstein saw it as
being geometric so Russell pretended
geometry didn't exist and Einstein
pretended language didn't exist what are
you saying studying Linguistics doesn't
mean you think nothing exists apart from
Linguistics start making sense okay so I
decided that reality must be logico
geometric putting the two of them
together and of course course then I
realized well I've got to put together a
theory construct a theory in which
reality is actually logico geometric and
so that's where the ctmu came from and
the ctmu is the cognitive theoretic
model of the univers cognitive theoretic
model of the universe this is your
Theory of Everything my theory of
everything and it's all in the name and
there's the big reveal Einstein plus
Russell equals Langan who is clearly
smarter than both of them put together
so let's dig into this Theory shall we
if you take a good close look at that
you've got cognitive theory and of
course you know a theory is a kind of
language theoretic language okay then
you've got cognitive theoretic model
you've got a model and then you've got
Universe you've got a language you've
got a universe and then the model is the
mapping between them ctmu says those are
all the same
thing all of those terms all of those
those uh those properties are
distributed everywhere over reality
reality can have only one structure when
once you realize that and you implement
it in theoretical form yeah it's going
to be this brand of word salad for the
rest of the interview folks no Chris
theories are not languages they are
models saying theories are languages and
then listing models separately as though
theories aren't models only demonstrates
that you don't know what any of those
words mean then saying that all of those
plus the universe are the same thing
definitely proves you don't know what
those words mean since if they were the
same thing those different words
wouldn't exist what properties are
distributed everywhere properties of
language what properties of what
language and how are they distributed in
deep space where nobody is using
language none of this means anything
you're not just talking about this
siloed aspect of thought or this you
know philosophy over here language over
here math over here physics over here
but you're presenting something that is
universal correct not really presenting
so much as vaguely referenc Ing and
never actually describing physics has
math in it want to show us some math big
guy if we're talking about a Theory of
Everything the first question we have to
establish does God exist yes here's the
second reason Chris is here on the daily
wire to Pander to their largely
religious viewership again we aren't
talking about a Theory of Everything
neither of these morons know what that
term means which is why Mikey has no
clue that immediately bringing up the
existence of God in what is supposed to
be the domain of theoretical phys
physics is an insanely stupid thing to
do but of course Chris fires back with
an extremely confident yes there
definitely is a God and if anyone would
know it would be the smartest man in the
world right identity has a the reality
has an
identity okay the identity is that as
which something exists okay matter of
fact when you say the word reality
you're naming an identity it is you're
identifying something this I'm I'm
smiling because your your answer on this
is so beautiful it it just reminds me of
of Moses at the burning bush and Moses
at the burning bush says who shall I
tell the people that you are talking to
God and God says tell them I am that I
am that's right this is pathetic Chris
said absolutely nothing he just said
reality is a word and Mikey dives into
quoting fairy tales can we get a little
more rigorous fellas that's exactly
right that's what the ctmu says it's
just comes up with the mathematical
structure that you need to build a
reality out of that which mathemat iCal
structure Chris you keep pretending that
you can do math but you haven't shown
anyone an ounce of math come on buddy
one little equation it doesn't even have
to be yours show us one of Einstein's
and tell us what it means pretty please
no so you come up with that identity and
then you search it for its properties
you see once you've built the
preliminary framework then you start
deducing the properties of this identity
and you find out that those properties
match those of God as described in most
of the world major religions What
preliminary framework describe it which
properties list them actually say
something and Sorry God as described in
the world's major religions um there's a
bunch of different ones and they're very
not the same are you talking about
Vishnu something tells me you're not
talking about Vishnu what about Allah no
not him either I bet you're talking
about the God that white people like if
you mean just a general deity of some
kind you should stop pandering to
religious people okay are its properties
such that you can deny the existence of
God or are its properties such that God
definitely has to exist and the answer
is God exists God properties the
properties of the central substance and
Central principle of reality those
properties are attributed to God
including of course you know things like
you have the three o omniscience
omnipotence and omnipresence but then
you've also got Consciousness God has to
be sentient well that's it Case Closed
God exists because Chris says so the
words omnipotence and Consciousness
exist therefore God exists even loser
apologists like William Lane Craig seem
like a genius compared to this clown God
God himself is conscious and and
therefore personal yes you can establish
a personal relationship with God we're
images of God you know what an image is
it's basically the product of a mapping
God Maps himself into each human being
right that's a very personal thing that
God is doing for us right and I don't
understand how anybody can say that it's
any different uh it's pretty easy I can
just reject this utterly baseless
assertion you're making you've offered
no evidence whatsoever that a God exists
you just said random words okay well the
simulation hypothesis is basically the
idea that the reality we see around us
physical reality is simulated on some
sort of a an automaton or or a or a
computer yeah some some aliens somewhere
have just uh they've fooled us
right right
exactly eat a piece of
liquor before one launches into the
simulation one needs a little sustenance
you
know sorry I was going to comment on how
Chris can't pronounce automaton
correctly but then I got distracted by
Mike I humping the  out of Chris for
way too long this guy either has a low
bar for Intrigue or he's sexually
aroused because this part of the
universe that we see around us cannot
exists just by itself y okay there are
certain things that it
entails and when you go into those
entailments that's how you get to God
cool so what are the entailments so far
you've alluded to mathematical
structures preliminary Frameworks now
some kind of entailments are you going
to get around to actually presenting any
of this stuff in a rigorous way what do
you mean I I hate to put it in in that
well I mean okay here's the display you
realize the display contains States yep
okay you see things the objects contain
states are static that's why they're
called States okay static how do they
change well they have to be processed
something has to process yeah yeah yeah
but the idea of being a state and being
a process those are two different things
yeah to the in the ordin ordinary way of
looking at it okay it turns out that you
can't properly describe reality and
causation at all unless you put those
things together somehow and that's what
it takes God to do okay God provid
provides the processing functionality
for your state we are getting a master
class in word salad folks he said the
display contains States Mike said yeah
no doy then Chris said the word static
and pointed at the table then he moved
on without clarifying what he meant by
state what is the state of the table the
positions and kinetic energies of all
the atoms in the table the position and
momentum of the table as a whole what
are you talking about and in order for
this un find state to change there has
to be processing of what processing
means to perform a series of operations
on something something has to perform
operations on the table for it to do
what continue existing change its state
from what to what Mike is eager to
appear intelligent so he just nods his
head and prods Chris along but Chris
isn't actually saying anything he said
the words State and process didn't
clarify what he was referring to and
included God must exist why for
something to change State like for
something to move God has to exist so
that things can move we can perfectly
describe motion with the laws of physics
no God required anyone who has the
foresight to begin prodding at this
verbiage sees that it topples over like
a house of cards immediately it's no
better than the Underpants Gnomes in
South Park who plan to profit from The
Underpants they collect even though the
ever critical Phase 2 is never defined
just replace collect Underpants with
list random terminology and replace
profet with God exists I might not be
sophisticated enough to F to parse all
of the quibbles that there might be but
broadly speaking as a Christian so much
of what you're saying resonates as
obviously true for me the idea that uh
well I'm a member of the body of Christ
the idea that God creates the world in
this uh great Act of love so really you
just nodded along with all this crap
about States and processing fixated on
God exists felt validated in your Blind
Faith and are now pretending this guy's
a genius because he told you what you
wanted to hear you need a certain kind
of quantum that Quantum is called an
identity operator God is the identity so
obviously these little quanta they have
to be they're doing things they're
processing so we can call them operators
right no we can't an operator is a
function it's a mathematical structure
it's not a physical entity like whatever
Quantum he's making up photons electrons
these are quanta functions are not Quant
they are identity operators okay the
identity operator has basically it takes
input from the outside world recognizes
it or accepts it using syntax processes
it and then returns it to the world as
external State that's adorable
speculation got any evidence for the
existence of this thing you made up I
ask because the evidence evidence for
the existence of photons and electrons
is quite convincing you know since light
and matter exist and we do lots of
things with them based on our
understanding of them what are you
working with here okay so things come in
then they are processed right there's
throughput which is you could call that
the subjective or internal state of the
identity operator and then it's returned
to the external universe so but are you
attributing now I so what I'm saying is
that's Consciousness and I'm saying that
it consciousness exists in every part of
the universe because those are the
quanta oh these quanta you made up now
are Consciousness that's great so you
can find them in brains our brains
produce Consciousness so they should be
in there right but wait Consciousness is
everywhere because the quanta are
everywhere you say well then it should
be even easier to demonstrate their
existence what are these things what are
their properties you know how we can
list the physical properties of any
Quantum like their Mass charge spin all
kinds of stuff and we can verify those
properties empirically did you want to
get around to doing that soon probably
not can you can you put that into more
basic terms what you've just
said but what was it you you need to
understand about this what what are you
actually why why are these two concepts
you're describing why are they not
reconcilable these what is the problem
with these oh I I explained that to you
already that's what okay all right Chris
shows signs of agitation when Mike asks
him to generally clarify what he just
said because that would entail Chris
remembering exactly what he said he
doesn't frauds like this just go into a
flow State and rattle off random
terminology it's what Terrence Howard
does too that's why he's always
contradicting himself because he's
really bad at it Chris is pretty good at
it but it's hard to duplicate so he says
I already explained it and then launches
into another tiid that's more or less
unrelated to what he said previously so
the real manifold of classical physics
is a par oxic construct okay okay that's
why those two things that's why that
doesn't work with Quantum field Theory
and the idea that things are are you
know Quantum fluctuations and Fields you
know that's as a matter of fact that
particular concept of the real manifold
that doesn't work for anything at all
he's just listing random physics
terminology Quantum fluctuations or
Quantum Fields Chris if you knew what
those things were you wouldn't list them
in a sentence that way as those they
were the same thing saying the word
manifold over and over again doesn't
help a discussion of well this caused
this and uh I'm going to describe a
totally deterministic system and so as a
result of this causing this causing this
causing this you don't have free will
and you're saying cause is actually more
complicated than just cause that's
correct in other words talking about
Free Will in those terms was oos means
nothing yeah you can't get anywhere with
it this is a key tactic for frauds like
this when being being interviewed by
someone who wants their gibberish to be
meaningful anytime the interviewer tries
to summarize something that was said it
doesn't matter what they say or how they
say it they're absolutely correct cause
is more complicated than just cause of
course Michael you're so Adept you're
really understanding this super
complicated Theory from the smartest
person alive because you're so smart
this gets them to continue the interview
in the most charitable way imaginable
never pushing back on anything or
requesting too much clarification so
that they can continue to be viewed as
intelligent by the other person and the
viewers so now now we're at metac
causation so what does metac causation
how what causation works from past to
Future Okay metac causation works from
past to Future and from future to past
in a closed loop notice how Chris
interrupts because he doesn't want to be
asked a coherent question all he needs
is a keyword from which he can launch
into word salad of his choosing in this
case he settled on some gibberish about
causation from future to past Mikey
caught it and has a question I get past
a future this seems pretty simple I pick
up the glass of water I put it over here
and now I remember 2 seconds ago the
water was over here and then I caused it
to go over there right so how do you
cause something to go from the future to
the
Past you it you it can't go anywhere
unless there's someplace for it to go
yeah that's that's all I'm saying okay
this is
finish up that licorice Chris take some
time to think you were asked how you can
cause something to go from the future to
the Past a thing you said that can
happen he can't answer since that's
impossible so he says something totally
unrelated that something can't move
unless it has a place to go yes Chris
thank you for that pointless tangent
things can move from one place to
another while moving forward in time the
question was about moving backwards in
time are you sure you have nothing here
so when you take that glass and you move
it from there to there okay you think
that there's a point right there yeah
where you're going to move that glass
that's
false okay the point to which you are
going to move that glass is actually in
the future when you pick up that glass
it's still in you understand what I'm
saying yes okay that makes sense and and
then getting back to God well that was
an easy getaway wasn't it Chris you said
something idiotic about time and space
pretending that the point where he would
move the glass to doesn't exist just
because the time at which it would get
there will be later Mike nodded his head
like a dunce and then changed the
subject for you and we can see the
manipulation in action too Chris
condescendingly asks if Mike understands
what he's saying and even though he's
saying nothing Mike says yes of course
because he's chasing that high of being
told he was correct a little earlier he
won't admit that he's not following
something Chris is saying for the rest
of the interview because of it do I I'm
not going to ask you if I'm going to go
to heaven or hell but will I go to
either heaven or
hell you will persist after you die okay
where you go depends on who Michael
nolles really
is I'm not going to ask you about a but
what about a that was weird and Chris
ever so cognizant of the audience he's
presumably talking to says oh yes you'd
better be a good boy if you want to go
to heaven unfortunately if Mikey's God
actually existed he probably wouldn't be
fond of him devoting his life to a
deceptive propaganda Mill if you
displease God that's exactly what's
going to happen to you God is going to
cut you off and he's going to say I
can't see him anymore he's going to turn
away from you and then you won't be able
to reunite salvation will be impossible
for you because salvation means that God
has got to pull you back into himself
right okay but God doesn't want to see
you anymore he doesn't even know you
exist he knows your physical body is
there but he's not interested anymore
because you hate him you deny his
existence you offend him so he's not
going to look at you right I will never
stop being amused by how Petty and
infantile the Christian God is to people
like this like whatever I made you gave
you no evidence whatsoever that I exist
and you won't even love me and worship
me do you know how much that hurts my
feelings I know I'm infinite and perfect
but I can still have my feelings hurt
you know I'm sorry but anyone who
believes in this poultry kind of God is
an in intellectual toddler are angels
and demons real
yes yes I think so too is there is there
a fear that if you take some of these
drugs you might be letting in the wrong
guys that's a problem isn't it and
that's a problem that I think a lot of
people have encountered for context
they're talking about psychedelics I'm
going to go ahead and assume that
neither of these guys have done any
psychedelics at least definitely not
Mikey and it's adorable to hear him
Proclaim that demons are his excuse not
having the mental fortitude anyway I'd
ask for evidence of demons existing but
this hasn't been a very evidence heavy
conversation thus far so maybe I'll keep
it to myself well God has a boundary too
he's got a very tight boundary he's a
perfect he's perfect he can't take
anything resembling imperfection right
he can't take it into himself because
that would be a contradiction that's
funny you called God omnipotent earlier
now you're talking about something he
can't do do we need to go over the
definition of omnipotent Chris are you
saying that he sort of lack that the
devil sort of La lacks substance or La
that's why he needs the humans I'm
saying the devil lacks coherence
coherence is what brings everything into
superposition right with itself in other
words it allows something to this is
going to sound a little bit paradoxical
allows something to communicate
non-locally with itself okay right all
of its possible states are in superp
position they exist all that all at once
okay and uh this is this is uh
pretty much
inescapable the word Salad Shooter
malfunctions every once in a while and
Chris made it 45 minutes before his
first mishap not bad it's tough to keep
the stream of  going luckily he
had the cigar in his hand so he could
pretend to be doing something while
deciding to stop talking at any rate
what he said was meaningless he was
talking about superp position while
gesturing inwards in a way that would
indicate the opposite of superp position
super position is diffuse a system
existing in many states at once when the
wave function collapses the system will
exhibit a particular State like what his
hands are indicating by crushing inwards
to what would be fewer States or a
singular state in the end all he did was
vaguely summarized the concept of
superposition take a puff say it's
inescapable and then stop talking as
though he actually explained anything
about the devil these things were
actually funded they more or less
invented by the central you know funded
you know originally was paying marks and
Engles and before that Moses H and other
people to come up with you know it's a
strategy for world domination it has
been for the last 200 years what has
changed reason number three Chris is
here at the daily wire Marxism bad
because central banks something
something those marxists are trying to
take over the world honest decent
capitalists would never do such a thing
they just want to give you affordable
Electronics got to stick to that
boogeyman narrative we're were you a
trump supporter you don't need to say if
you as a matter of fact back when people
were saying Trump can't read look look
at the way he hesitates you know he
can't he's got trouble with the
teleprompt the guy can't read I actually
stood up and I said no I said I've met
Donald Trump and I think his IQ is
probably equal to that of the average
Harvard Professor just recently heard
that Saudi Arabia and Russia
willing binging binging yeah he's a
regular known chsky good call Chris
basically he is comp he's a good
businessman you know and therefore could
be good for the country and I wanted
people to understand that if you needed
one sentence to prove that Chris is not
very bright this would probably be it
because what he said resonates with what
is in the minds of a lot of American
citizens we want to have our own country
we want America to have for us we don't
want our borders to be open we don't
want millions of third world migrants
coming here every year and displacing us
for from our own territory yeah he got
elected by fear-mongering about
immigrants just like every other
demagogue before him great work Chris
and the first time around you know they
weren't prepared yeah you know so they
couldn't do anything about it the second
time
around yeah are you suggesting Chris
that there were some questions about the
2020 presidential
election anyone who doesn't understand
that that that election was shall we say
not quite up to Snuff is some kind of
moral
I take it back this would be the
sentence to demonstrate that Chris is
actually dumber than rocks do tell us
about how the election was rigged by
Dirty Democrats just because mailin
ballots were included Chris Enlighten us
oh wait you have some wisdom to share
about Co awesome are you uh are you
antivaccine generally I take it you're
antio well I bought into the co thing at
first and you know I went out and bought
you know Gina and I bought you know gas
masks for us and you know those n100
masks and uh you know and I advised
people what to do so it's not to get
infected with the uh the deadly Co and
then I noticed that that you know it
wasn't really kill you know I live in
northern Missouri nobody up there was
wearing masks nobody up there I mean and
nobody was dying of covid-19 so I real
well there's got to be something a
little bit off about this right and so I
you know kind of like started getting
away from it and then I noticed that you
know this well then I noticed that it
was being used as a pretext for
something called the Great reset yeah
nobody in Missouri died of covid except
the 20,000 people in Missouri who died
of covid but please tell us some
 about the great reset and there
have been you know white Papers written
in the past about using just this
methodology to get you know to get uh
everybody behind the globalist agenda
right operation you know warp speed was
part of that you know operation Warp
speed accelerated the development of
covid vaccines because there was a
terrible Global pandemic and it was
implemented by your favorite orange
Maniac Donald Trump are you saying your
idiot hero is part of the globalist
agenda Chris does Trump bear some
responsibility for giving be
responsibility my question is does he
really know what's going on or has he or
surrounded himself with people that are
misleading him about what's going on I
would like to believe that Donald Trump
has been misled I thought Trump was
smarter than all the Harvard professors
Chris so which is it is he a Super
Genius like you or is he a bumbling
idiot being manipulated by everyone
around him pick a lane do you believe in
aliens well I will say this the
intelligence Community large sectors of
it believe in aliens really yes oh
absolutely it's a big I mean they're
constantly discussing these things yes
and if you look at the global Elite you
know and you wonder well I don't want to
blame the world banksters for this you
know that's that's a conspiracy theory
then who is pulling all those strings
okay could there be another kind of
entity you know um aliens demons
whatever could there be something that's
pulling their strings that had the the
global banksters know about right and
they're taking orders from but they're
being totally concealed and hidden from
the public this is a viable hypothesis
and it's one that the intelligence
communities don't reject it's it's funny
you post which is you know kind of
neither here nor there because the
intelligence communities themselves
could be run by aliens for all we know
yeah the globalist bankers are being
controlled by aliens according to the
CIA you don't sound crazy at all Chris
if there's anything that a hyper
intelligent civilization from another
system would want to do when it comes
here it would be to manipulate our
finances and screw hardworking Americans
out of their 401 case aliens are
mischievous and Petty like that they
also love subtly working through the CIA
to enact imperialist foreign policy and
oust foreign leaders to serve a western
agenda because they don't have the power
to just come down here and enslave us
all with Ray Guns you're making a lot of
sense people are going to be laughing
when you say that that there are aliens
that that let them laugh okay but they
can't they won't be able to come up with
any any supporting argument against what
I'm saying it just they don't know
enough Chrissy Pooh have you heard of
this thing called the bird of proof it's
not the CIA is run by aliens and I'm
right unless you prove me wrong you
can't just make up whatever  you
want and tell other people it's true
until they can prove otherwise if you
really believe that then I would say
your IQ is about 115 at best and I'm
right until you show us some official
document that says otherwise okay big
guy it's funny that you mention angels
and Demon or uh pardon aliens and demons
in the same breath because I don't
particularly believe in aliens I mean
what do I know I don't there are a lot
of things I don't know about but I
certainly believe that demons exist
because I'm pretty confident that demons
exist I'm I'm less confident that aliens
exist life elsewhere in the universe
impossible baseless Supernatural
superstitions let's go Mike is so proud
to be so so stupid and uh he was written
ghost stories and things and at dinner
parties he'll say hey just I'll ask
random person he'll say hey have you
ever seen a ghost and he says a lot of
the time people will say yes and
throughout history people report having
seen a ghost that is correct and he says
you know too many people are saying
they've seen a ghost for there not to be
ghosts or something like a ghost that's
correct that is absolutely correct yep
if a bunch of people say something it
must be true that's how logic Works
actually Mikey the fact that nobody has
ever substantiated the existence of
ghosts in any empirical manner
whatsoever means a lot more than
whatever volume of anecdotal evidence
you want to reference here they're there
I mean if you're not a very observant
person you'll never see anything like
that if you if your mind is completely
closed and you just screen all that
stuff out you'll never see anything like
that but if you're an open-minded person
and you're observant you will see things
like that eventually right if you want
to believe those things exist you'll
eventually trick yourself into believing
that you saw them finally the guy is
saying something sensible but no he
ruins it by making up a story about
seeing a UFO and uh I was there and
suddenly I look up and I
I say suddenly it was just in the sky I
became aware that it was up there and I
looked up there's this huge spheroidal
you know but elliptical not not a
perfect spheroid like a saucer that was
turned partially on its side okay and I
thought well that must be one of those
you know lenticular clouds that I've
heard of you know so I looked at it and
I figured okay now I wonder how this
evolves in time totally changeless I
actually took sticks and I tried to use
parallax to figure out you know what is
this thing why isn't it changing why
isn't it moving why is it completely
featureless and metallic looking you
tried to use parallax to do what because
that's a method to figure out how far
away something is so how would that help
you to figure out what it is and why
it's metallic looking and how did you
use sticks to do that Chris do you just
not know what Parallax means do you
think that if you use some smart words
people will believe your dumb UFO story
there are people in the CIA who actually
claim to have been abducted I'm not
going to tell you who they are but
they're
there okay and we're not talking about
small individuals we're not talking
about low ranking individuals we're
talking about high ranking individuals
these people not just that you've read a
book about you're saying these are
people you've talked to people that I
was people
that there was one of them in particular
that that I was actually they were
somebody that I knew was trying to
arrange and introduction to this person
and I said well you know he's okay so
he's in the you know CIA um is he going
to tell me the truth you know I'm not in
the CIA is he going to tell me the truth
about anything well no actually what he
wants to talk about is abductions
because you know he and his wife were
actually abducted by aliens and he wants
to talk to you about and I said well is
he going to tell me the truth about
anything well I don't know I said then I
don't want to talk to him huh okay I
don't want to talk to him at all there
has to be some kind of understanding
that I'm not going to get lied to
otherwise I'm wasting my time cuz I'll
never know whether he's lying or telling
the truth so if somebody isn't going to
commit upfront to telling me the truth I
don't have time for it if he were a
really smart liar he would have just
said I will tell you the truth then lied
even if he wanted
to I suppose so I me that's what they do
in the CIA yeah right it's sort of the
job right if you're a spy that's that's
correct and you lie your ass off at
every of opportunity about everything
right I'm curious as to whether he had
this lie ready to go or if he made it up
on the spot it sounds like the latter
because he made up this  about
top CIA officials being abducted and he
can't tell you who they are implying
that he knows them Mikey calls his bluff
so Chris backpedals now it's not someone
he knows but someone he was supposed to
meet but he didn't meet him because he
wanted the truth Mikey says he could
have just lied and said it was the truth
Chris says duh CI IIA agents are always
lying literally all the time in which
case he would never have asked if he was
going to tell the truth since he had
already decided they're always lying do
you see how nothing he says is even
remotely logically consistent when you
actually scrutinize it he's just talking
out of his ass at all times but and then
when you go all the way back to and so
and so is really just answering to the
devil now you've got me again because
because I read that in my Bible I know
that that's true I know that you know
he's the prince of this world well yeah
yes and they've been by the way I mean
there are accounts from Biblical times
and pre-biblical times that involve UFOs
things in the sky that show up during
critical battles for example and turn
the tide right this goes all the way
back you know to the to the the the viic
religion you know the pre Hindu religion
there are all kinds of people who have
reported these things they end up in
various religious scriptures
including Christian scriptures as well
yeah the devil obviously exists and
controls everything because Mikey's book
of story says so and then Chris doubles
down with a little Ancient Aliens twist
are we going to get some Billy Carson
style Anunnaki  too it strikes
me that there's really something to that
Roger scrutin the late conservative
philosopher he said that the job of the
conservative intellectual is to
articulate things that the common man
knows
intuitively that's right in other words
conservative so-called intellectuals
take the delusions and prejudices of
idiots and artificially intellectualize
them inorder order to validate and
manipulate those people the daily wire
everyone if you don't have the key to
the clubhouse you're not getting in okay
they won't even talk to you yeah no
academic will take me on will actually
start arguing even in his own field at
this point because they know they're
going to lose and they will any academic
any time I think most bright undergrads
could mop the floor with You Chris I
could too but do keep puffing your chest
out like this it's adorable higher
education cartel as as there can be
right they indoctrination bill you have
to look at the entire educational system
as being one great big indoctrination
Factory yeah and the people that work in
it those faculty members they're chosen
they're selected yeah as indoctrinator
of the youth yes and they they pedal
Marxism but yeah nothing but Marxism
when I was getting my chemistry degree
every day it was nothing but Marxism
Marxist nucleophiles and electrophiles
the proletariat ass in those dirty bis
bases in the lab they would just talk
about division of labor we never even
got a chance to run a single reaction
you guys clearly know exactly what
happens in College of course in reality
neither of these ass hats could Define
Marxism or communism or Socialism or
capitalism if their lives depended on it
I don't like drag queen Story Hour but
we need to tolerate it it's one of the
blessings of liberty if we don't
tolerate drag queen Story Hour what yes
a Blessing of Liberty well it's in look
it's in the Preamble to the Constitution
I think James Madison's rolling over in
his grave at the very thought of that
Constitution mentions  does it
not in my last read I mean I you know I
was raised in an environment where we
were you know basically taught to be
tolerant of of you know people of their
foibles and and you know they if they
wanted to be a little bit deviant well a
little bit of deviation is good you know
you can't just be locked into one rigid
way of looking at things so I developed
tolerance but now they've become
they become rabid they're shoving it
down children's throats and it's just
not good for society okay it violates
the biological imperative of survival
okay to to become totally sexual there's
a reason that men and women exist and
that they that they mate and create
children it's for the survival of the
human race reason number four that Chris
is here at the daily wire man plus woman
make baby and that's the best thing and
anything that Dev Ates from that is evil
gay marriage bad drag queen reads a
story is bad the pedos and the groomers
are taking over society and they must be
stopped I knew this jerk off was just
another bigot tolerance my ass Chris if
everyone has to tolerate your bloated
bloviations then you can deal with a
drag queen reading a book once in a
while but when they go out and they have
gay day parades where they're cavorting
you know nude and they're going into
children's restrooms and so forth that's
where we have to draw the line
children's restrooms what is a
children's restroom Pride parades don't
take place on an elementary school
campus you alarmist prick are there
thinkers alive today who you think are
worth reading people always say what's
the reading list what should I read what
should I listen to are there
philosophers or popular writers are no
academic philosophers that are worthy as
far as I'm concerned of attention what
it's not because all of them are stupid
or anything like that it's because they'
bought into the party they're academics
yeah okay they cannot violate you know
the the the academic communistic
atheistic narrative and get away with it
okay and if you're in that system then
obviously you're playing along with it
yep everyone who is affiliated with any
University in the entire world is both a
communist and atheist you're not allowed
to work at a university if you aren't
both of those things not even religious
universities it's Paradox I know hey
Chris stop making excuses for being too
dumb and lazy to read what philosophers
have to say you could actually learn
something for once are there are there
non-academic writers thinkers
philosophers who you would recommend
people read I'm sure they're out there I
haven't encountered any oh wow so even
all the people who aren't at the evil
universities none of them are worth
reading either so all the smart people
are indoctrinated and all the non
indoctrinated people are stupid that's
quite a pickle are you sure it's just
that you don't know how to read I want
to know who beyond beyond his own
writing who uh the smartest man in the
world wants me to read who would you
recommend well I would say that you
should go back and definitely read
Aristotle and Plato and Socrates yeah it
would be great if more people would read
Socrates the problem is that he never
wrote anything down you  so after
telling us that nobody alive today is
worth reading his first examples of
super important people from history that
we should all read includes one who
never wrote anything this is how you
know Chris is completely full of  he
never read any Socrates because that's
not a thing that exists which means he
never read any Aristotle or Plato either
those are just smart people from history
that he thinks will make him seem smart
by association have you ever heard of
Plato Aristotle Socrates yes morons
those you've got that takes us up
through you know it takes us up through
some of the the medieval Christian
philosophers Andel aquinus Augustine and
beyond that then it starts getting
dicey yeah once we get past aquinus and
philosophy started to decouple from
Blind Faith in the Christian God it got
dicey says Chris we can't have people
exercising logic and critical thinking
skills now can we by the way these new
atheists I mean I mean they're really
they're adamant you're talking about
Richard Dawkins Daniel Dennis talking
about Richie Dawkins Daniel Dennis Sam
Harris well I don't know Chris kitens
you know I mean guys of this nature
you're a little outdated with your
references Chris The Four Horsemen you
speak of got together in 2007 and
Hitchens died in 2011 new atheism isn't
even really a term people throw around
much anymore except for fear-mongering
 like you two who recoil at the
thought of ality and who would like to
end the separation of church and state
but you didn't you didn't just say that
he doesn't believe in God you said he
hates God hates God dokins obviously
hates God why is there evil in the world
usually yeah that's what it comes down
to right no sweetie Dawkins doesn't hate
God anymore than he hates The Lochness
Monster you God botherers are incapable
of comprehending the idea that other
people genuinely do not believe in your
magic Sky daddy do you think that our
discussion or our understanding of God
therefore must be uh active and
participatory rather than merely
absolutely and furthermore it must be
rational as well as faith-based rational
and faith-based is an oxymoron faith is
specifically a suspension of reason it
is the belief in that which you have no
logical reason to believe if you had
rationality behind the position it would
no longer require Faith you sure are
dumb for a genius Chris  only Pawn
in Game of Life well people always ask
you this why aren't you a
billionaire why why aren't I a
billionaire that's people I I've seen
people billionaires hate my guts see I
don't go along with the that look you
they have to give you the opportunity to
make money you need to have connections
in order to make money you need to make
friends out of people who have a lot of
it come on you boners what about all
that bootstrap talk in 50 years of adult
life you couldn't figure out how to rub
two nickels together without a
billionaire giving you a ride
seriously if you can't become a
billionaire without help from
billionaires how do billionaires exist
and aren't any of them self-made because
yes some sure are I know you're obsessed
with meaning and not money but couldn't
you have started your own construction
business or a bouncer training school
write a  book there's nothing you
could do to make a measly six figures
while keeping your integrity in check
are you really that devoid of creativity
Chris it sounds like a whole lot of
excuses to me a lot of these rich people
are into something called
transhumanism they don't think that
they're going to have to leave so
there's no problem with not being able
to take it with you do you think there's
any relation between the transhumanist
movement and the transgender
movement the idea that we're just going
to escape our
bodies
uh I do the the idea the idea I think is
that you can throw off all constraint
you canow throw off the constraints of
reality you con including constraints of
gender
transhumanism transgender holy smokes
they're related am I right it's called a
prefix you idiots it means on the other
side of transhumanism to the other side
of the man- machine divide transgender
when one's gender identity is on the
other side of or not aligned with that
person's sex I'm pretty sure Chris said
he taught himself Latin when he was 12
so this is pretty embarrassing what
should I do in my own life even even
maybe Beyond any political question
search for
God ask God to establish a personal
relationship with you it's available
you're attached to God by your soul okay
there's this soul that attaches you to
God you can
receive the will of God into yourself
yeah I did that and nobody answered I
guess he's not taking calls funny how
the smartest man in the world when asked
for Life advice offers something so
trite as to be indistinguishable from
any run-of-the-mill preacher in any
sleepy town in America huh you'd think
he'd have something special but nope do
bidding of magic Sky Daddy and that
concludes the interview as we can all
now hopefully see at best we can say
that Chris is a narcissist of middling
intellect who has genuinely convinced
himself that he's a genius by adopting a
sophomoric contrarian attitude to
everything he knows nothing about
blended with sheep like like religious
subservience and at worst we can say
that Chris is nothing more than another
installment in a series of Internet
pseudo intellectuals that fit a
particular archetype which has become a
proven business model in the past few
years his religious and philosophical
rhetoric is the same as that of Jordan
Peterson but even less convincing his
scientific rhetoric is the same as that
of Eric Weinstein but even less
convincing he's just another
self-aggrandizing ass hat who uses
language that exemplifies what dumb
people think smart people sound like and
not all that effectively if we're being
honest the particular twist he employs
is that he wears his salt of the earth
brand on his sleeve just a workingclass
man that happens to be smarter than all
those fancy city Folk with their
computers in their cappuccinos now to be
clear I'm not mocking the working class
some people live in the city some people
live on a farm some people ride
skateboards some people ride horses some
people work in a laboratory some people
work construction it does doesn't matter
and there are plenty of highly
intelligent people that are either
constrained to the working class because
of socioeconomic Injustice or because
they genuinely prefer that lifestyle the
point is that there is an element of
manipulation involved with Chris
obsessively referring to himself in this
manner it may be closer to the truth
than when golden billionaire Donald
Trump does it but it reeks of
demagoguery regardless it's a facad the
intention is to seem relatable establish
an emotional connection and Garner the
trust of a a certain type of viewer so
that they will be receptive to the
dazzling rhetoric as I've said before
it's just another instance of portraying
oneself as the strong alpha male who
should lead the tribe such that others
will relinquish their critical thinking
skills and let him do the thinking for
all of them our culture at this moment
in history has demonstrated time and
time again that it will seek out and
adore these figures so this is just the
trend we are seeing right now there are
figures who employ this Playbook and
there are Outlets who platform and cater
to those figures a symbiosis for profit
on both sides since it's been proven to
work so well every few months some new
pseudo intellectual jackass goes on
every podcast designed for dumb people
to think they're smart proclaimed to be
a super genius with all the answers
millions of people fall for it and they
all cash in if I didn't have a moral
backbone I probably would do it too what
could be easier all you have to do is
confidently use words that most people
don't understand and if anyone proclaims
that the emperor has no clothes on just
say some vague anti-establishment
 about how they're indoctrinated
can't see outside the box and aren't
ready to receive the new super awesome
Paradigm shifting knowledge it's a
foolproof way to con a bunch of Fools
and you can see the parade of fools
lapping up his rubbish all over the
comment section how can anyone be so
suggestible how can someone get through
to these people to any of them I would
say can you acknowledge that you only
think he's intelligent because you don't
understand what he's saying do you know
who else says things you don't
understand any scientist not just any
scientist any graduate student and I'm
not saying that to be condescending
anyone who is an expert in anything can
speak in a way that most other people
won't understand that's the nature of
specialized knowledge take any current
scientific publication in the entire
world at random if you don't work in
that field or if you haven't at least
studied that subject in college to some
extent you absolutely will not
understand it nor should you be
surprised about it here's one now wow
who wrote this it's super complicated
they must be the smartest person alive
should we worship them should we send
them on Joe Rogan and Lex fridman and
the Thousand other wannabe clones trying
to cash in look at this one this guy is
even smarter than the other one I don't
understand a word of this which podcast
should they go on this is what irks me
you could take any scientist in the
entire world
put them in front of Joe Rogan have them
explain their research and it should get
the same effect but it won't do you know
why because any typical scientist would
not present themselves as a genius that
everyone has to listen to nor would they
inject their research with any more
relevance or profundity than it deserves
now some definitely would of course
there are arrogant scientists I'm
talking about the average scientist they
don't use manipulative rhetoric so
people would not latch on to them them
irrationally which is why such people
don't get invited on those podcasts
because those podcasts are in the
business of sensationalism not knowledge
these people have absolutely nothing to
offer Society Beyond smoke and mirrors
just listen if I had some complex stuff
in memory and a bar fight happened and I
had to go indulge in some physical
violence that usually my memory was
erased when I'd get done with the fight
I mean it would be gone
irretrievable one time I was thinking
about artificial intelligence then that
evolved into a whole new way of looking
at neural networks suddenly this
horrible fight
errupted I set the page down and I
mopped up the fight and I came back over
and my piece of paper was
gone I tried and tried and tried to find
that piece of paper nobody could tell me
where it was and I couldn't remember
what the hell I'd written on it that's
right Chris was going to revolutionize
neural networks but gosh G whiz he
couldn't remember what he wrote down
kind of like Eric Weinstein and his Shob
operator that he wrote in his notes and
college but whoopsy he can't remember
what it was now it's always the same
these people have absolutely nothing to
point to in order to demonstrate their
alleged Brilliance nothing they don't
invent anything they don't build
anything they don't do anything all they
do is tell stories and talk everyone
goes Eric War a genie does anyone know
why what is there anything they've done
no truly cuz all they do is talk is
there anything they've built do does is
there one appliance that did they have
anything to do with have they come up
with something even like the rotato
which Peels and slices of potato as you
could like is there one thing any of
them have done except whack off Elon
Musk and talk this rant from comedian
Tim Dylan perfectly encapsulates what
I'm saying here and he happen to be
saying it about Eric Weinstein but he
could be talking about any of these
jerks since they're all from the same
mold remember how this conversation was
supposed to be about ctmu the incredible
Theory of Everything they talked about
it for like 10 minutes and Chris didn't
present anything it was just sound bites
these types of figures are geniuses in
their own mind and their own word alone
I just can't understand how people can't
see right through them but then again
I'm not susceptible to  rhetoric
like this colleges and universities
purport to be harnessing intelligence
for the good of mankind they're a
breeding house for parrots people are
allowed to make little tentative moves
forward but they're not really allowed
to do anything too radical always always
always it's this anti- Academia 
not allowed to do anything radical says
who who is stopping anyone someone goes
to college to get educated and then goes
into the private sector and starts their
own business developing some incedible
new technology who is stopping them
where is this Shadow Academia gapo
forcing people to use their knowledge in
only certain establishment approved ways
who is preventing people from taking
their actual legitimate knowledge and
developing actual lucrative applications
that will matter in society and why
would any capitalistic Enterprise be
trying to squash that we have to have a
philosophical framework an actual
ethical structure that we can look at
and say well this is without a doubt the
right way of
thinking within that framework we derive
an advanced ethics an ethic that can be
taught without fear in elementary school
grade school secondary school and in our
colleges and
universities we have to start looking
for possible alternative sources of
leadership I don't see anybody on the
top of the Heap now who is capable of
doing this they've all been co-opted by
the system they have too much to lose by
deviating from what is now a Barren past
it's going to take somebody else
somebody coming in from outside somebody
rising to the top from the bottom shall
we say that's right once again The
Establishment is failing it's a sinking
ship and yet somehow they have too much
to lose by deviating which isn't even
logically consistent this is wall
Thornhill in the electric Universe this
is James tour in origin of Life research
this is Eric Weinstein in theoretical
physics countless examples always the
same intent a devaluing of everything
established to promote something that is
invalid at face value it's about tearing
down existing human knowledge to put it
on even footing with their complete
ignorance Chris everybody Rises to the
top from the bottom no one is born an
accomplished scientist or philosopher
they learn and work and become that
person and there are no shortcuts
despite what any internet Guru will
promise could it be
you who
knows it could be
you it could be
me really wow thank you internet Guru I
Will Follow You And subscribe to your
newsletter what will be our first order
of business oh well one of the first
things that I would do is I would
Institute something like the Manhattan
Project for a safe long- lasting means
of birth control simply implant that in
all children at age 10 that would solve
our population problem right off the bat
it would also enable us to practice a
benign form of
eugenics I should probably say anti-is
genics either we have to do it through
genetic
engineering or we have to let only the
fit
breed we like to think that it is our
right to breed as incontinently as we
want to have as many kids with whomever
we want to Future generations of man
kind are being settled with the results
of what we do yeah you heard right he is
a proponent of eugenics doesn't seem so
harmless anymore now does it
nevertheless getting away from Chris for
a moment let's examine how this specific
brand of rhetoric is used on a broader
stage people who are disgruntled due to
economic disparity will fall for
demagogues Hitler rose out of the Great
Depression Trump came to power in the
wake of the 2008 recession this Playbook
is centered around an attempt to take
civil unrest due to economic issues and
use it to manufacture political power
most people know they're getting screwed
but they have no idea how or what to do
about it so they listen to the loud man
who pretends to have answers to
precisely these questions but these
answers are always a distraction from
the real issues it's never their own
greed or the institutions they serve but
rather immigrants or woke marxists
suppressing Free Speech it's whatever
Boogeyman they can conjure to distract
the masses from the economic issues that
are truly to blame they will manufacture
some kind of grand ideological battle
when it's really just deregulation
implemented by most of the presidents of
the past 50 years in both parties from
Reagan to Clinton and all the rest the
current epistemological breakdown we are
experiencing in this post-truth era is a
problem that can't possibly be
overstated people have no idea who to
trust and they are making the wrong
decisions in enormous numbers I promise
I'll keep it short this time since it
always comes back to this but if we
don't figure out how to help people feel
motivated and inspired to to gather
basic knowledge for themselves so they
can avoid falling for these kinds of
Internet gurus and if we don't try and
steer the media landcape towards
highlighting actual educated and
knowledgeable people we are absolutely
doomed as a species because when the
 really hits the fan and we are
faced with a real existential problem
it's not going to be some jerk like
Chris Langan who gets us out of it I can
promise you that so that's it for Chris
Langan another in a long line of pseudo
intellectual clones we absolutely don't
need and who hopefully will Fade Into
Obscurity very quickly but the factory
is cranking these guys out faster than
sweat shops can make new iPhones so I'll
see you next time for whichever fraud I
have to cover next until then
