hi I'm Chris Hedges uh and we are here
in Salem Oregon uh interviewing Dr
Sheldon wolen who taught politics for
many years at Berkeley uh and later
Princeton uh he is the author of several
seminal works on political philosophy
including politics and vision uh and
democracy Incorporated uh and we are
going to be asking him today about the
state of American democracy uh political
participation and uh what he calls uh
inverted
totalitarianism uh so let's begin with
this concept of inverted
totalitarianism uh which has uh
antisence and in your great work
politics and vision you reach back all
the way to the Greeks uh up uh through
the present age to talk about the
evolution of political philosophy um
what do you mean by it well I I I mean
by it that in uh in the inverted idea
it's the idea that uh uh democracy has
been in effect turned upside down uh
it's supposed to be a a government by
the people and for the people and all
the rest of the sort of rhetoric we're
used to but it's uh it's become now so
patently a an organized form of
government
dominated by groups which uh are only
vaguely if at all uh responsible or even
responsive to popular needs and popular
demands so that but it at the same time
it retains a kind of patner of democracy
because we still have elections they're
still relatively free in in any
conventional sense we have a relative
free media but the uh what's missing
from it is a kind of crucial
continuous opposition which has a
coherent position and is not just saying
no no no but has got an alternative and
above all has got a an ongoing critique
of of what's wrong and what needs to be
remedied you you jux oppose inverted
totalitarianism
to classical totalitarianism fascism
communism and you say that there are
very kind of distinct differences
between these two types of
totalitarianism what are those
differences well certainly one is the in
classic
totalitarianism the fundamental
principle is the leadership principle
and the notion that the masses uh exist
not as a citizenry but as a as a means
of support
which can be rallied and mustered almost
at will by the dominant Powers that's
the classical that's the classical one
and the Contemporary one is one in which
the rulle by the people is
enshrined as the sort of popular message
about what we are but which which is in
fact is not really true to the facts of
political life
in this day and age well you you talk
about how uh In classical totalitarian
regimes politics Trump's economics but
in inverted totalitarianism it's the
reverse that's right yeah in classic
totalitarianism uh thinking here now
about the Nazis and the
fascists uh and also even about the the
Communists the uh the economy is viewed
as a tool
which the which the powers that be or
manipulate and utilize in accordance
with what they conceive to be the
political requirements of ruling and
they will take whatever steps are needed
in the economy in order to ensure the
long long run sustainability of the
political order in other words the the
uh the sort of uh arrows of political
power flow from top to bottom now in in
inverted
totalitarianism the imagery is that of a
a populace which is enshrined as uh as
as the leadership group but which in
fact doesn't rule but was but which is
uh turned upside down in the sense that
the uh the people are enshrined at the
top but don't rule and minority rule is
usually uh treated as as something to be
abhor but is in fact what we have and
it's uh the problem has to do I think
with the historical relationship between
political orders and economic orders and
democracy I think from the beginning
never quite manage to make the kind of
case for an economic order that would
sustain
and and help to uh to to develop
democracy rather than being a kind of
constant threat to to the
egalitarianism and popular rule that
democracy stands for in your book
politics and vision you quote figures
like Max Weber who who talk about
capitalism as in fact being a
destructive force to
democracy well I think yeah I think
vor's critique of capitalism even
broader I think he views it as
quintessentially destructive not only of
uh of democracy but also of course of
the sort of feudal aristocratic system
which had preceded it um capitalism is
destructive because it has to eliminate
the kind of custom morace political
values even
institutions that are that present any
kind of credible threat to the autonomy
of the economy and it's that that's
where the the battle lies the capitalism
wants an autonomous economy they want a
political order subservient to their
needs of the economy and their notion of
an economy while it's broadly based in
the sense of of a capitalism in which
there can be relatively free entrance
and property is relative ly wide widely
dispersed it's uh it's also a a a
capitalism which in the last analysis is
elitist as any aristocratic system ever
was you talk in the book about how uh it
was essentially the engine of the Cold
War ju deposing a supposedly socialist
Soviet Union although like many uh
writers including chsky I think you
would uh uh argue that leninism was not
a socialist movement um I think chsky
actually calls it a kind of
counterrevolution uh Adam ulam uh talks
about it as a kind of well Adam ulam
talks about it as a counterrevolution
chsky is a right-wing deviation but
nevertheless that jux deposition of the
Cold War essentially freed corporate
capitalism uh in the name of the
struggle against communism to deform
American democracy uh and and just also
just want to make it clear that you are
very aware in uh especially in politics
and vision of uh the uh hesitancy on the
part of our founding fathers uh to
actually permit direct democracy so
we're not in this moment idealizing uh
the system that was put in place but
maybe you could talk a little bit about
that well I think that's true I think
the system that was uh consciously
deliberately constructed by the FR
Founders who framed the
Constitution that uh that democracy was
the enemy and that was rooted in
historical realities many of the
colonial governments had a very strong
popular element that became
increasingly uh prominent as the
colonies moved towards rebellion and it
and that provide and Rebellion meant not
only resisting British rule but also
involved uh uh the growth of popular
institutions and their hegemony in in in
the colonies as well as in the nation
Nation as a whole so that the uh so that
the the original uh impulses to to uh
the Constitution came in large measure
from this democratizing movement but the
framers of the Constitution understood
very well that this would mean the at
least would jeopardize the this this the
uh the the the ruling groups that they
thought were absolutely necessary to any
kind of uh civilized order and by by
ruling groups they me not only those who
were better educated but by those who
were properti because they regarded
property as a sign of of talent talent
and of ability so that it wasn't just
wealth as such but rather a
constellation of Virtues as well as
wealth that entitled capitalist to rule
and uh they felt that this was in the
best interest of the country and you
must remember at this time that the uh
that that the people
so-called were not well educated and in
many ways were feeling their way towards
defining their own role in a political
system and above all they were
preoccupied as people always have been
with making a living with surviving and
those were were difficult times as most
times times are so that politics for
them could only be an occasional uh
activity and so that there would always
be an uneasy relationship between a
democracy that was often qu
and a form of rule which was constantly
trying to uh reduce as far as possible
Democratic influence in order to permit
those who were qualified to govern the
country in the best interest of the
country and of course when we talk about
property we must include slave holders
indeed indeed although of course there
was uh in the beginning a tension
between the uh the northern colonies and
the southern colonies this fear of
direct democracy is kind of epitomized
by Thomas Payne uh who uh was very
useful in fting Revolutionary
Consciousness uh but essentially turned
into a pariah once the Revolution was
over and the native aristocracy sought
to limit uh the power of participatory
democracy yeah I think that's true I
think uh it's too bad pay didn't have at
his disposal uh lenon phrase permanent
revolution because I think that's what
he felt not in the sense of violence
violence violence but in the sense of a
kind of conscious participatory element
that was very strong that would have to
be continuous and that it couldn't just
be episodic so that there was always a
tension between what he thought to be uh
Democratic vitality and the sort of or
ordered structured election related term
related uh kind of political system that
the framers had in mind so let's look at
the Cold War because in politics and
vision uh as in democracy Incorporated
you uh talk about the uh framing of what
Dwight McDonald will call the psychosis
of permanent War this constant battle
against communism as giving Capital uh
the tools by which they could uh
destroy uh those Democratic institutions
traditions and values that were in place
how did that happen what was the process
well I think it happened because of uh
of the way that the Cold War was was
framed that is it was framed as not only
a a war between communism and capitalism
but also a war which the sub of which
the subtext was that
communism was after all an ideology that
favored Ordinary People now it got
perverted there's no question about that
by by Lenin and by Stalin and into
something very very different but in the
Cold War I think what was uh what was
lost uh in the in the struggle was the
the the the the ability to see that
there was some kind of
justification in historical reality for
for the appearance of Communism that it
wasn't just a freak and it wasn't just a
uh a a kind of mindless dictatorship but
that the plight of ordinary people under
the under the forms of economic
organization that had become prominent
the plight of the common people had
become desperate there was no social
security there were no wage guarantees
there was no Union organization just
like today yeah they were powerless and
and the uh the ruling groups the
capitalist groups were very conscious of
the of what they had and what uh what
was needed uh to keep to keep it uh to
keep it going and that's why figures
like uh Alexander Hamilton are so
important because they understood this
they understood it from the beginning
that uh what capitalism requir IR ired
in the way not only of so-called free
enterprise but
remember Hamilton believed very very
strongly in the in the uh kind of
camaraderie between capitalism and
strong central government that the
strong central government was not the
enemy of capitalism but rather it's uh
it's its tool and that uh and that what
had to be constantly kind of uh
revitalized was that kind of
relationship because it was always being
threatened by populist democracy which
wanted to break that link and and cause
government to be in and uh return to
some kind of responsive relationship to
the
people and the Cold War so the Cold War
arises and this becomes the kind of
Moment by which capital and espe
corporate Capital can dismantle the New
Deal and uh free itself from any kind of
Regulation and constraint to deform and
Destroy American democracy can you talk
about that process how that what
happened during that period Well I think
the first thing to be said about it is
the success with which the governing
groups managed to create a cold
war that uh
that was really so total in its uh in
its uh spread that it was hard to mount
a critical opposition or to take a more
detached view of our relationship to the
Soviet Union and just what kind of uh
problem it created and it also had the
effect of course of skewing the way we
looked at domestic discontents domestic
in qualities and so on because it was
always easy to Tire them with the uh
with the brush of Communism so that the
the communism was a was was just more
than a regime it was also a kind of a
total depiction of what was the threat
to to and complete opposite to our own
form of society our own form of economy
and government and in politics and
vision talk about because of that
ideological Clash therefore uh any
restriction of
capitalism uh which was defined in
opposition to Communism as a kind of
democratic good if you want to use that
word uh was was lifted in the name of
the battle against communism that it
became capitalism that was ju opposed to
Communism rather than democracy and
there therefore this empowered capital
in a very pernicious way to dismantle
Democratic institutions in the name of
the war on communism oh I think there's
no question about that the uh the notion
that you first had to so to speak
unleash the the great potential
capitalism had for improving everybody's
economic lot and the uh kind of
constraints that had been developed not
only by the new deal but by Progressive
movements throughout the 19th century
and early 20th century in the United
States where it had been increasingly
understood that uh while American uh
economic uh uh institutions were were a
good thing so to speak and develop and
needed to be nurtured and developed they
also posed a threat they posed a threat
because they tend Ed to result in
concentrations of power concentrations
of economic power that quickly
translated themselves into political
influence because of the the the
inevitably poorest nature of democratic
representation and elections and and
Rule so that the uh the difficulty's
been there for a long time been
recognized for a long time but we go
through these periods of
sleepwalking where we have to relearn
lessons that have been known almost
since the uh since the birth of the
Republic or at least since the birth of
Jeffersonian democracy that uh that
capitalism has its virtues but it it has
to be carefully carefully watched
observed and often
controlled thank you uh uh please uh uh
join us uh for part two uh later on with
our interview with Professor Sheldon Wen
Professor Wen um we were talking about
uh the freeing of corporate Capital
because of the Cold War uh from internal
Democratic
restraints uh and that free saw
corporate Capital really make war
against participatory democracy
Democratic institutions can you describe
a little bit what the process was how
they began to hollow out those
institutions and weaken
them well I think you really have to
start with the uh political parties
themselves the Republicans of course
have never been had much of an appetite
for uh popular participation the
Democrats have had a checkered history
of it sometimes uh very sympathetic and
other times uh indifferent but um the
the during the uh during the 60s and uh
and the and really even during the 50s
as well uh movement toward democracy
began to take shape with the realization
of the uh of the kind of voter
restrictions the most Elementary kind of
restrictions on Democracy prevalent
especially of course in the South and
especially involving the
disfranchisement of uh of of
African-American
uh voters so that the uh uh that kind of
uh that kind of development and of
course the uh attempt on the part of uh
of Freedom Writers and others to go into
the South and try to uh to help uh
African-Americans polit organize
politically and and to Def and to defend
their the Rights created a kind of
political context I think think probably
which had never been had never existed
before in which the uh there were
fundamental arguments about franchise
election
disenfranchisement race and uh a range
of related issues that uh that simply
called for a kind of a debate that as I
say had had had scarcely been raised for
for decades and it that meant that uh a
certain generation or a couple of
generations had had a political exposure
that was uh truly unprecedented in
recent American history not only the
Freedom Writers who went down but
practically every campus in the country
was affected by it and not only because
various faculty and students went to
Alabama and elsewhere but because it
became a standard topic of conversation
to to learn how the movement was doing
what kind of obstacles were being met
and what we could do and there were
marches and marches and marches so that
it was a it was a political experience
that was I think uh as I've said
unprecedented uh in terms of its
intensity and in terms of the huge
number of of of uh citizens being
involved of a younger younger age and
yet when we look back at the
1930s uh what I think marked the
so-called new left was that it was not
coupled with labor no it wasn't no it
wasn't the 30s and the 30s
were kind of a peculiar thing I mean it
was a it had it wasn't it shouldn't be
uh simply dismissed because it did have
lasting influence because it showed uh
to some degree at least that that it was
possible to get a progressive
Administration that Rosevelt whatever
his failings and
shortcomings had had
shown that with sufficient popular
support you could manage to make some
kind of dent in the in the uh in the
kind of political privileges that
existed in the country and helped to
benefit the economic plight of of most
people and he did make serious attempts
it uh it of course ran into all kinds of
problems but that that's the nature of
politics but I don't think it can be
underestimated the extent to which the
the New Deal uh influence spread
throughout the society I think it had a
an
extraordinary uh effect in ter long run
effect in terms of igniting ideas about
popular participation and its
possibilities and yet it was really a
response to the breakdown of capitalism
it certainly was I mean it it it had its
limitations but I think there's a very
real question about how far the country
was prepared to go at that time it's
important to remember that the early 30s
meeting by that from 1932 say on was not
only a period of
New Deal ferment it was also a period of
reactionary ferment and that one mustn't
forget such things as the Liberty league
and also and above all father
coglin uh which who was a extraordinary
figure someone who began as a defender
of the new deal and ended up as a bitter
anti-semite and had to be disowned or at
least throttled by his own church had
become so extreme but the uh but but
there there were there were a lot of
things percolating in those years and on
on both sides because I've said the uh
the New Deal and the liberal uh
Resurgence uh also uh uh also in effect
uh uh caus its uh it caus a reaction
that uh that I think led to a kind of
permanent uh I'm going to say permanent
conservative
realization that it had to develop a
kind of standing set of its own
institutions and
Foundations and fundraising activities
all the year round not just to wait for
elections but to become a kind of
permanent force in
conscious conservative force in American
politics from the ground up and that
started when would you say I would say
it started with the reaction to the New
Deal which would mean in about
1934 and so essentially they're building
anti-democratic institutions to to
burrow their their themselves into what
we would consider the fundamental
institutions of an open Society
universities the
Press um political parties would that be
correct yeah that would that would be
largely correct yes they did realize
that uh that those institutions were
porous and that they lent themselves to
uh you know to the influence of money
and the influence of uh of the kind of
people who had big big money and uh so
they waged a uh you know a counter
campaign and and the result was I think
a uh a sort of permanent change
especially in the Republican party
because remember the Republican party
was was not a reactionary party in the
early 30s and even as late as the 1936
election with Alf Landon who was very
much a moderate and uh he only W won
Maine in Vermont but still uh it he was
significant and that uh Wendel Wilkey
was a power in the party until at least
1940
uh had a Liber very important liberal
Wing so it took a while for the
evolution of the Republican party to
becoming the kind of staunch and
continuous uh opponent of of New Deal
legislation with with leaders who by and
large were committed to Rolling it back
and to introducing conservative reforms
in education in economic structure in
social security systems and so on we'
spoken earlier about what you term
inverted
totalitarianism when did that process
begin would we would we signal the
beginning of that process uh with those
reactionary forces in the 1930s is that
when it started um I think in a in the
broad view it would start back uh start
back then I think uh to G it's that it
didn't gain Full Steam
until you had those uh uh parallel
developments that
involved such sophisticated public
relations uh powers and uh political
party
organizations that were round thee
operations that uh with a conscious
ideological slant and an appeal to
donors who who wanted to support that
kind of slant so that politics while all
of those elements had been present to be
sure for a long time they achieved a
certain organizational strength and and
uh longevity that I think was unique to
that period
and one has to remember that uh that the
30s was a very troubled political period
because not only of the the New Deal and
the controversies it raised and not only
because of the reactionary elements at
home but Europe was clearly uh heading
toward some uncertain future with Hitler
and musolini and then the Spectre of
Stalin so that uh it was a very very
worrisome nervous period that had a lot
to be nervous about do you have a theory
as to why countries like Germany uh
Spain why Europe went one way and
America when
another well I think I'm sure there are
lots of reasons one that I would
emphasize is the failure of governments
in that country to be able
to capture and mobilize and sustain
popular support while introducing
structural economic and social changes
that would meet the the kinds of growing
needs of of a large Urban and
industrialized population I think that
was the
failure you talk in uh I think it's in
politics and vision about how fascism
arose out of viar uh which was
essentially a weak democracy and yet you
argue inverted totalitarianism certainly
a species of
totalitarianism uh can often be the
product of a strong
democracy it can uh in the sense that uh
that strong
democracy can do what its name
implies in the pursuit of popular ends
it develops inevitably powerful
institutions to promote those ends and
very often they lend themselves to being
taken over and utilize that uh that uh
for example that uh popular means of
communication and uh and uh news
information and so on uh can become you
know very easily propaganda means for
for for uh for corporate capitalism
which understands that if you gain
control of uh newspapers radio
television that you're in a position to
really shape the political atmosphere
you write in democracy Incorporated that
you don't believe we have any authentic
Democratic Institution
left I don't that may be a bit of bit of
an overstatement but I think in terms of
effective Democratic institutions I
don't think we do I think there's
potential I think there's potential uh
in movements towards self-government
movements towards uh uh economic
independence and movements towards
educational reform and so on that have
the seeds for for change
but I think that it's very difficult
now given the way uh the media is
controlled and the way political parties
are organized and controlled it's very
difficult to get a foothold in in
politics in such a way that you can
translate it into electoral reforms
electoral victories and and legislation
and so on it's a very very complex
difficult demanding process and as I've
said before democracy's great trouble is
it's episodic right and that just uh
makes it easier for those who can hire
other people to keep a sustained
pressure on government to go the other
way you talk about how uh Democratic
institutions which have essentially
surrendered themselves uh to corporate
power
have pushed politics if we Define
politics as that which is concerned with
the common good and with uh accepting
the the risks the benefits and the
sacrifices evenly across the society
that uh that essentially that
has pushed political life to some extent
underground um outside of the
traditional uh political
institutions I think I think there's I
certainly think that there's something
to be said for that because uh I think
if you look
strictly at our political parties and
the national Pol political
processes uh you get a picture of a
society which seems to be morban in
terms of popular democracy but if you
look at what happens locally and even in
state Statewide uh situations there's
still a lot of Vitality out there and
people still feel that they have a right
to complain to agitate to promote uh
causes that will benefit them and this
uh this Still Remains I think a a strong
element in it but I do think we're
facing a a period of in which economic
uncertainty is such that uh particularly
for younger people in the sense that we
don't really know anymore with any
degree of high certainty how to prepare
young people for a constantly changing
economy so that young people in a
certain sense who are the sort of stuff
of uh of later political movements and
and political uh support systems that
young people are in a very real way uh
puzzled and I think confused and sort of
don't know where to go and are being
propelled in certain directions that uh
that don't really add up to their long
run uh benefit and it's a uh and it it
it starts with I think the uh secondary
education and it continues in college
the uh the plight of liberal arts
education is just extraordinary today it
is so much on the offensive and uh so
much on the ropes that that it's hard to
see what what what if any place it'll
have in the
future it's hard to see you in most
politics departments at American
universities today it was probably a
lonely position even when oh yeah
because most American uh uh most
political science dep departments have
become in effect social science
departments and much more addicted to
seeking uh uh quantitative uh projects
that lend themselves to to apparent
scientific certainty and are less
attuned in fact I think even I would say
apprehensive about appearing to be
supportive of popular causes it's uh
it's it's just not in the in the grain
anymore and the more that academic
positions become precarious areas as
they have become with tenure becoming
more and more a rarity 35% now positions
are I would believe it I would believe
it I mean and that that becomes the uh
that becomes a problem in terms of
finding uh people willing to take a
certain risk uh with with the
understanding that while they're taking
a risk it won't be so fatal to their
life chances but I'm afraid it is now
right and uh and it doesn't bod well
because it seems to me it in a
left-handed sort of way it encourages
the kind of professionalization of
politics that uh results in the kind of
political parties and political system
that we've been warned about from the
year one and a political passivity yeah
which you say you talk about uh
classical totalitarian regimes mobilize
the masses whereas in inverted
totalitarianism the goal is to render
the masses politically passive and you
you use Hobs yeah to describe that could
you speak a little bit about that well
Hobs is interesting because he's uh he
writes in the so-called social contract
tradition and that had been a tradition
which grew up in the late 16th and 17th
century the social contract position had
furthered the notion that a political
society and its governance were the
should be the result of an agreement of
an agreement by the people as to what
sort of government they wanted and what
sort of role they wanted to to play for
themselves in such a government so that
the and the social contract was an
agreement they made with each other that
they would create such a a system and
that they would support it but they
would reserve the right to oppose it
even rebel against it if it proceeded to
work contrary to the designs of the of
of the original uh original contract so
that uh that became the sort of uh of of
medium by which Democratic ideas were
carried through the 17th century and
into much of the 18 18 century including
the American colonies and the uh and the
and the arguments over the American uh
Constitution as well and and especially
I should add among the in the arguments
about state constitutions in
government and um
that
fostering of political passivity uh you
said in uh or have said in work is
caused by what you were speaking about
earlier the economic insecurity the
precariousness of the position which I
think you go back to Hobbs is as citing
as one of the kind of fundamental
controlling elements uh to shut down any
real political activity I think I yes I
believe that very strongly I think the
if you go back way to the Athenian
democracy the one of of the things you
notice about it is that it paid citizens
to participate in other words they they
would be relieved from a certain amount
of economic insecurity in order to to
engage actively in politics well when we
get to our times and modern times that
kind of guarantee doesn't exist in any
form whatsoever we barely can manage to
to have an election day that isn't uh
where we suspend work and other
obligations to give citizens an opp an
opportunity to vote they have to cram a
vote into a busy normal day so that the
uh the relationship between
economic uh structures and institutions
and political institutions of democracy
are just really in ttention now in which
the uh uh which the requirements of the
one are are being undercut by the
operations of the other and I don't see
any easy solution to it because the uh
the forces that uh control the economy
control to a large extent public opinion
um modes of uh of uh of publication and
so on and uh and make it very difficult
uh to mount uh counter counter views
well in fact to engage in real
participatory democracy or political
activity is to put yourself in a more
precarious position Visa your work your
status uh within the society there's no
question about it and that that's true
of I think virtually every activity it's
now certainly frowned upon an academic
uh uh act work and it's certainly an uh
public education it's it's frown on and
there's no effort made to really make it
a bit easier for people to to
participate and the uh intensity that
economic survival requires today leaves
most people exhausted there's uh and one
understandably they don't they don't
have much if any time for for politics
so we're we're in a really difficult
situation where the requirements of
democracy are such that they're being
under minded by the realities of a kind
of economy and society that we've that
we've developed which you point out
Hobbs foresaw he did he did indeed and
his solution was you surrender right you
surr your political rights y uh thank
you stay tuned for part three with our
discussion with uh Professor Sheldon Wen
uh you talk in both of your books about
super power which you call the true face
of inverted totalitarianism what is
superpower how do you describe it well I
think it's important to uh to to to
grasp that
superpower
includes as one of its two main
elements the modern economy and the
modern economy with its uh with its
foundations in not only economic
activity but scientific research is
always a dynamic economy and always
constantly seeking to expand to get new
markets to be able to produce new goods
and so on so that the so that
superpowers
dynamism becomes a kind of uh becomes a
kind of counterpart to the character of
the modern economy which has become so
dominant that it defines the political
forms I mean the first person to really
recognize this which we always uh are
embarrassed to say was KL Marx who did
understand that economic forms shape
political forms that economic forms are
the way people make a living they're the
way goods and services are produced and
they determine the nature of Society so
that any kind of government which is
responsive to society is going to
reflect that kind of structure and in
itself be undemocratic be a aist in a in
a fundamental sense and be and have a uh
have consumers as
Citizens and Marx would also argue that
uh it also defines
ideology it does it does Define ideology
Marx was really the first to see that
ideology ideology was
a had become a kind of although there
are antecedence had become a kind of uh
preconceived package of ideas and and
centered around the notion of
control that it uh represented something
new in the world because you now had the
resources to de minate it to impose it
and to generally make certain that a
society became so to speak educated in
the in in precisely the kind of ideas
you you you wanted them to be educated
in and that became all the more
important when uh when societies entered
the stage of relatively Advanced
capitalism where the emphasis was upon
work getting a job keeping a job holding
it in insecure times and when you got
that kind of situation everybody wants
to put their political beliefs on hold
they don't want to have to agonize over
them while they're agonizing over the
search for work or worrying about the
insecurity of their their position
they're understandably preoccupied with
survival and at that point democracy
becomes at best a luxury and at worst
simply an afterthought and it's uh so
that it its future becomes very
seriously compromised I think and
uh
when the ruling ideology is determined
by capitalism corporate capitalism you
write uh we have an upending of
traditional democ ratic values because
capitalist values are about expansion
exploitation profit The Cult of the
self uh and you stop even asking
questions uh that can bring you into
Democratic or participatory
democracy I think that's true uh to an
extent but you know I would amend that
to say that once the kind of supremacy
of of the capitalist regime becomes
assured and where it's evident to
everyone that it's not got a uh a uh a
real alternative in uh confronting it
that I think its genius is it sees that
a certain
relaxation is is not only possible but
even desirable because it gives the
impression that the regime
is being supported by public debate and
supported by by uh people who were
arguing with other people who were uh
justifi I mean who were allowed to speak
their minds and so on and I think it's
when you reach that stage that you get
as as I think we have that that the that
the pro that the problematic
relationship between capitalism and
democracy become more and more acute and
yeah we don't have anyone within the
mainstream who questions either
superpower or
capitalism no they don't and I think uh
I don't think it's it may be a question
of you know weakness but I think um I
think the problem is really I think more
sort of quixotic that is um capitalism
unlike earlier forms of economic
organization
capitalism thrives on change it it uh it
presents itself as a dynamic form of
society with new inventions new
discoveries uh new forms of wealth so
that it doesn't appear like the old
regime as sort of the uh an encrusted
old fogy type of society and I think
that makes a great deal of difference
because in a certain sense you almost
get it roles reversed that is in the old
regime the dominant Powers uh
aristocracy and so on wanted to keep the
lid on and the uh Insurgent democracy
liberalizing Powers wanted to take the
lid off but now I think you get it uh as
I say I think you get it kind of
reversed that uh democracy Now wants in
its form of being sort of the public
philosophy now wants to keep the lid on
and becomes I think
increasingly less or more averse to ex
examining uh in a in a to
self-examination and becomes
increasingly I would say even intolerant
of views which uh which which question
its own assumptions and above all
question its consequences because I I
think that's what where the real issues
lie is not so much with the assumptions
of democracy but with the consequences
and trying to figure
out how we've managed to get a political
system that preaches equality and an
economic system which thrives on
inequality and then produces inequality
as a matter of course well in all
totalitarian societies there's a vast
disconnect between rhetoric and reality
which of course would characterize
inverted
totalitarianism well I guess that's true
I think I probably qualify that because
I'd qualify it in the sense that when
you look at Nazism and
fascism uh they were pretty upfront
about a lot of things leadership
principle racist principles and they
made no secret that they wanted to
dominate dominate the world so that I
think was a a certain uh uh kind of
aggressive openness in in in those
regimes that I think isn't true of uh of
our contemporary situation and yet in
the same time in those regimes I mean
you look at Stalin's Constitution as a
document it was a very liberal protected
human rights and free speech and so on
the one hand at least in terms of civil
liberties uh and we have as superpower
exactly uh replicated and anyways this
call for constant global domination
expansion that was part of what you
would describe as classical
totalitarianism you right that the
notion of superpower is that it's Global
and that that constant Global expansion
uh which is twinned with the engine of
corporate capitalism is something that
you say has diminished the reality of
the nation state itself somehow the
nation state becomes insignificant in
the Great game of superpower Global
Empire and that that has consequences
both economically and politically well I
think it does uh I think one has to uh
treat the matter uh carefully because a
lot of the vestages of of the nation
state still are obviously in existence
but
uh I think one of the one of the
important Tendencies of our time I would
say not Tendencies but trends is that uh
Sovereign
governments based on so-called liberal
democracy have discovered that the only
way they can survive is by giving up a a
large dose of their sovereignty by
setting up European unions various trade
packs and other sort of regional
alliances that place constraints on
their power which they ordinarily would
Proclaim As Natural to have it to having
Any Nation at all and so that the U uh
that kind of development I think is is
fraught with all kinds of implications
not the least of being uh not only
whether what kind of actors we have now
in the case of nation states but what
the future of social reform is when the
vehicle of that reform has now been sort
of transmuted in into a system where
it's lost a degree of of autonomy and
hence its capacity to to create the
reforms or promote the reforms that that
that that the uh that people and and
social movements had wanted the nation
state to
do and
um part of that surrender has been the
uh impoverishment of the work class with
the flight of manufacturing and I think
it's in politics and vision you talk
about how um the war that is made by the
inverted totalitarian system against the
welfare state
never
um publicly accepts the reality that it
was the
system that caused the impoverishment
that those who are imp
are somehow to blame for their own
predicament and this of course is part
of the skill of the public relations
industry uh the the mask of corporate
power uh which you write is really
dominated by personalities political
personalities that we pick um and and
that has had I think uh I don't know if
you'd agree a kind of a very effective
has been a very effective way by which
uh the poor in the working class have
internalized their own repression and in
many ways become disempowered because uh
I think that that message is one that
even at a very at a street level many
people have
ingested yeah I think I think you're I
think you're right about that the uh uh
the problem of
uh of how to get a
foothold uh by Democratic forces in the
kind of Society we have is so
problematic now that it's very hard to
Envision how it would take place and the
uh uh the ubiquity of the of the present
economic system is so is so
profound and it's accompanied by this uh
apparent uh denial of its own reality
that it's becomes very hard to find a
defender of it who is isn't really uh uh
doesn't want to claim in the end that
that he's really on your side uh it's a
yeah it's a very paradoxical situation
and uh I don't know I mean I think we we
all have to take a deep breath and uh
try to start from scratch again and
thinking about where we are how we got
there and what kind of immediate steps
we might take in order to to alter the
course that I think we're on which uh
which really creates uh societies which
when you spell out what's happening
nobody really wants or at least not
ordinary people want it's uh uh it's
it's a very it's a very strange
situation where and I think you know not
least among them is I think the factor
that you suggested which is the kind of
evaporation of leisure time and the
opport unities to use that for political
education uh and as well as kind of
refreshment moral refreshment but the uh
yeah it's uh it's it's a it's a really
totally unprecedented situation where
you've got affluence opportunity and so
on and you have these uh these kinds of
uh frustrations
injustices and uh and really very
diminished life
prospects you agree I think with Carl
Marx that um unfettered unregulated
corporate Capital capitalism is is a
revolutionary Force oh indeed I think
it's been demonstrated even Beyond his
wildest dreams that it uh yeah you just
uh you just have to see what what
happens when a underdeveloped part of
the world as they're called becomes
developed by capitalism just transforms
everything from social relations to not
only economic relations but uh prospects
in society for various classes and so on
no it's a uh it's a mighty mighty force
and the uh the the problem it always
creates is trying to get a handle on it
uh partly because it's so omnipresent
it's so much a part of what we're used
to that we can't recognize what we're
used to as a threat uh and that's that's
part of the Paradox you take issue with
this or you know point out that in fact
it is a revolutionary force and yet it
is
somehow uh as as as a as a political and
economic position the domain of people
as self-identified
conservatives yeah it it it is uh I
think their conservative on um sort of
one side of their face as it were
because I think they're always willing
to radically change let's say social
legislation that's in existence for for
it to defend uh people ordinary people
uh I think they're very selective uh
about what they want to uh preserve and
what they want to either undermine or or
completely eliminate that that's of
course the uh uh the the kind of uh the
the kind of way that the political
system presents itself in kind of an
interesting way that is you get this
combination of conservative and liberal
in the party system I mean the
Republicans stand for pretty much the
preservation of the status quo and the
Democrats have as their historical
function the kind of mod modest moderate
reformism that's going to deal with some
of the excesses without challenging uh
very often the the basic system so that
it's uh it kind of strikes a wonderful
balance between preservation and
criticism the criticism because the
preservation element is so strong
criticism becomes always constructive in
the sense that it presumes the continued
operation of the present system in its
main elements of both corporate
capitalism and superpower absolutely and
yet you say that at this point political
debate has really devolved into what you
call non-substantial issues issues that
don't really mean anything in if we talk
about politics as centered around the
common good yeah it political debate has
become you know either so rhetorically
excessive as to be beside the point or
else to be so shy of taking on you know
the basic problems but you know again
you're back in the uh kind of chasing
the tail
problem the mechanisms I.E political
parties that we have that are supposed
to organize and express discontent are
of course precisely the organs that
require the money that only the dominant
groups possess I mean you know long ago
there were theories or proposals being
floated toh set up public
financing but public financing even as
it was conceived then was so
minuscule that you couldn't possibly uh
even support a a kind of lively
political debate in in a modest way now
politics has become such an expensive
thing that it's U that I think really
the only way
to describe it realistically is to talk
about it as a political economy or an
economic kind of political economy it's
it's got those it's those two are
inextricable elements now in uh in the
in the business of the of the national
or state governments too and yet I think
you could argue that even the Democratic
party under Clinton and under Obama
while it continues to use the rhetoric
of of that kind of feel your pain
language which has been part of the
democratic establishment has only
furthered the agenda of superpower of
corporate capitalism and of course this
the rise of the security and
surveillance state by which all of us
are kept in check yeah I think that's
true because the uh the uh the reformers
have simply
hesitated uh really really hesitated to
under take any kind of uh uh focus upon
uh political reform haven't the
reformers been bought off in essence I
think it's a no no subject I don't think
it even has to be bought bought off
anymore I think that it uh it it is such
a uh kind of third rail that uh nobody
wants to touch it because uh uh I think
there's there's a real inbuilt fear that
if you mess with those kind of so-called
fundamental uh structures you're going
to bring down the house and uh and if
and that includes messing with them even
by constitutional legal means that it's
uh that it's a uh it's so fragile so
delicate so this that and the other
thing that inhibit uh all kinds of uh of
efforts at reforming it it's uh it's a
phrase used to go it's a machine that
goes of itself so they think thank you
uh stay tuned for part four uh coming up
of our interview with Professor Sheldon
Wen I wanted just to go through and I've
taken notes from both of your books
politics and vision and democracy
Incorporated of the
characteristics of what you call
inverted
totalitarianism uh which uh you use to
describe the political system that we
currently live on
uh you said it it's only in part a state
centered phenomena what do you mean by
that well I mean by that that uh one of
the uh striking characteristics of our
of our age is the extent to which
so-called private institutions like the
media for
example uh are able to uh to work
towards the same end of control
specification that the government is
interested in that the idea of of
genuine opposition is usually viewed as
subversion and so that criticism now is
a category that we should really look at
and examine and to see whether it really
amounts to anything more than a kind of
mild rebuke at best and at worst a way
of sort of uh confirming the present
system by showing its open-mindedness
about
self-criticism and you said that there's
a kind of fusion now of and you talk a
lot about the internal dynamics of
Corporations themselves the way they're
completely
hierarchical uh even the extent to which
uh people within corporate structures
are made to identify with the
corporation on a kind of personal level
even and I speak as a former reporter
for the New York Times even we would get
memos about the New York Times family
which is of course absurd um and you
talk about
how that that value system or that
structure of power coupled with that
type of propaganda has just been
transferred to the state that the state
now functions in exactly the same way
the same hierarchical way uh it it uses
the same forms of propaganda to get
people at once to surrender their
political rights and yet to identify
themselves through nationalism
patriotism and and the Lust For
superpower itself the uh which we see
now you know across the political
landscape yeah now I think that I think
that's a very uh a very strong element
and fact decisive element in our in our
present situation the uh there's been a
kind of uh conjunct Ure between the way
that social and educational institutions
have shaped a certain kind of mentality
among students among faculty and so on
and the media itself that have H that
have that are in lock step with the
requirements of the kind of political
political economic order that that we
have now and that the uh the the the
basic uh the basic question I think has
been that we have seen the
U kind of
absorption of politics and the political
order into so many non-political
categories of Economics sociology even
religion that we've sort of lost the
whole uh seems to be unique character of
political institutions which is that
they are supposed to embody the kind
of the kind of substantive hopes of
ordinary people in terms of the kind of
present and future that they want and uh
and that's what uh what democracy is
supposed to be about but
instead we have we have it subordinated
now to the so-called demands of economic
growth the so-called demands of uh of a
kind of uh economic class that's at home
with the uh sort of scientific and
technological advances that are being
applied by by industry so that the uh
the kind of political
element of the ruling groups now is
being shaped and to a large extent I
think
incorporated into a uh an ideology that
is fundamentally
unpolitical or political in a sort of
anti-political way what I mean by that
it's uh it's not it's a combination of
forces that really wants to exploit the
political without seeking to either
strengthen it or reform it in a in a
meaningful way or to uh or to rejuvenate
it it's U it it sees the political
structure as opport unity and the uh
more
porous it it is the better because they
the uh the dominant groups have such
instrumentalities that they're
controlled now in order to do that
exploitation exploitation radio
television new newsprint what have you
that it can that that it's the best
possible world for them you actually
cite nii as saying how pressing HEI was
I think you may have said he was a
better uh Prophet than Marx I think if I
remember correctly in politics and
vision but how nii understood the
disintegration of the liberal of liberal
democracy and the liberal class and also
understood the rise of fundamentalist
religion in an age of secularism and how
dangerous that
was yeah he I I think that's obviously I
think it's true of him
uh and I think it was very very
farseeing on his part uh he of course
was not a a sympathizer with those
development but he wasn't an ordinary
sympathizer either with uh with the sort
of historical Elites or even current
Elites that were either uh capitalist or
nationalistic as in the case of of
Germany uh n n was trying trying to to
Really retrieve a notion of the value
intrinsic value of of of political life
and he found it however only only
comprehensible to him in terms of some
kind of dichotomy between Elite and mass
and that I think was uh the failing of
nature because he saw so much in terms
of tendencies in our society and culture
that will ruin us to democracy and and
needed to be reformed but reformed in a
way that would promote democracy but
which nature would inevitably try to
turn into vehicles for celebrating or
encouraging uh Elite formations and uh
he simply could not conceive of a
society that would be worthwhile in
which Elites were not given the most
prominent and uh and leading role he
just couldn't conceive it he had the
kind of 19th century sort of heelan
notion that that the masses were
ignorant uh they were intolerant they
were uh uh against progress and all the
rest of it he's simply like so many very
good writers in the 19 19th century
didn't know what to do with with the
quote people including marks no no they
didn't they uh they they tried to either
neutralize them or try to uh co-opt them
but they never really tried to
understand them I think the best the
best political movement I think which
did try to understand them in in a
significant way strangely enough was the
American Progressive move movement which
was very much rooted in American history
and American institutions but saw uh
quite clearly uh the dangers that it was
getting into and the need for really
significant reform that required uh
Democratic means not uh elitist means
for their solution and above all
required America to really think
carefully about its rule role in
international relations because he saw
that uh that that was a trap that it
would that as a an aggressive uh
dominant role in economic relations was
a trap because of what it required what
it required of the population in terms
of their Outlook and education and
culture and what it required in the way
of Elites who could uh lead that kind of
of those kinds of
formations and uh and I think for that
reason he was literally a pessimist
about about what what could happen and
uh he had nowhere to go he had no great
trust in the people and he had come to
distrust uh the elite I think in the end
he took a kind of view that what elit
should do is to hunker down and preserve
culture preserve it in its various
manifestation literature philosophy
poetry so on but he certainly understood
what happened when the state divorced
itself from religious Authority oh yeah
that you you would see the rise of
fundamentalist religious movements in
Fierce opposition to the secular state
number one and number two you would see
a frantic effort on the part of the
state to sacralize itself yeah yeah
that's true it it try it did try to do
that it did that rather Le far less in
the United States but it certainly did
it in
Germany and uh uh to some degree Italy
but not not fully it U yeah I I think
um I think to some extent the problem
that that nature gets into I think is an
overstatement of a position that assumed
a kind of
a kind of sustained religious
religiosity on the part of ordinary
people that I simply don't think was
true I don't mean to say that they
became Skeptics or they became agnostics
or anything of the sort but I do think
there was a slackening and a lessening
of religious commitments and a kind of
marginalization of of ecstasy groups and
are you talking about the end of
monarchy uh no the the end of uh of of
of the of the of of really the the the
significant role of religion in the
constitution of the modern modern state
which would have been the end of
monarchy wouldn't it it would have been
the end of monarchy except in a kind of
symbolic role uh yeah it would have been
the end of
monarchy um I do think that monarchy
probably would always require some kind
of sacral element uh certainly the
remnants of it in countries for a while
like Spain and Greece uh indicated that
but uh but no it it it did undermine
monarchy there's no question about it uh
most modern uh Tendencies have
undermined it and monarchs have mostly
been showpieces and not that much else
you also talk about inverted
totalitarianism as not
only uh signaling the political
demobilization of the
citizenry but how it's never expressed
conceptually as an ideology or
objectified in public policy what do you
mean by that well I I mean by that that
uh it it hasn't it hasn't been
crystallized in just those terms that
it's a that it's it's it's it's
operational it's operations is really a
combination of
elements
that has have not whose uh interlocking
and coherence together have never been
either properly appreciated or publicly
debated in any sustained way and I think
that uh there's been a sort of creeping
quality to it that it becomes more and
more significant as the requirements of
a modern economy and uh uh modern
education system become more and more
apparent and that uh but it's never
provoked the kind of uh crisis that has
led to fundamental
reexamination it's uh there have been
critics there have been complaints and
so on but it's never opposition has
never really been focused in a way that
presented a uh a serious challenge
because it's never named it never names
itself no no you cannot you cannot use
that name I mean it's that simple you
canot use capitalism as a you know in in
a way that's
appropriate you said that in inverted
totalitarianism It Is furthered by power
holders and citizens who often seem
unaware of the deeper consequences of
their actions or inactions what I find
interesting about that statement is you
you say even the power holders don't
understand their
actions yeah I don't think they do I
think that's most uh I think that's
apparent not only in uh so-called
conservative uh political uh office
holders but liberal ones as well they uh
there's such and it's I think the reason
for it isn't far to seek uh the demands
of contemporary uh political decision
making that is actually having to decide
things in legislation or executive
action in a
complex political society and economic
Society such as ours in a complex
political economic uh Society such as
the world is make it make reflection
very difficult
they make it extremely difficult and
everybody's caught up in the in the
demands of the moment and understandably
so it uh it becomes again a kind of uh a
kind of game of of of preservation of
keeping the ship of State afloat but not
really trying uh seriously to change its
direction except maybe
rhetorically uh I think I think it's a I
think the
the demands of the world of are such now
and so dangerous with the kind of
weaponry and resources available to
every crank and nut in the world makes
it uh makes it extremely difficult for
for governments
to to let down the to relax a moment and
think about social order and the welfare
of the citizens in some kind of way
that's divor from the uh security
potential of the society we spoke
earlier about how because corporate
forces have
essentially uh taken over uh not only
systems of media but systems of
Education uh they've effectively
destroyed the capacity Within These
institutions for critical thinking and
what they've done is educate generation
now probably a couple generations of
systems manager ERS people whose
expertise technical expertise revolves
around keeping the system as it's
constructed viable and a float so that
when uh there's a uh in 2008 uh the
financial the global financial crisis
they immediately loot the US Treasury to
infuse uh staggering 17 trillion doar
worth of money back into the system and
uh what are the consequences we'd spoken
earlier about how how uh even the power
holders themselves don't often
understand where they're headed what are
the consequences of now lacking the
ability to to critique the system or
even understand it what are the
consequences environmentally
economically in terms of democracy
itself of of feeding and sustaining that
system of corporate capitalism or
inverted
totalitarianism well I think the only
question question would be how uh what
kind of time span you're talking about I
mean I see the uh the the kind of
erosion of those institutions that you
mentioned as so
continuous that uh that it that it won't
take won't take terribly long before the
substance of them is completely hollowed
out and that what you will get is
institutions which
do no longer play the role they were
intended to either role of lawmaking in
independent way or criticism or
responsiveness to a to to an electorate
so that I think the uh the consequences
are with us already and are and of
course the turnoff on the part of the
voters is H is just one indication of it
but the level of public discourse is is
certainly another so that I I see it as
a a process which now is finding fewer
and fewer dissident voices that that
have a a genuine platform and mechanism
for for reaching people I don't mean
that there aren't people who disagree
but I'm talking about do they have ways
of communicating discussing uh what the
disagreements are about and what can be
what what can be said about the
Contemporary situation that needs to be
addressed so that the U the problem I
think right now is the problem that the
uh the the instruments of uh of of
revitalization are just really in very
bad disrepair and I don't see any uh
immediate Prospect of it
because coming from with in the system
itself coming from within you know years
ago say in the 19th century it was no uh
ordinary occurrence that a new political
party would be formed and that it would
make maybe not a
dominant effect but it would certainly
influence as the Progressive Party did
influence
Affairs that's no more possible now then
than you know the most Outlander scheme
you can think of uh political parties
are so expensive that I needn't detail
the difficulties of that would be failed
be faced by anyone who tried to organize
one I think the beautiful example we
have today I just think fraught with
implications is the Koch brothers
purchase of the Republican party they
literally bought it literally and they
they had a specific amount they paid and
now they've got it there hasn't been
anything like that in American history
to be sure powerful economic interests
have influenced political parties
especially the Republicans but this kind
of gross takeover and in which the party
is put in the pocket of two individuals
is without precedent and that means
something serious it means that among
other things you no longer have a viable
opposition party and while however much
many of us may disagree with the
Republicans there is still a an
important place for for disagreement and
now it seems to me that's all gone it's
now become a personal vehicle of two
people and one God only knows what
they're going to do with it but I
wouldn't hold my breath if you think
constructive results are going to follow
well didn't Clinton just turn the
Democratic party into the Republican
party and force the Republican party to
become insane yeah it's um it's true
yeah I mean it's true that that the uh
beginning with the Clinton
Administration the Democratic party has
kind of lost its way too
but I still maybe it's a a hope more
than a a fact but I still have the hope
that the Democratic party is still suff
sufficiently loose and sufficiently
uncoordinated that it's possible for for
dissidents to get their voices heard now
it may not last very long I because in
order to compete with the Republicans
there will be every Temptation for the
Democrats to emulate them and that means
less internal democracy more Reliance on
corporate funding wouldn't uh it' be
fair to say that after the
nomination of George McGovern uh the
Democratic
party created institutional mechanisms
by which no popular candidate would ever
be nominated again oh I think that's
that's true McGovern thing was a
nightmare to the party to the party
officials and I'm sure they they Ved
that there would never be be anything
like it again possible and of course
there never has been and it also means
that you lost with that the one thing
that McGovern had done which was to
revitalize popular interest in
government and uh so the Democrats not
only killed McGovern you know they
killed the what he stood for which was
more important and you saw an echo of
that in 2000 when Ralph nater ran yeah
and engendered the same kind of
Grassroots enthusiasm and just as it was
the Democratic establishment that uh you
know virtually during the presidential
campaign the Connelly Democrats
conspired with the Republican party to
destroy in essence their own candidate
uh you saw the democ it was the
Democratic party that destroyed the
viability of of nater yeah no that's
true it's true the uh the Democrats uh I
mean it's not it's not surprising
because as we've said many times the
Democrats are playing the same game as
the Republicans and have have a nuance
and some historical baggage that compels
them to be a little more to the left but
uh it seems to me that the conditions
now in which political parties have to
operate conditions which involve large
amounts of money which involve huge
Stakes because of the of the character
of the American economy now which has to
be very carefully dealt with with and
very cautiously and given the declining
role of America in world affairs I think
that there's there's every reason to
believe that the that the caution
cautionary attitude of the democratic
party is emblematic of a of a new kind
of politics where the room for maneuver
and the room for staking out significant
different positions is shrinking
shrinking very very
much thank you very much uh stay tuned
for part five coming up of our interview
with Professor Sheldon willing I wanted
to ask about the nature of
superpower and particularly the role of
the military in superpower and I thought
I'd Begin by asking because the military
is something you have personal
experience with your own you were a
pilot of a beach 24 were these the
flying fortresses was that Bomer
Navigator was what I was a Bombadier and
a navigator yeah uh and in the South
Pacific yes MH and you flew how many
combat 51 51 missions mhm uh and what
was from when to when and what were you
uh targeting well we um our group
started uh from godle Canal when the
Americans took it over finally and what
we were essentially was the Air Force to
support MacArthur and MacArthur's
strategy was to proceed by Island by
Island uh taking them back from the
Japanese and getting closer and closer
to uh Japan proper and we were the
support group for that which meant uh
softening up the Japanese holding Island
Holdings prior to Invasion and then the
other unfortunate uh Mission we had was
to chase the Japanese Navy which proved
disastrous isn't that a novel use of
aren't those like about as maneuverable
as a tank in the air terrible we had we
in received awful losses from that
because these big lumbering aircraft
prly flying low to try to hit the
Japanese Navy and we lost countless
people in our countless so and that's
what so we we spent that and uh uh we
were going from isand to isand making
our way eventually to the Philippines
itself and then I left at that point I
had finished my missions and the uh Air
Force was at that point preparing for
the invasion of Japan which of course
didn't uh actually take place where were
you when the bombs were dropped on
Hiroshima nagasa I was on a road to
Miami Beach to visit my I had my wife
and visit we're going to visit my mother
did you you did you at the time
recognize the significance of that uh I
didn't I don't think um we quickly
learned something about it because um
there were some people I was associated
with who who knew some of the the the
the men involved in the development of
it and uh they they used to tell me
things about uh Oppenheimer and the
others that especially of course you
became uh aware of this when Oppenheimer
ran into his own trouble with the
unamerican activities people well and
this is because he turned on the nuclear
program after right yes he did producing
yes he did the Weaponry
yeah um what from your own experience
because you write about the military and
you write about superpower but your own
experience in the military what did you
learn from that what did uh it wasn't
theoretical for you you were in War uh
you were in the giant bureaucracy of the
military
itself well uh you must remember the
Cardinal fact which is we were all so
young uh I was
19 and the uh other members of our crew
there was only one who was about 23 or
20 24 so we were all extremely you know
in experienced and
impressionable uh and we were you know
flying these Giants
giant bombers and going into combat not
knowing anything about what it meant
except you know sort of formal lectures
which we might have had so the
experience was always quite traumatic in
a lot of ways some of it didn't register
until much later but for some of them
some of the people I knew it it
registered very soon and we had quite a
few psychological
casualties of uh of men boys who just
couldn't take it anymore just couldn't
stand the strain of uh you know getting
up at 5: in the morning and proceeding
to get into these aircraft and go going
getting shot at for a while and and
coming back to rest for another day it
uh uh it it was a it was a difficult
time it was a very difficult time and I
think the fact that saved us was that we
were so young we didn't know what was
going on basically and uh I think there
was a lot of of uh coming to grips with
it later in the lives of most of us that
we began to appreciate and realize what
we had been through and uh that didn't
help terribly much but it did allow you
in some sense to get come to grips with
with what it had meant especially uh the
kind of suppressed uh memories you had
of uh bad incidents that that happened
how did it affect you uh did you walk
away differently both I mean emotionally
and intellectually do you think from the
war way I became I think as I look back
I think I went through a period of being
in very inward uh looking and
uh the other thing to be remembered is
uh the the pace of things from the
moment you got out in my case I had to
go back to undergraduate school to
finish my degree so I was back for a
year then you jump right into graduate
training and graduate education was at
that point so overwhelmed by numbers
that everything was kind of compressed
and and uh brief and not terribly uh
much time to digest things and then you
were scouting for a job so that the uh
one had the impression that uh the
pressure that had been building up in
the war and the war service just kept on
going and that you never really had a
chance to relax because now you were
faced with
tenure and the problems of tenure and
the problems of publication and teaching
so that it it exacted a toll it there's
no question about it we never really
managed to relax because we I suppose we
did relax a bit when we finally got
tenure but even then it was very
competitive because the the password was
publication right and so you were
constantly pressured to write and write
and write and uh uh and you did yeah you
did but uh I think I was fortunate
enough in it to enjoy it actually enjoy
the writing but for a lot of my
colleagues they would manage it but it
exacted a price they it's hard to
explain to people how difficult it is to
write when you uh when it simply has to
be forced in a lot of ways well see the
difference is you're a writer I mean
you're quite a good writer which is not
common among academics yeah I'd always
enjoyed writing from the time I was in
grammar school to to the time I went to
college I enjoyed it very much but uh
some of my uh some of my colleagues who
Lov the subject matter and were good
teachers just couldn't write and it was
tragic because they had a lot to give
and they couldn't get tenure because
they hadn't passed this particular bar
and you also had uh so you were at
Harvard in the
1950s yeah and this was when the academy
was being purged ston Lind
know driven out of Yale uh you know
Chandler Davis I me a long list of great
great Scholars and academics who were
targeted uh from outside and within the
academy and pushed out and this was
something that coincided with the
development of your own formation as an
intellectual and as a writer uh and I
wondered how that experience also
affected you because you held fast to a
very kind of radical critique
of well it I mean I had a very peculiar
experience when I got hired at Berkeley
because I didn't realize when I went
there that the position I was taking was
one occupied by a by a man who refused
to take the Loyalty out oh and he and I
didn't know that at the time and uh so
when I did learn it of course I I felt
kind of guilty about the whole thing he
Lo he lost a job he he quit and uh it it
was
a in one sense you know you sort of said
to yourself well I don't have to worry
about the Loyalty o because I've taken
it in the military many many times so
there's nothing new to me but later on
you began to think about it more and
realize that maybe there was a a larger
issue there than than you thought
because it meant that you were accepting
a certain Orthodoxy from the outset and
that uh you weren't quite as free as
Notions of academic freedom suggested
you were and it it was it was a kind of
rude awakening for a lot of us I think
uh because you know we also were caring
the the
wartime propaganda about uh we represent
the forces of freedom and and open
society and all the rest of it and then
to find
ourselves really kind of cramped for
expression in that very tense kind of
post post-war cold war war period it was
it was not a it was not a pleasant time
I I didn't enjoy those years of teaching
it settled down later but didn't settle
down for much because we then had the
frus of the 60s too which was very
disturbing and upsetting to all the
academic routines how much damage do you
think those purges triggered by the
McCarthy era in the early 50s did to the
academy I think it did a lot to uh uh to
people almost about often in ways they
weren't quite aware of um it had a
definite uh chastening and deadening
effect on academic inquiry and political
expression and what happened was I think
the worst part of it was that once that
got into the air it became normal you
accepted those things really
unconsciously when you say those things
what are you talking about you're
talking about how far you question
government policies how far you question
dominant values what you said about the
economy and things of that sort and the
uh uh the the problem was that you uh
you you faced the students with a with a
far less uh critical attitude than you
should have had and it took a long while
I think to kind of disentangle yourself
from that kind of uh kind of coverage
which the the the Loyalty of period gave
uh to to people and since academic jobs
then were scarce uh you always you know
kind of swallowed whatever you had had
to swallow to get a job so if you may
have been a a radical in graduate school
or undergraduate school but you knew
that you couldn't carry carry that torch
as a prospective faculty member I talked
to Larry ham who Princeton organized the
anti-apartheid movement this would have
been in the 70s yeah and uh he said of
roughly 500 Princeton faculty there were
only three or four yourself included who
joined those demonstrations yeah that's
true we paid a price I think the most uh
humiliating episode for me was when uh
some of the undergraduates were
protesting uh Princeton investment in
South Africa and uh they wanted to PR
present their case to the to the
alumni and the alumni had a meeting and
the kids were supposed to present it and
at the last minute the kid that was
leading the group got a little cold feet
and he said would you come in with me
and I shouldn't I should have said no
but I didn't so I went in with them and
I've never been Jered quite so roundly
by the by the uh uh alumni sitting there
waiting to be be talked to by the
students about investment in South
Africa uh some of them called me
50-year-old uh sophomores and that kind
of thing it it was it was a difficult
experience but uh the the students did
well they they held their own who was
one of the largest at Princeton
surprisingly one of the largest student
well largely because of Larry yeah uh
who's a remarkable organizer and uh very
charismatic and with deep integrity and
um yes he was uh and still doing it in
New York today um
um I wondered whether that experience
says something about the university um
about its cowardice MH and I guess let's
say the faculty in particular yeah oh I
think it did I think uh all those events
of the 60s on on through the 70s
uh did it
um uh it's hard to realize at the outset
of the frus particular I'm speaking from
my my experience at Berkeley it's it's
really hard to to
recognize this the moment when the
faculty suddenly realized that they were
a kind of corporate body right that uh
that could stand up against the regions
and uh take a stand when there when they
thought there was interference with
academic freedom as there tended to be
with the regions they uh they they did
kind of mess around with curriculum and
try to influence faculty hiring and so
it was a very very Grim chapter but the
uh the effect of it was you know to make
you very very uh very very much on guard
against the uh the role of the of the of
the of the uh
uh of the graduating graduated students
and their and their influence in the
University because at Princeton you had
like at very few other places lots of
concentrated money and the university
were depended on that to to a large
extent so that the uh the alumni had a
had a kind of position that I didn't
experience anywhere else in terms of the
their prominence and I think the
informal influence that they exercised
over a lot of matters that they had no
business dealing with it was a it it was
an an education in alumni relations the
like of which I never had any place
else when you came back from the war you
went to Oberlin and then you went to
Harvard yeah
many
of the academics at these institutions
during the war had
served uh in positions of some Authority
in Washington had certainly integrated
themselves into the war effort and I
wondered if this if you thought that
this was a kind of turning point in
terms of Academia fusing itself the way
business had with the military uh you
know intellectually in terms of serving
the ends of
superpower well well I think it
certainly had some influence in the
sense that uh I guess one of the things
that struck me at Harvard in terms of uh
going to seminars where the professor
had been active in Washington during the
war was the uh uh I mean they were
always interesting because of inside
stories but they were also really quite
uncritical of of anything that they
either were doing or or the government
was doing during this period in other
words there was no
Detachment uh that they that because
they were so in a certain sense uh
Carried Away by their own experience and
their kind of self- assumption about
their their importance and so on that it
uh it it I found some of the early years
at
Harvard experience with faculty be
very very uh unnerving in a lot of ways
now it isn't true of all of them some of
them like uh I don't know whether you
knew Merl fad or not but he was Merl was
chairman of the department but he he was
a wonderful person and he had been in
Washington during the war with one of
the the agencies controlling prices and
wages uh but he was uh he je he never uh
threw his weight around or tried to rely
on Washington experience as the answer
to all lectures uh he was a he was a
very good man and a very very serious
academic but others uh like Bill Elliot
as I say were just uh so infatuated with
with them their own self-importance that
they uh I learned absolutely nothing
from them in class and I don't think any
of the other students did they never
came prepared they always would kind of
talk off the top of their head and more
often than not it would be
autobiographical and it uh it just was a
was a very disheartening kind of kind of
experience I remember when I first came
to Harvard in graduate school um there
was a man who taught the history of
political uh Theory named Charles
M and M was of the old school he was a
very careful very aidite scholar
with very few if any axes to grind and I
unfortunately didn't come to harvor till
his very last year there but I did
manage to sit in on some of his lectures
well he was succeeded by by another man
Carl Friedrich who who was so infatuated
with himself and his self-importance and
his role in the post-war uh Constitution
tions that were written for the German
uh uh States the the provinces um that
he could hardly bother teaching you the
subject matter and was much more
concerned that you shared his
experiences and his uh and and the kind
of role he had played in the in in the
postwar war world and uh I have never
seen such a parade of academic egos in
my life as as that uh that uh that
moment when so many of them were uh were
clearly uh uh so marked by the
Washington experience I'm wondering if
that isn't an important rupture for
Academia going back to Julian benda's
treason of the intellectuals where he
writes about how you know it is not the
role of the intellectual to formulate
policy uh to adjust the system but to
stand back with a kind of integrity and
critique it um but you had that
combination of the Fusion of Academia
with Washington carried forward in the
60s under Kennedy and others y um uh
coupled with the anti-communism uh and
I'm I I wondered whether you thought
that that was a kind of radical break or
or a destructive force within Academia
when set against the
pre-war well it's yes it's certainly
it's certainly a
uh cast a uh a kind of set of
constraints many of which you didn't
really recognize till later about what
you could teach how you would teach and
the and what you wouldn't teach and uh
it its influence was was really simply
very great because uh people it's not so
much what they said is what they didn't
inquire into well and also it's who's
led into the club yeah oh yes yes indeed
yes indeed I mean Chandler Davis one of
our great
historians pushed out of Yale for his
taking a piece going on a peace
delegation to Hanoi during the war
blacklisted yep uh gets a law degree
he's still working on behalf of at this
point prisoners and workers in U
Youngstown Ohio please join me
for uh part six of my interview with
Professor Sheldon Wen um were talking
about superpower the way it had
corrupted Academia especially in the
wake of World War II um the increasing
integration
of uh academics to into the power system
itself um and I wanted to talk a little
bit about the nature of
superpower um which you describe as
essentially the face of inverted
totalitarianism uh you you say that with
superpower power is is always projected
outwards um which is a
fundamental characteristic that Hannah
Aon subscribe ascribes to Fascism of
totalitarian fascism and that the
inability and she ju opposes uh Nazi
Germany with countries like Hungary so
that the uh nature of fascism in a
country like Hungary is diluted because
they don't have that ability to keep
pushing power outwards we of course uh
in our system of inverted
totalitarianism have been constantly
expanding hundreds of bases around the
world we virtually at this point occupy
most of the Middle East and I spent
seven years in the Middle East um and to
come back to America and have Americans
wonder why we are detested um is
absolutely mistify because the facts on
the ground the direct occupation of two
countries the proxy Wars that are
carried out Somalia Pakistan Yemen um
have
engendered Isis and resurrected Al-Qaeda
and other jihadist movements in a way
that uh is completely understandable and
rational from their perspective um so I
wondered if you could talk about what
that quality of constantly projecting
power outward does
to the nation and to democracy
itself I think in some respects uh it's
it's pretty apparent what it does in
terms of instit governing
institutions that is it it obviously
enhances their power and their and
increases their
scope uh and at the same time renders
them uh less and less responsible even
even though we've kept the uh the
outward framework of Elections and uh
criticism and all the free press Etc uh
but the the the power is there and it is
uh it is thanks to particularly to
contemporary technology it is power
that's kind of uh endlessly
expandable we U and it's very different
from the sort of imperialism of the of
the 18th or 19
centuries where resources always had a
limit and that Territorial and other
expansion was severely restricted by it
and but now of expansionism is
accompanied by an ability to impose
cultural norms as well as political
Norms on populations that did not have
them and the uh and that has made a
tremendous difference in the uh in the
effect of of the Imperial reach because
it means that you can uh it's becoming
easier to uh have it rationalized not
only at home but also abroad and the uh
and and the differences I think are just
very very profound between uh the kind
of expansionism of the Contemporary uh
State like America and and those in the
18th and 19th
centuries um what are the consequences
you talk in politics and vision about
you mentioned thus cities and uh and
thus cities raising up the figure of
paricles who warn the Athenian deos that
expansion uh constant expansion would
ultimately destroy Athenian
democracy uh uh by in essence bring
bringing back the um mechanisms for
control the the harsh violent mechanisms
of control of Empire back into Athens
itself and that of course is what we
have done um from the use of drones to
militarizing police forces to the
security and surveillance State what
what are what are the consequences the
physical consequences of of superpower
uh you mean particularly upon the
population right Upon Us yeah well I
think I think what it does is create an
enormous Chasm
between uh the sort of uh pictures we
have of or are given of what our system
is in high school grammar school even
even college and the reality of where we
are it's uh it's I I think it's that
disjunction that seems to me uh so uh
kind of perilous because it means that
much of our education is not about the
world our world that we actually live in
but about a world that we
idealize and idealize our place in it
that uh that makes it very difficult I
think for Americans to take a true
measure of what their leaders are doing
because it's always cast in in a kind of
uh uh mode that uh that seems so
reassuring and seem so self-confirming
of of the value of American values for
the whole world and I think that it's
that that problem is such that you you
don't really have a critical attitude uh
in the best sense of the word I don't
mean that the public is never
disgruntled or the public is never out
of sorts I'm talking about a a critical
attitude which which uh which really is
dealing with things as they are and not
with a simple negativism but is trying
to make sense out of out of uh where we
are and how we've gotten to be where we
are but it it requires I think a level
of political education that we simply
haven't begun to to to explore and I
think it's become more difficult to to
to to kind of get it get it uh across to
the public because there's no longer
what Dewey and others call the public
the public is now so fragmented and so
so almost Kos in so many ways that it's
uh that it becomes very difficult to
reach them and there are so many
intermediaries of entertainment and
diversion and so on that uh the
political message even when it's pres
presented which it is rarely as uh as
some kind of
public-spirited uh set of uh ideals uh
just gets lost it uh it it's uh it's a
very very perilous period I think
because uh uh I think the net effect of
it is to render the political Powers
more independent even while they
Proclaim their their Democratic basis
and of course
superpower
creates a bureaucracy which
operates in secret virtually I mean we
and and I think that is something that
we have seen transferred back um that
you're no longer allowed to peer into
the internal mechanisms of power and the
Obama Administration has been quite
harsh uh in terms of going after those
few whistleblowers people within the
systems of power who have reached out
through the Press uh Edward Snowden
would be an example to allow the public
to see the workings of power um using
misusing the Espionage Act which was
really the equivalent I think of our
foreign Secrets act to shut down uh this
kind of
lens into how power works and that is I
think the disease of superpower itself
that has now been brought back would you
say yeah I I think that's substantially
correct the uh the the difficulty is uh
is really so enormous now in trying to
educate a public to to awareness of what
what is happening when there are so many
counterveiling
methods of uh conditioning and informing
that public that are quite uh quite
concern to prevent exactly that and I
think that the the the I think it's very
much a question of whether the whole
idea of a public isn't in such Jeopardy
that it isn't that it isn't really faced
with a certain kind of antiquarian
significance and nothing more because
the uh the public has uh I think ceased
to be a kind of uh entity that's
self-conscious about itself I mean we
everybody may vote and we say the public
has expressed itself and that in a one
sense in a quantitative sense is true
but the real question is did they when
they asserted themselves or voted in a
certain way were they thinking of
themselves as a public as as as perform
in a public act a political Act of a
citizen or were they expressing
resentments or hopes or frustrations
more or less of a private character and
I think that it's h that it's that kind
of a quandry we're in today and uh again
it makes it makes it very difficult to
to see where the democracy is heading
with that kind of uh level of public uh
public knowledge and and public
political sophistication well the public
is encouraged through the ethos of
capitalism to express their interests
yeah and I think it's in politics and
vision that you speak about how that
fragmentation of the public is by design
that people are broken down according to
their quote unquote interests not
as uh a a a citizen within a democracy
but as a particular group that seeks to
acquire certain rights power economic
advantages and that fragmentation which
is uh assiduously cultivated opinion
polls become a way to do that although
of course modern public relations do it
and campaigns do it that PE that that
rather than speak to a public in a
presidential campaign you target quite
consciously these public relations
uh mechanisms within the campaigns will
Target these fragments to keep them
fragmented no I think that's true and I
think that's a a very significant
development where the uh I mean the
notion of a public had always assumed a
kind of cohesive character and some kind
of H set of commonalities that uh that
justified describing it as a public but
I think that that day has long long
since gone because of precisely what you
described that is the fragmentation of
it deliberate fragmentation of it and
the uh skill with which you can slice
and dice uh the public into smaller
fragments that are that can be appealed
to while holding that fragment uh in
relative isolation from what's Happening
to the other fragments or to the society
as a whole yeah it's a you can Target
now in a way that uh that you couldn't
before before you had a blunt instrument
called public opinion and you assumed it
yet you shaped it as you shaped some
kind of amorphous Mass into a whole but
that's uh that's not it anymore it's far
more
sophisticated far much more aware of
lines of Distinction that set one public
against another and you had to be
careful not to uh not to ruin your own
case by by antagonizing one public that
you needed for your for for your cause
so that it's a it's become a highly
highly sophisticated operation that uh
that has no counterpart I don't think in
in our previous political history it
makes Walter Litman look benign yeah it
certainly does yeah I mean his is public
is still a coherent ho even if it's a
little crazy um and I think what's
frightening is the way not only the
public has been fragmented but the way
that these fragments are manipulated to
be turned one against the other so for
instance corporate capitalism strips
workers of
uh you know benefits and job
protection um pensions
medical plans and then very skillfully
uses uh that diminished fragment to turn
against public sector workers such as
teachers who still have those benefits
so the question doesn't become why
doesn't everyone have those benefits the
question becomes to that fragment which
is being manipulated by forces of propag
in public relations you don't have it
and therefore they shouldn't have it
they shouldn't have it yeah I think
that's an example of what you were
speaking Yeah I think that's I think
that's accurate the uh the uh the
ability of the of of the
fragmentation strategy is uh is really
quite astounding and it's that we've got
such sophisticated means now of
targeting and of fashioning messages for
specific
audiences and insulating those messages
from other audiences that it's a it's a
new chapter it's clearly a new chapter
and I think that it's fra with all kinds
of uh of dangerous possibilities for any
kind of theory of democracy which uh
which requires I I think some kind of uh
notion of a public sufficiently United
to to express a will uh and a preference
that uh that that of what it needs and
what it wants but if you're uh
constantly being divided and and
subdivided it's uh it's that's an
illusion now that uh that there is a
public and the amazing thing it seems to
me is that the ruling groups can Now
operate on the assumption that they
don't need the traditional notion of
something called a public in the in the
BR sense of a coherent whole that that
they now have the the tools to deal with
the very very disparities and
differences uh that they have have have
themselves helped to create so that it's
a it's a game in which you uh in which
you manage to uh
undermine the cohesiveness which could
which publics require if they are to be
politically effective and you undermine
that and at the same time you create
these these different uh distinct uh
groups that inevitably find themselves
uh in tension or at odds or in
competition with other groups so that it
becomes more of a melee that it does
become a way of of fashioning uh
majorities and this was quite conscious
the destruction of the public oh
absolutely absolutely I mean again it's
that theme we've talked about it uh
they're capable of doing it now that is
of H of dealing with fragmented publics
who aren't aware of their of their ties
to those fragments but are are everybody
feels sort of part of a of a group that
has no particular uh alliance with
another group and the
cultivation by the dominant forces of
that sense of victimhood of your group
yeah and that victimhood is caused by
another fragment yeah I mean that of
course characterizes the rightwing the
reason for our economic Decline and our
social decline is because of
undocumented workers or because of
liberals or because of homosexuals or
whatever you know yeah know that uh
that's the that's a time honored
strategy of uh
div really not only divide and conquer
subdivide and subdivide and and Conquer
well they were good students of Hobs I
guess
yeah yeah better than they
know uh thank you very much uh stay
tuned for part seven of my interview
with Professor Sheldon Wen uh he is the
author of several seminal works on
political philosophy including politics
and vision uh democracy Incorporated and
a book on
teville uh and it's toille who I think
expresses uh this notion of
participatory democracy that you Embrace
and I wondered if you could explain what
that means and set it
against um manufactur what you call I
think manufactured
democracy well to toefield discovered a
uh I mean he didn't invent the the
notion but he discovered the
significance of viable local
self-government and the and he insisted
that the U that that a democracy if it
were to avoid the pitfall of becoming a
mass democracy would have to zealously
protect and nurture uh these smaller
groupings whether they be
municipalities religious groupings or or
economic groupings of one kind or
another but that these were the the
major forces for offsetting the drive of
modern power towards concentration and
control so that the that was the the
basic uh basic uh struggle for him was
between these two these two forces and
he saw in the New England Town meetings
and in the new England local self
government schemes uh the the answer to
how you kept democracy alive you kept it
alive locally and that the effect of
keeping it alive locally was to dilute
the significance of majority rule at the
national level toille feared majority
rule because he thought it meant
uniformity of belief imposed by the
power of the majority
I think he u in a certain sense may have
overstated that and paid insufficient
attention to the role of of Elites I
think that in some of his later writings
especially when they were concerned with
France uh in the 1840s this is regime
yeah I think he became aware that uh
that that that there were was a problem
with with that and that uh the the old
regime's system of uh corporate bodies
had to be carefully thought through
because they could easily be a become
simply vested interest and the uh and so
that they there was a lot of unfinished
business in teville and I think it's
very important in understanding him and
that you recognize it but I think that
his definition of what particip
participatory democracy is is one that
you Embrace yes it is and I I think that
the uh that the common threat I think we
both
share if I can put it that way
pretentiously the common that we share
the the notion that uh that the problem
is centralized power and that
centralized power has assumed because of
scientific and technological
developments has assumed a quality of
Menace that it simply didn't have before
before it was simply the power of a
central government in its Army and in
its bureaucracy to to sort of enforce
Force its will but the uh but now it's
much more than that it's the it's the
ability to shape and direct Society in
in a fashion that's much more uh of a
lock step thing than was ever conceived
by by Chi and this was Lenin's genius
and that as a revolutionary he
understood that yes he did yes he did
and they it's it's as it is at the same
time the tragedy of Marx because he both
understood the Lenin point of view but
he also understood the point of view of
of more participatory kind of
Institutions and he I think he never
managed to overcome that because he
thought that Revolution required mass
movement Mass
organization and that once you got there
you didn't know what to do with it after
the revolution except sustain it in
certain uh institutions and that the uh
that the problems of
participation and the kind of experience
Mark wanted people to get in running
government in running Economic
Institutions was becoming increasing L
uh more difficult and what lenon grasped
is that the goal was to seize those
centers of power yeah destroy the
Soviets destroy autonomous power y um
and and as in essence harness that
system which you talk about that complex
system uh
to his own ends yeah and to simplify it
in doing it I mean not just take it over
but refashion it in a way that was
Harmon harmonious with this kind of
central regime he wanted in other words
you didn't just take over uh local
institutions and uh local parties and so
on and so
forth which had their own histories and
ideologies and practices but you
reshaped them and you reshape them in
accordance with a with a centralized po
system that that lenon I think very
unfortunately LED towards
uniformity uh because I I think he saw
or thought he saw that uniformity was
also a key to exercising power in a way
that could change a whole society a way
that you could not do it if you kept
recognizing differences tolerating them
even encouraging them well he didn't at
any differences at all starting with
bakunin no he didn't he certain he
certainly didn't um Adam anen in his
great book on Lenin Bolshevik said that
the only people that Lenin finally
admired deeply were quite successful
capitalists because they had
accomplished in the capitalist world
what he was seeking to accomplish uhhuh
in that uniformity and that complete
hierarchical uh you know repressive and
unforgiving system that in many ways
just became a form of State capitalism
right it's yeah true enough you had
published I think it was for five years
this journal oh yes democracy I see you
have the great historian Arnold mayor
contributed to this yes he was on the
editor oh he was on the
1982 um which must have boosted your
esteem and popularity at the politics
department at Princeton oh yes oh yes I
remember once when I was editing that
journal I left a copy of it on the on
the table in the faculty room and hoping
that you know somebody would read it and
comment I never heard a word no and
during all the time I was there and
doing democracy I never had one
colleague come up to me and either say
something positive or even negative
about it and just absolute silence what
you did it was 5 years that you did it
yeah and and why why did you see the
need for this journal well I saw a need
for it because I thought a couple of
things I thought political Theory had to
to justify itself not just as an
historical discipline that uh that dealt
with the Critical examination of of idea
systems but also that political Theory
had a role to play in in helping to
Fashion public public policies and
governmental directions and above all
civic education in a way that would that
would further what I thought to be the
the goals of a more democratic more
equalitarian uh more educated
society and um I assume that's because
you saw within the intellectual
landscape that that was not being
addressed I didn't think it was I mean I
had respect for the people especially at
the nation magazine which I thought was
was trying very hard uh my problem with
the nation I thought was that it was I
hate to appear this way but I didn't
think its intellectual level was very
high and that mattered because its
Archen enemy the new Republic whatever
you may think about its politics managed
to attract intellects of a pretty high
order
and that meant that the the liberal
radical case was being was not being
presented at its best and that uh that
it was uh that it was mostly a kind of
responsive uh set of uh reactions to
what what the government was doing or
what capitalists were doing but had no
coherent idea of what they really wanted
to get to in terms of a of a just and
more equal Society were you seeking to
do what Dwight McDonald did with
politics a bit um I admired his work I
thought he was a a real ground breaker
breaker uh and I certainly uh uh
certainly didn't learn from him about
trying to to do something like this I
think he's underappreciated yeah very
much
underappreciated he was a little
quixotic but you know the great story
about him and trosky he he he was not
Orthodox in any of his beliefs but for a
while he was a member of the trotskyite
party um but of course he kept writing
things that trosky didn't approve of
until a letter came from Mexico from
trosy said that everybody has the right
to their St the stupidity of their own
beliefs but comrade McDonald over abuses
the privilege and he was expelled um but
he did very much what you did and he
attracted the kind of intellectual
radical thinkers I mean everyone from
Orwell to Hannah Aon to beheim uh who
were not being yeah published and I know
you had written for a while for the New
York Review of Books and with the rise
of that neoliberal Embrace of what
became corporate capitalism uh
essentially dropped from if we want to
call the New York Review of Books the
mainstream yeah it did a uh uh it was
too bad I enjoyed that relationship and
was it was a longstanding relationship
where I con was a contributor almost
from the first edition of the of the New
York Review of Books the uh the kind of
interesting about my rupture with the
New York Review of Books it came about
although it was probably festering
because I was moving more towards the
left they were moving more towards the
center the rupture came when
um one of the editor's friends in the
New York circle of intellectuals wrote a
book on
education and uh he uh Bob silver gave
it to me uh to review for the New York
Review of Books and I thought it was a
not a very good book and I thought that
it was not even a a liberal uh view of
educational reform and I said so in it
and he refused to to publish it well
what's so interesting is that the author
of that book about a decade later
publicly disowned the book because she
too regarded it as not really
sufficiently Advanced or liberal in its
viewpoint but you know that was 10 years
later it didn't do do me any good but uh
but the relationship was good while it
lasted and I certainly owe silver was a
a great debt in giving me a chance very
early to write for a for a large
audience um when you talk about
participatory democracy in an age of
superpower in an age of inverted
totalitarianism how is that going to now
Express itself within that super
structure well I think it will Express
itself I guess the answer I would give
is that that precisely it doesn't
Express itself I think it's uh it's
shaped and it's allowed only the outlets
that are conceived to be consonant with
the purposes of of those in power so
that it uh it it's not not autonomous
anymore in any significant sense the uh
I mean we have to keep realizing how
difficult it is to get ideas into the
public Arena now uh for any uh
significant audience it's uh it's
becoming you know more and more a a
matter of of a few outlets and if you
should uh for one reason or another uh
become you know Persona nrata with any
of those those Outlets then you your
goose is cooked uh there's no other way
to go so that uh there's a kind of I
think hidden uh sort of Force I don't
want to call it censorship that's too
strong but there's a kind of hidden
force that kind of makes you think twice
about how far you want to go in pushing
a particular point that is at odds with
either the existing Notions of the of
the uh uh powers that be or the existing
Notions of the opposition which is
called careerism it is and it's a
powerful force it is indeed both within
the media within Academia yeah and um
you know coming from the New York Times
culture you learn not so much how to lie
you learn what not to say yeah what not
to address what questions not to ask
yeah I'm sure that's true I'm sure it's
true I I used to get a taste of it at uh
at democracy even when I was editing it
that there were certain taboo matters
did you look at the Occupy Movement as a
form of participatory democracy I did to
an extent yeah I think it had had
certain healthy significance I think it
was U kind of under uh I hate to sound
this way but I thought it was under
intellectualized in the sense that it
didn't Express seemed him quite unable
to express its own fundamental belief in
a in a kind of coherent way that could
could really uh grab the country the
country's attention I think I think it
was very strong on tactics and actions
of that kind and kind of weak in terms
of its ability as I say to formulate its
in some kind of broad-based way its own
system of
beliefs but it was at least a place a
physical place oh no no question about
it it I I think it's been grossly
underestimated in terms of its
importance and the trouble is when the
uh when it doesn't get recognized for
its importance it gradually loses that
importance because people forget about
it and it's it's too bad I mean memories
are so short these days anyway but the
uh uh the way it sort of disappears and
and seems to leave no noticeable Mark is
is a is a really tragic aspect of our
politics today because people sacrificed
they were thinking and they were trying
to to achieve a laudable end and uh they
were ridiculed and uh and uh abused and
so on it uh it it is and and and above
all forgotten and the state physically
eradicated their encampments yeah it did
now it's a it's a bad chapter and I hope
someday somebody writes it as a
cautionary
tale has true participatory democracy
become in the age of inverted
totalitarianism subversion at in the
eyes of the
state I'm not sure it's quite re reach
that point because I think the uh powers
that b view it as
harmless and uh they're smart enough to
know that if something's harmless
there's no point in sort of making a
pariah out of it so that I think they
they I think they're capitalizing on the
sort of short attention span that people
especially people working have for for
politics and that it that it would soon
go away and uh run its course and and
that if they could contain it they
wouldn't have to really repress it that
it would gradually sort of shrivel up
and and disappear so that I think it's
been a I think it's been a deliberate
tactic not to continuously
engage uh the the Democracy movement
intellectually because that's a way of
perpetuating it its importance instead
you surround it with silence
and hoping and in the Modern Age with
good reason that memories will be short
and you use cliches in the mass media to
demonize it little indeed
indeed thank you very much uh stay tuned
for our
final segment with Professor woen on
Revolution um coming up um when you have
a system of totalitarianism in this case
inverted
totalitarianism when you have
effectively fragmented and destroyed the
notion of the public when you have
institutions that Define themselves as
Democratic and yet have abandoned civic
virtue and the common good uh and in
fact harnessed their Authority and their
power to the interests of Corporations
which is about creating a Neo feudalism
a security and surveillance State uh
enriching a small Global oligarchic
Elite uh perpetuating the
militarization of the society and
superpower itself which defines itself
through military
prowess is that a point at which we
should begin to
discuss
Revolution I think it is but I think uh
the proper emphasis should be on
discussing it carefully that is to say I
mean by carefully not uh timidly but but
carefully in the sense that we would
really have to be breaking new ground
and I think it it's because of the
nature of the of the forces we've been
talking about that constitute a a
challenge I think the like of which
hasn't happened before and that we've
got to we've got to be very sure because
of the interlocked character of modern
society that we don't act prematurely
and don't do more d damage than we than
we really uh than are really justifiable
justifiable the U so that I think uh I
think Revolution is one of those words
that I'm not so sure uh we
shouldn't uh find a
synonym that would capture its idea of
significant even radical change but
which U somehow manages I think to
discard the
physical uh Notions of overthrow and
violence that inevitably it evokes in
the modern Consciousness and I don't
have a solution to that but I think that
uh that that that's required I think the
idea of Revolution simply carries too
much baggage and it it and the result of
that is you're forced to fight fight all
sorts of rear guard actions to say what
you didn't mean because of the of the
overtones and uh implications that
Revolution seems to have to the modern
uh to the modern ear so uh I think we do
have to start striving for a new kind of
vocabulary that that would help us
express uh what we mean by radical
change without uh without uh simply
seeming to to tie ourselves to the kite
of previous Notions of of Revolution I
think we I think the Contemporary
condition as I'm sure Marx would have
been the first to acknowledge is quite
without precedent in terms of the
concentration of capitalist power and of
the relationship between capitalism and
this and the state it's always been
there but now we're talking about
Aggregates of power the like of which
the world
has never seen and the like and the
world that we have now come to see is is
is in the throws of being integrated by
those Powers so it's U I think we we
really have to know when we're being uh
trapped by our own language and need to
at crucial points see hold up that
language for scrutiny and say maybe it
needs to to be rethought in a different
direction or need to be modified in a
serious way so that we're really making
contact with what the world actually is
and yet in the archaic sense of the word
it's it's about a cycle Revolution is
about coming back yeah in this sense
coming back to participatory democracy
that we've lost yeah um and the popular
notion of Revolution which you correctly
point out does not bear much resemblance
to the historical reality of Revolutions
in the sense that most revolutions
although violence are certainly part of
it most revolutions are finally
nonviolent in the sense that you have uh
the armed forces in the case of the cacs
going to petrograd in the case of in the
Paris commune where uh the national Army
refuses to turns in their arms and
creates the the commun in 1871 in Paris
uh even in contempor AR situations such
as the downfall of the Shaw in Iran in
1979 and the Army refuses to fight it is
it is about converting intellectually
morally ethically um
uh those within the power structure who
realize its Decay its corruption its
repression and no longer are willing to
sacrifice for
it well I I I guess I'm not quite
certain uh not quite certain in the
sense that uh I
think your
formulation would rely more than I would
on trying to
persuade the P the powers that be in the
structure uh to change course or modify
their behavior and modify their their
beliefs and um I don't think that's
possible or if it's possible it's not
possible on a large scale there might be
deviant and Rebels who would but I
really think it's
U to have the form that I think would
really justify calling it Revolution I
think it has to be generated and shaped
outside the power structure
and I think because what you're trying
to do is in is to enlist and educate
groups and individuals who have not had
a political education or experience of
much of much of any kind and so that you
your task is uh is compounded it's uh
for those who think that the basic
problem is just seize power you're still
confronted by that in that formula with
a population that's basically unchanged
and that you then face the kind of cruel
choices of forcing them to change so
that they can support your structure so
that the the the real I think really
difficult challenge is to accompany the
the attempt to gain power with an
equally strong emphasis on public
education that that makes it uh so to
speak uh a potentially
responsible repository of that
power I would totally agree that it has
to be formed outside of power um but I'm
wondering whether once you can create a
revolutionary ideology and a force that
uh contests power um one of the secrets
to revolutionary success is that that
message which is what vaslav hav would
call living in truth the that that
message once it penetrates the lower
levels of power and I'm thinking of like
the police or the case those foot
soldiers that are tasked with protecting
an elite that they may very well view as
venol whether that can create or or in
Revolutionary Society creates enough
paralysis within the structures of power
that you can bring it down and I covered
the fall of East Germany uh where in uh
the fall of uh 1989 Eric huker who had
been in power for 19 years as the
dictator sent down an elite paratroop
division to leipsig uh because at that
point they had 70,000 people massing in
the streets and when that uh paratroop
division refused to fire on the crowd
the whole apparatus of the stazi state
crumbled almost you know at such a
dizzying speed none of us could keep
track of it and huker was out of power
within a week
so I'm asking whether that you're I I
think you're right of course that all of
those revolutionary forces have to be
formed outside of the structures of
power but whether finally in some sense
appealing if you want to call it to the
conscience of those at the low level
though people who are like the kexs who
come in and are told to quell the bread
riots and instead fraternize with the
crowds whether um that is in your eyes
you know a a a kind of fundamental
Moment by which a power elite can be
removed I think there uh I think there's
something very much to be said for that
uh and of course in the one wants to
avoid apocalyptic Notions but um I think
what's what we're dealing with is the
ability of of Democrats small D to
sustain the kind of political
education in such a way that you
concentrate upon those lower echelons of
power and get them to to to think
differently about their role it's a very
touchy subject because it uh it leads
you open to accusations of promoting
disloyalty among the police say or among
the army or what have you and it in a
sense that's true but I think that
nonetheless without trying to so to
speak boldly uh subvert uh those uh the
role of those powers in in society it is
possible to to reach them and to create
a climate where they themselves have to
come to grips with it and and I think
that's a that's a task that's arduous
and it's difficult and it's even a
little uh a little D dangerous in in our
present age would
you if you look at those revolutionary
philosophers and we could perhaps even
include Plato um they always talk about
the creation of an elite what Lenin
would call a revolutionary Vanguard
mackelli would call his Republican
conspirators Calvin would call his
Saints um do you see that as as a
fundamental component of Revolution
mhm to some extent I do I I would want
to of course uh naturally avoid words
like Elite but I do think given the the
way that ordinary
people become exhausted by the simple
task of living working and trying to
sustain families and neighborhoods uh in
a way that just takes all of their
energy I do think it calls for some kind
of
group or class you could even call them
who would
undertake the kind of uh continuous
political work of educating
criticizing trying to bring pressure to
bear and and working towards a revamping
of of political institutions and I don't
think it uh I think it I don't mean to
imply that there should be no that there
should be a disconnect but between that
group and Ordinary People I do think it
requires that you recognize that such a
group is necessary and that the second
task is to make sure that there are open
lines of
communication of contact of uh of
meetings between leaders and and and the
and and the people such that uh there's
never a sense of estrangement or
alienation such that the uh such that
leading groups uh feel their free to
pursue the good as they see it and for
the good of the masses who do not do you
worry about bakunin's critique of the
Bolsheviks that once that power is the
problem and that once these people who
may be very well intentioned trosky
would be an example of pre-revolutionary
trosy postrevolutionary trosky at least
in his writings was very Democratic once
in power he was Lenin's Iron Fist yeah
um and and I wonder whether bakunin's
not right that powers the problem in
that sense and and creating an elite is
a very dangerous move or a Vanguard or
whatever I think it is and I think that
the I think our
Situation's somewhat different from what
uh trosy and the others faced in the
sense that U there are
openings in our system of governance and
of uh public discourse that make it that
do provide an opportunity if you're
willing to work hard enough to get
dissident voices out into the to the
public realm and that uh so that the the
need for forc violence and so on it
seems to me is is so is simply
unnecessary that at that that as long as
we have you know con institutional
guarantees that mean still mean
something and that we have free free
forms of communication that still mean
something I think that we're obligated
to to play by those rules because they
do allow us to to disseminate the kind
of message we want want to disseminate
and uh and that the need to sort of
circumvent them or so in some sense
subvert them it seems to me is
self-defeating and yet climate change
has created a a narrowing window of
opportunity if we are going to survive
as a species and unfettered unregulated
corporate capitalism which commodifies
everything from human beings to the
natural world and this comes out of Marx
will without any kind of constraints and
it has no self-imposed limits it will Ex
it will it will exploit
those forces until exhaustion or
collapse and we are now seeing the
ecosystem itself teetering on collapse
yeah no it's true uh and I think but I
don't think uh I don't really see any
other solution than to than to really
put your your chips where where an
enlightened public would be would would
take a stand and I think I think the
problem to some extent is that there are
enlightened publics in this country but
there's no
concerted general movement which can
which can which can profess to to
represent a large body of opinion that's
opposed to these kind of developments
you just you just described and I think
I think it's the it's it's a certain
lack of
organization not in the sense of
following previous uh uh prescriptions
of organization but of trying to find
methods whereby power ordinary people
and their power can be brought to bear
in ways that will deter and dissuade uh
those who are uh in a position to to to
influence these decisions because time
as we all know is running out and uh and
and that if it uh we can continue along
the same course I'm afraid the solution
or I mean the result is not simply going
to be uh uh e uh environmental disaster
it's also going to I think feed the in
an unhealthy way it will feed a an
outcry for really forceful government
and uh and and not in a necessarily
Democratic
way and yet if we don't respond it is in
essence Collective suicide it is it is
indeed now vber has a very Bleak view of
in the age of
bureaucracy and what he he actually
talks about the banishment of
mystery um and as a former Theologian
that is really the banishment of the
Sacred nothing has an intrinsic value
everything only has a monetary value
vabor like rolls is scathing about
allowing a capitalist class to even ever
assume power um and vber writes in
politics as a vocation which you cite in
politics and vision that the very figure
that he holds up as a political hero who
resembles the classical hero is some way
uh and and holds on to civic virtue can
never overcome what the Greeks would
call Fortuna and that finally uh
you you live in a world where um you
have the necessary
passion uh of those who would carry the
common good within them thrown up
against this massive monolith this
impersonal monolith of
bureaucracy um and I wonder if uh and
and because that is the reality a
reality that uh in many ways vors
discovered um and and and he like I
think if you go back to classical
writers like Augustine uh would argue
and you know vber better than I would
argue that in some sense or at least my
reading of it is that in some sense he's
calling for those of us who care about
the common good and civic virtue to
stand up in the face of a very Bleak
reality and uh again Augustine would do
this while saying that in the end you
can never create the kingdom of God city
of you know the city of man city of God
um and yet it finally becomes just a
moral imperative whether you can
actually succeed or not s succeed uh I
don't know if VOR if that's fair
characterization of VOR is not really
the question the question is how do you
retain your own moral Integrity in the
face of these horrifically destructive
forces um and in some ways the question
is not can we succeed and and I reading
vabor I think in some ways he would say
you probably can't but that you must
resist anyway I I think that's a fair
reading of of him I think that uh that
for vber the uh the truly uh important
Civic virtues were just uh exactly the
ones that
would assert themselves at a time when
basic uh uh institutional values were at
stake and human values were at stake and
that uh you you don't win or you win
rarely and if you win it's often for a
very short time and that the the whole
that that that's why politics is a
vocation for for Vapor it's not an
occasional uh undertaking that we assume
every two years or every four years when
there's an election it's a it's a
constant occupation and
preoccupation and the the problem as VOR
saw it was to understand it not as a
partisan kind of education uh in the in
the politicians or political party sense
but as in the the broad understanding of
what political life should be and what
is required to make it uh sustainable
and so that he's he's calling for a a
certain kind of understanding
that's uh that's very different from
what we think about when we associate
political understanding with how do you
vote or what party do you support or
what cause do you support I rer is
asking us to step back and say what kind
of political order and the values
associated with it that it promotes are
we willing to to really give a lot for
including sacrifice
and I think that it's a it's that
distinction between the the temporary
and the Trent and what's truly of more
enduring significance that sets vorov
against the uh the group he hated the
relativist he's calling us to a life of
meaning yeah yeah which you have
exemplified yeah well thank you very
much Wen it's been a tremendous honor
you're uh have had a tremendous
influence on myself and many other
Cornell West and many many others and uh
not only because of the uh Power of your
intellect but the power of your
integrity well thank you I've enjoyed it
very much and I thank you for the
opportunity to talk
thanks for
