insects are the the majority of species
on the planet and they some people have
described them as being kind of like the
the oil that lubricates the whole system
that it would and it would grind to a
Hal without
them when you hear the words climate
crisis you probably think of rather
large animals endangered species like
elephants rhinos you might think of
extreme weather events like hurricanes
volcanoes earthquakes all rather large
in
scale but in fact one of the major
protagonists in this broader story of
climate systems breakdown is rather
small I'm talking about insects
arthropods the kinds of things actually
you can find in the cracks in your back
garden and yes this is bigger than just
bees potentially dying out and
pollination it turns out that arthropods
and insects are the backbone the very
oil which permits the machine ma of our
planet to keep ticking over it's also
important to talk about them because
actually it's somewhere we can make a
difference like I say these Critters are
in your back garden and your local park
perhaps the argument would go you can
make a change there rather than waiting
for government to do its bit all in all
insects and their role in the climate
crisis is under discussed we barely talk
about about it enough and I'm not just
talking about bees and pollinators
there's far more besides so I'm very
lucky today to be joined by Dave gson he
is a biologist a conservationist he's
also a writer and one of the leading
experts in the English speaking World on
insects and their role in the climate
crisis Dev goson welcome to Downstream
pleasure nice to be here well I'm very
happy you're here um I have to say um I
became acquainted with your works
properly only over the last few months
seen you here and there then there was a
great write up in the financial times
about what's basically going on with
insects which we're going to talk about
today that's the content of today's
interview and then I looked at your
interview um your YouTube channel rather
these Charming videos you make about
cider Charming is a polite way and bees
yeah gardening the environment food it
all kind of fits together at least it
does in my garden and so I yeah try and
encourage people to to Garden in a kind
of wildlife friendly way and enjoy
homegrown produce and all that kind of
stuff which uh is fun I I they're pretty
amateur um my editing skills are minimal
but uh some of them at least seem to be
quite popular yeah the side of one I
really I really recommend it um but
besides the the homesteading you're
actually also very eminent biologist um
an enologist yeah insect insects I have
to say the the several books of yours
that I've read over the last several
months um have catalyze within me a
fascination with insects a reverence and
an awe for insects which has surprised
me job done that is basically the idea
because most people don't like insects
um you know most adults anyway they you
know they pay them no attention they
know nothing about them they think
they're a bit disgusting and they call
them bugs creepy crawlers they're likely
to squash them more than any anything
else um and that's I think that's really
sad you know I mean I know I'm a bit
weird and I've been into insects since I
was a little kid and never kind of grew
out of that um
but not only are insects really
important but they're they're actually
just kind of really fascinating and cool
if you spend the time to look but just I
find it so frustrating that most people
never do you know you can find them in
your back Garden City Parks pretty much
anywhere but most people go their whole
lives without really once looking at
them what's the most beautiful insect in
the world according to Dave gson oh God
what's the goat there are loads you
could choose from um the the Spanish
Moon moth let's I'll pick a random one
today um you ask me tomorrow you get a
completely different answer but uh
they're beautiful big silk moths um
found in in in the Pines amazing kind of
emerald green intricate patterns on
their wings and long tals gorgeous
gorgeous creatures um butterflies and
moths were actually my sort of First
Love Before I became hooked on bees
later on and throughout um your book Sun
and Earth there are these periodic
portraits of different insects or
arthropods is that the is that the
broader word arthropods are things with
an exoskeleton so that includes spiders
as well as insects and Crustaceans like
crabs and lobsters and shrimps and
everything think so arthropods is a much
bigger group insects are a kind of
subset of the
arthropods and you're talking about that
there is um uh this idea of parasitic
wasps that go onto a caterpillar this
one that really sticks in my mind that
go onto a caterpillar and then there's a
parasitic wasp on the parasitic wasp
yeah I mean there's extraordinary you
say in the book actually in salent Earth
that you're not
religious but there's an extraordinary
beauty in it and and it's very easy to
understand why somebody would believe
that the world had been intentionally
designed by a superior intelligence the
way that you talk about this stuff is
just mindblowing yeah they are
astonishing I mean I you know I don't
put it down to God but there is a lovely
quote um from um a biologist JBS haldane
um who's long dead now but uh he was
asked in an interview like this one you
know what what his his studies of
evolution had taught him about the
nature of God and his response was he
must have an inordinate fondness for
beatle
um which was tongue and cheek cuz he was
an atheist but uh um but however they
came about there are something in the
region of a quarter of a million
different types of beetle alone you know
just this incredible diversity and we've
only scratched the surface you know we
discover new species all the time and uh
with so far we've named I think it's 1.
oneish million species of insect but
it's estimated that there could easily
be another five million wow so we we
haven't yet discovered most of Life on
our own little planet you know isn't
that extraordinary um so yeah they're
they're they're incredibly diverse they
they've been around they were insects
were the pretty much the first animals
to crawl out of the sea about 480
million years ago which is just an
unimaginable length of time you know
they're they've been around twice as
long as the oldest dinosaurs um which
has given them time time to evolve into
you know this this extraordinary variety
of shapes and sizes and colors and the
weirdest life histories like the
parasitic wasp that parasitizes the
parasitic wasps that parasitize the
caterpillars and so on some of them are
really minute you know the smallest
parasitic wasp actually the smallest
insect is is just under2 millim long so
you couldn't really you barely suspect
the naked eye um and then the biggest
ones are B of the moths with wingspan of
about a foot um so there's yeah there's
quite a range it's really extraordinary
uh you are as I've said an academic
biologist entomologist what how would
you classify yourself an
entomologist um an entomologist an
ecologist a conservationist I guess sort
of
I combine them all to some extent and
you you said your first love was
butterflies and moths then you went into
bees we're going to talk about bees a
lot because of course they're not just a
quite quite Charis I insect they're
really important for life on Earth
including us um but you were an academic
biologist conservationist but you've
increasingly been drawn to writing
popular science books um if you don't
mind me saying in middle age is not
something you were doing in your 20s I
pres the first first one sting in the
tail was published
2013 um and written I guess two or three
years before that it took me a while to
persuade anyone to publish it um and it
I mean I guess
the you know to start with I studied
insects because I just thought they were
interesting and I wasn't it wasn't my
research wasn't particularly applied it
wasn't I wasn't all about conservation
it was more about insect Behavior trying
to understand what they do and why they
do it out of Fascination rather than any
practical
benefit and then but then over time I
became more and more aware that they
were
disappearing um and that not only is sad
for people who like insects but actually
is worrying for all of us because they
do really vital stuff so my research
became more um applied I started to
focus on you know trying to understand
why they were declining and what we
could do to turn it around what you know
for example how we might change farming
or how we might change the way people
Garden um to make the world a more
insect friendly
place and we published lots of sort of
academic studies on on those things um
but
eventually I got quite frustrated
because it didn't seem like anyone was
listening you know politicians gardeners
Farmers don't read academic papers
they're often behind a pay wall they're
written in a kind of a fairly um
unhelpful sort of scientific language
which isn't particularly easy for Lay
people to follow anyway they're not
intended for a wide audience they're
intended for other scientists but other
scientists aren't going to do anything
very useful with that knowledge
um so so so I started a charity the
Bumblebee conservation trust was the
first sort of thing I did to try and
actually change you know have some real
impact um and that that that kept me
busy for a few years and has been a been
a success and I'm really pleased with
that um but it still on its own isn't
going to save the planet um it's it's
grown and it does good things it's
creating habit habit up for bees it's
raising awareness about bumblebees and
so on um but I wanted to I still thought
there was still an awful lot of people
out there that AR aren't engaged with
this agenda at all they don't care about
insects um so how do I get to all those
people you know the probably 95% of the
population that don't really think about
environmental issues much at all um
certainly not about insects so I thought
well I'll write a book you know a
popular book and try and get people that
way um
and I figured there were lots
of having spent at that point I guess
about 25 years studying bumblebees I had
lots of kind of interesting stories
about travel in search of interesting
bees and studies we tried to do um which
don't always go quite to plan um and and
so I I wrote this book stinging the tail
hoping that someone would like to read
it um took a while to persuade a
publisher to take it well first of all
you have to find an agent the whole
process of publishing once you leave
Academia is quite different I'd been
used to Scientific journals and their
way of doing things and there you just
send them a manuscript direct to the
journal um but with I quickly discovered
with sort of more mainstream publishing
that you can't contact um a Publishing
House direct as an author they don't
talk to they literally you look at their
website and it says do not send us
unsolicited manuscripts we won't reply
so you sort of hit this this brick wall
that you need an agent and I no idea
what an agent was I thought that's what
you know film stars had or whatever um
anyway so you go online and you dig
around and I I contacted dozens of
agents and most of them weren't
interested in this skew book about
bumblebees but eventually after lots of
false starts um I got an agent that was
genuinely enthusiastic and uh and it
didn't actually take him long at all to
to persuade
um Jonathan Cape it was to publish it
and and then it thankfully it's done
really well it was it was helped by um
Radio 4 um BBC Radio 4 had it as their
book of the week which um got it got
some sort of good attention for it and
it was shortlisted for what was called
the Samuel Johnson prize at the time
which also helped on the publicity front
and I he still you know still most
people out there haven't read any of my
books and are still not interested in
insects but I've sucked in a few people
um I've had some lovely emails from
people who say you know oh I I picked up
your book I wasn't really interested in
bees but you know someone recommended it
or had nothing else to read or whatever
and and actually you know and and now I
filled my garden with wild flowers bee
friendly flowers to to help save the
bees and you know that's great um it
makes you know makes it sort of feel
like you've had you've done something
useful with your life which so done
something useful that's really
interesting because you're saying that
you were publishing academic papers for
25 years and then the shift kind of
happens around
2010 What specifically catalyzed it was
there a story was there a moment of
political failure it is a combination of
things I think I mean one is the
biodiversity and climate crisis have
become more acute you know noticeably
the information we have as to how
rapidly they're progressing and how big
the impacts of them are going to be are
already
has has increased really uh rapidly in
recent years and it reached a point
where it was just something that you
know I I couldn't
ignore
um and I mean it's hard you know it's
it's all quite depressing actually
because we really are making a mess of
the planet um but it was also happened
to be
around uh 2010 that I got involved in
research on pesticides and being
um which was something I hadn't hadn't
been involved in
before but at the time I was I was
running the Bumblebee conservation trust
um and some of the members picked up on
this there was a bit of a sort of um
controversy emerging about a class of
insecticides called
neonicotinoids which um beekeepers were
convinced were killing honeybees uh it
started out these the chem chicals were
introduced in the mid90s so they've been
around a while at that point um
but
um scientists had started to initially
French beekeepers flagged up that if
their beehives were near sunflower
fields treated with these new
insecticides their their hives were
dying and they connected the two
reasonably enough um and scientists
started to do some research on honeybees
and these chemicals and and seem to
confirm that actually yes these
chemicals were causing honeybee Hive
hives to die out and so the members of
the Bumblebee conservation trust were
saying well if these things affect
honeybees don't they affect bumblebees
is this why Bumblebees are
declining and so um I started doing work
on on that and and actually so we did
some experiments fairly simple stuff but
we basically um kind of mimicked having
bumblebee nests um exposed to a field of
treated oil seed rape which is a crop
that bumblebees like to visit and which
at the time was treated with these
chemicals and we knew the chemicals when
when the crop is treated some there'll
be traces of chemical in the pollen and
the nectar that the bees are
eating um so we we kind of replicated
dosing bee nests with the same kind of
concentration they'd get if they fed on
a oil seed rape field and basically the
nests did really badly compared to
control nests um doesn't sound wildly
exciting but anyway we got this it was
published in science science which is is
alongside nature is one of the top two
science journals in the world and it was
published next to another paper on the
impact of these chemicals on honey bees
and science decided to that this was
quite a big story by this stage so they
we had a big press release in Paris they
flew us out to uh some fancy old
building and had all the French press
and some International press there um
for the launch of these two papers and
it got a lot of attention but there was
this immediate backlash
um which I I mean I guess I was naive
but I'd never encountered the kind of
power of Industry lobbies um and
so um my team and and the French team
that had published this other study on
honeybees came under attack from the
agrochemical industry trying to
criticize what we've done criticize us
personally um trying how personally
claiming that we'd made up the data
which that you know which is a pretty
you know that's a strong thing to say to
a scientist because the whole of Science
is based on trust really you know anyone
could make up data but you trust that
they wouldn't be so stupid as to do that
because it it's it's pointless you know
what what are you trying to achieve it's
not
science and so those kind of accusations
are you know they they they're certainly
um upsetting and uh have to be taken
seriously um anyway so I got embroiled
in this kind of fight really um uh and
and it was a bit of an eye opener I mean
the tactics that were used very the same
as the tobacco industry have used for
decades to try and discredit scientists
that come up with evidence that shows
there's a link between in that instance
tobacco and ill health um trying to
produce counter evidence they employ
their own scientists who always find
these things are harmless
um trying to conf Lobby politicians and
confu create enough doubt that
politicians can avoid doing anything
because they can say well there's no
clear scientific consensus here we don't
need to act um and it was exactly the
same or you see it with climate science
as well at the moment um anyway it was
it was it was a bit of a shock to the
system you know i' I'd just just been
quietly studying butterflies and bees
all my life never done anything
controversial soci or you know been
involved in anything anything like that
you know if you most of my studies said
we need more flowers in the countryside
well nobody gets upset if you say there
should be more flowers um but if you say
product X seems to be killing bees then
you're threatening you know sales worth
in some cases billions of dollars a year
and suddenly you know that's a whole
different world anyway it was it was
interesting um and and history suggests
we were on the right side of the
argument because the um European food
standards agency banned those chemicals
in Europe um in 2018 so it took a few
years but and it took a lot more
research by both us and lots of other
research groups but it did did seem that
event it was quite it's quite a nice
example of where scientific research did
actually lead politicians to to do the
right thing in the end at least Europe
the rest of the world is still spraying
these chemicals all over the place and
there's still a few Niche uses in Europe
that are still allowed but you know if
it feels like it was a bit of a victory
we we won that battle anyway and that
you know has made the world a slightly
better place for Beach they still have a
bunch of other problems but um at least
one of them has been more or less solved
so correct me from wrong the way that
neonicotinoids um harm bees is that they
under their ability to navigate they're
effectively drunk or drowsy they get up
late it turns them into kind of schlubs
right uh well so it does lots of things
I mean they're neurotoxins they're you
know the the they're the equivalent of
noock for insects um so they kill them
outright at at really quite small doses
you know it takes for a honeybee um then
it takes four billionths of a gram which
is you know an imaginably tiny amount um
to to deliver a lethal dose to a bee um
which to put that in context means a
teaspoon which is five grams of one of
these chemicals is enough to give a a
lethal dose to one and a qu billion
honeybees just one teaspoon and we're
applying hundreds of tons of these
things to the landscape um so they kill
them but at even lower doses they that's
when they it makes them sort of drunk it
makes them impairs their brain and these
are neurotoxins so they become
uncoordinated they become slower at
flight they become disorientated so they
can't find their way back to the hive
which is catastrophic if you're a bee
because if you lose your hive you're as
good as
dead they also do other things like
reduce the fertility of male bees and um
impair the immune system of bees so
they're then more prone to outbreaks of
disease in the in the hive and so on so
there's a whole raft of of lethal and
sublethal impacts of these chemicals and
it's not just on bees they're just as
poisonous to butterflies or beetles or
anything else so the bulk of life on
Earth which insects are threatened by
these chemicals I should say um
before it's really easy to get tunnel
vision and focus on one particular
problem um and you see in you know
scientists do it I guess it's human
nature you get stuck into something and
you dig really deep but
actually these one this is just one
group of chemicals we in Europe farmers
use about 500 different pesticides which
are all different types of poison to
either kill insects or plants or fungi
or whatever um and you know Banning one
particular group um probably isn't
really the answer because they just
replaced with something else and there
are new pesticides invented all the time
um uh so so although we we wanton a bit
of a battle unfortunately that the the
way we farm and the way the way farming
is done globally now this sort of very
intensive approach approach to
agriculture with loads of chemical
inputs that that is the problem
fundamentally unfortunately um and it
seems to me that that this is all very
serious but the the um the biggest
challenge I I you could this sounds a
bit daed right now given all the
terrible stuff happening in Ukraine in
the Middle East but amongst the biggest
challenges facing Mankind in in coming
years is working out basically how do we
feed it's going to be 10 billion of us
quite soon how do we feed 10 billion
people without destroying the planet
because what we're doing at the moment
is destroying soil wiping out
biodiversity uh has it's a big
contributor to climate change um we
can't carry on doing what we're doing at
present I would argue we need to find a
better more sustainable way to grow food
but that's not easy to do um
particularly with a with a big powerful
Lobby that quite likes the current
system and profits very handsomely from
it you talk in the book about um and
we'll talk about glyphosate and we'll
talk about various other pesticides you
talk in the book about insect
populations over the last 100 years
Falling by between 1 to % a year now I
presume that's talking about the UK no
that's that's the best Global estimate
that we have but the confidence limits
are pretty wide you know that the data
we have
for for Regions outside of Europe and
North America are pretty poor um but
that's that is that is the best
published estimate of insect declines at
a global scale so we're talking about
we're not talking about biomassive
insects because of course you can get
one or two insects proliferating
somewhere we're talking about a 1 to 2%
decline in the kinds of insects the
insect diversity over 100 years that is
that is in abundance of insects numbers
of individuals as best one can estimate
it which as I say is is is not easy to
do but essentially it's it's you know um
there are so many insects and most of
them live in the tropics where there are
a few scientists the data we have are
really patchy um but all the bits of
data we do have show decline more or
less um so most of those studies are
from Europe and North America um but
overwhelmingly they show that that
insects their ranges are Contracting um
and they're becoming less common in the
places where they still occur with some
exceptions there are some insects you
know there's so many insects there's
always going to be a few that doing okay
um but but the the clear pattern is one
of decline um at a at a rate which is
hard to discern exactly and is bound to
vary from place to place depending on
what you know what's happening locally
um uh
and if that continues then you know the
consequences are pretty scary because
people may not like them but you know
these insects are doing all sorts of
ecological jobs that something has to do
and there's no real replacement for
insects the best known of which is
pollination of course um you know bees
and lots of other insects pollinate our
crops and without that we definitely
couldn't feed the current population let
alone what we're going to have in a few
years time but they do loads and loads
of other things as well which are less
well recognized so is it is it 2third of
crops require pollination it's it's
three4 three quarters wow even worse
yeah um
that said that's that makes it sound
perhaps worse than it is because the
quarter of our
crops that's in terms of numbers of sort
of crop species yeah um the quarter of
our crops that don't require pollination
happen to include some of the biggest
crops in terms of volume so the grasses
things like um wheat Valley rice oats
and corn don't need insects and they're
pollinated by the wind
and obviously that's that comprises a
lot of what we eat in terms of bulk but
the healthy stuff the stuff that gives
us all the you know the polyphenols that
are all the rage these days the vitamins
the minerals the the fiber that nearly
all of that comes from fruits and
vegetables which we all know really good
for us um but nearly all of those are
pollinated by insects and without the
insects the yield would in some cases be
zero and in other cases be be reduced um
but it would make it incredibly
difficult to feed a healthy diet to to
the human population if we were to lose
a big chunk of our fruit and vegetable
production which is what we're looking
at if we lose insects and chocolate and
coffee yeah yeah which you know is a
pretty awful Prospect isn't it um so so
yeah you know people should take this
really seriously because it it it
directly affects all of us this isn't
just something that a few you know crazy
Tree Huggers like me what should be
worrying about everyone should be
worrying about it so besides pollination
because I think that is the one that
most people are like okay well I like
bees people like bees generally or maybe
less so wasps but generally speaking
they like pollinates what else not that
this is why we should preserve
biodiversity but what other practical
uses and functions from the perspective
of human beings are rational
self-interest to Insects perform yeah so
there are several the there they're
they're important bio control agents so
they're they're they're predators of
pests of our crops admittedly the pests
are also often insects but uh everyday
examples people are familiar with would
be things like ladyb birds and Lace
Wings which eat aphids which otherwise
would reduce the yield of our crops and
there's a strong argument to be made
that that the future of sustainable
farming would involve doing much more to
encourage natural enemies of pests
rather than trying to kill with
pesticides anyway so so there's natural
enemies then probably the biggest area
and a really unglamorous one is is
recycling of stuff of of organic mat
complely dead material so dead bodies um
and and animal dung things like Kats um
insects play a really vital role in
breaking up the Kats in burying little
packets of dung that they lay their eggs
on dung beetles dung flies uh and so on
and it doesn't sound particularly
important but but without that the
nutrients in the cat would wouldn't be
recycled and available for plants to
grow which is then the cow eat and
continues the cycle um and there's a
really neat example of how important
that kind of everyday process is which
from Australia where when we took cattle
to Australia it turns out there aren't
any um Native Australian dung beetles
that are able to deal with caoo it's too
liquid marsupial poo is quite dry um and
so the Australian dung beetles literally
drowned if they tried to feed on on
cashit um so what a way to go um and and
so we'd introduce cows large herds of
cattle and the the Pats were just drying
and solidifying and covering the ground
in a solid layer of of kaioo um which
was stopping the grass from growing
locking up all the nutrients um I can't
off the top of my head remember the
figure but there were thousands of
square kilometers of of grazing land
that would became useless because of
this accumulation of
dung um and so they they they set about
uh um finding some beetles some dong
Beetles from elsewhere in the world that
could they could import to Australia to
do the job and uh to cut a long story
short they eventually introduce them
from South Africa which is has a roughly
similar climate
but that could cope with kidong and
within just a few years The Beatles
proliferated and all the dung was swept
away and the grass started to grow again
and the farmers were happy but it just
illustrates you know that these little
dung beetles are doing something really
vital that we can't do
without um so so broadly there's this
this really vital role they play play in
recycling in in nutrient Cycles so so I
mentioned dead bodies and Kats but also
things like leaves um tree trunks
uh when a tree dies it takes a while but
it's it's slowly decomposed by an army
of little burrowing beetles and wasps
and so on that chew their way through it
um and again that's a really vital job
um and they do other things too insects
they help to keep the soil healthy by um
tunneling in it and air rating it and
they distribute seeds and and so on and
so on but um all in all you I mean
insects are the majority of species on
the planet and they some people have
described them as being kind of like the
the oil that lubricates the whole system
that it would and it would grind to a
Hal without
them you make a compelling case for it I
mean even with with flies you know
obviously people just view them as um
completely unnecessary you know sort of
divine mistake but that's not the case
at all is it
because you say fly but of course the
that that that term encompasses about
150,000 known spe species all sorts of
the common house fly common house fly
yeah um so they they their lar feed on
mainly on dung and other organic rotting
material and help to clear it away um
they might be quite annoying but they're
also they also contribute to pollination
they visit flowers to some extent um but
and and of course they're food you know
things like swallows and Swifts and he
Martins their favorite food are small
flying in like
houseflies um and we you
know one of the other side consequences
of declining insect numbers is we've
seen big declines in the in the numbers
of things that people often care much
more about than insects like swallows
and Swifts and so on their food supply
is is disappearing as insects Decline
and it's there and you think stop to
think about it actually there's a huge
proportion of of life on Earth that
depends on insects for food not just
Birds but um bats are almost all insect
of Wares lots of freshwat fish um try
salmon eat insects um reptiles
amphibians they're all eating insects so
if the insects go then so do they yeah
the birds one is interesting I went to
um I've been to NEP actually several
times over the last couple of years
Isabella tree is somebody we really want
to interview but she's very hard to get
hold of and and you talk about NEP in
the book which of course is for those
who aren't aware a a pretty large rewed
farm um over the last 20 years in Sussex
and I remember going there in mids
summer and you sort of you walk there's
various Trails you can go on and I
remember just putting my foot down in
some long grass and this just this
Fusion of insects just jump out and it
makes you realize wow this was this was
probably quite ordinary 50 50 60 years
ago if that in much of the country and
now it's it's kind of disappeared I mean
it was almost something it was like
something from a dream you know it was
Unthinkable in terms of the biodiversity
we see around us today yeah I I funnily
enough I interviewed I tree last week on
stage at the University Sussex I wish
we'd got you before had we had a
screening of of the new film Wilding
which is same title as the book which is
really cool I have to say I'd highly
recommend it but I I love NEP because
you know it shows that nature can
recover that you just you know it's
three and a half thousand acres it's
bigger state but it's just been for 23
years now it's been essentially left for
more or less unmanaged for nature to do
its thing and and what Nature has done
is proliferated you know there are huge
you notice it not so much is fantastic
to see grasshoppers in abundance and all
these other insects buzzing around but
it's what's what's perhaps more obvious
to many people is that the numbers of
birds that eat insects that are that are
really doing well cooko you hear cookus
there I don't know what time you went
but going the right time in the spring
it's the only place in Sussex now where
you can regularly hear cookus you can
hear turtle doves you can hear
Nightingales which Nightingales are
specialist in sectores got the second
biggest population in the whole of uh
Britain and they didn't have any
Nightingales there when they started
this project um so it it yeah it you
know it's it's nice that there is a
little Ray of Hope there um that you
know insects could recover it's it's
they're not doomed to continue declining
they spring back real you know unlike
pandas um insects can breed really fast
if if the conditions are right they
could spring back in no time at all we
just need to set aside enough land um to
to support viable populations long term
um and it seems to me I'm a big fan of
reing I I'm aware it's quite
controversial it's not everyone's cup of
tea and
there are a number of criticisms of it
um you know the mo most obvious of which
is it it takes land out of production
and yet we've got a growing human
population you know how is that going to
stack up
um relating to that it means we arguably
we're importing more food if we ruad
lots of land in the UK we'll have to
import more which is exporting the
environmental impact of of
eating um and that's absolutely true but
um NEP is on really unproductive clay
soils that you know they were making a
loss they were receiving huge tax uh
subsidies from the taxpayer and still
losing money every year and essentially
they were about to go broke if they
didn't do something because the land is
really hard to farm it doesn't produce
much um and it seems to me that that the
least productive land land that's not
viable to farm unless you very heavily
subsidize it
which would include quite a lot of the
Uplands of Britain um is would be better
used to support nature and carbon
capture in the soil and provide
Recreation for people you know places
where people can go and connect with
nature one of the lovely things about
NEP is that if you go there at the
weekend in the spring or summer there
are tens of thousands of people I mean
it's a bit like Picadilly circus you
know it's perhaps not what you're
wanting when you go to a wild place
um and from a sort of personal
perspective I might wish there were a
fewer people there but actually isn't
that great because they're all people
that have gone there because they've
heard that you know they might see a
beaver or a stalk or a purple Emperor
butterfly or hear a nighting gale and
and you know that they're learning about
nature they're connecting with nature
and um if we want you know if we want to
save the planet we need people to engage
with with these issues and what better
way than you know getting them to go
somewhere like that so yeah I think it's
brilliant um and personally would would
would love to see a NEP in you know
every County so that there's one near
everybody um and some big projects in
the the remoter regions of Britain where
you know there's space for them I would
go so far I me I know it's not some
people would think this was nuts but I'd
love to see wolves back in the UK
they're in pretty much every European
country now so they can't cross the
channel on their own but they've got
wolves in the Netherlands which is the
most CED
much more crowded than Britain um if
there's room for wolves there then
there's room for wolves here that might
be changing though because of course
Ursula V Deion's favorite Pony I think
was killed by yeah some wolves and now
she's on a mission to kill lots of
wolves andal Europe there are countries
in Europe where you know um some of the
wolves are being shot but there are
there are more wolves now in Europe than
there are in North America which um uh
so overall there there are large numbers
and although there are a few instances
where you know it causes problems eating
ponies it's not that common and it's
pretty I mean
subsidizing paying Farmers for their
losses which you know it's usually sheep
is the issue Lambs um is actually a very
small expense compared to the
agricultural budget it's you know
vanishingly small amount of money um and
you know for the for for the pleasure of
having that amazing um species that
should be here you know it's a native
species in the UK and you know I'd have
wild Bor and links back as well and
beavers everywhere and um Pine Martins
all over the shop and I'd love to live
in a Wilder country basically well P
Pine Martin or is it polecats that's
happening right that's partly that's
already happening that's why red
squirrels are on the way back well
fingers crossed um they they are
supposed to help because that you know
they love to eat a gray squirrel and
that's certainly uh they of course they
never went extinct in Britain there were
Pine Martins in Scotland um and they've
recently uh released some in the New
Forest and then very recently there were
some released on dmore uh and let's hope
they do well and Thrive and spread and
uh wouldn't it be amazing be be
something restored from our our lost
forer you know we live in a country
where we we've wiped out almost all the
large animals I mean apart from deer
there are no large um wild mammals in
Britain at all um and yeah of course we
used to have Bears um would you want
Bears back well it would be nice
wouldn't it whether it's pract well I
think it would I mean of course you know
there are not not everyone would agree
but just to give an example um uh the I
think it's the abzo national park in
Italy is half the size of K G National
Park but it has wolves and bears and
links and wild cat and wild boar that's
the whole lot uh it has way more people
living in it than Kon National Park so
it's not impossible it's not ridiculous
at all we could have Bears probably you
know it' have to be the more remote
corners of Britain and you know I guess
it's inevitable there would occasionally
be conflict if you went down that route
but um no I think we we need to stop
always seeing oursel as much more
important than nature you know I it it
seems to me that these species have a
right to be here maybe I'm a bit crazy
no I mean I I personally agree with you
um particularly on the Wolves thing we
we'll come back to that the moment but I
think lots of people when they hear um a
conservationist or somebody you know who
whose political bent is is green
politics and they hear somebody saying
we should reintroduce wolves I think
they think well I'll be going from my my
my walk in you know semi- rural
Hampshire and I'll be accosted by yeah I
I people do think I mean obviously
wolves have been done a huge disservice
by fairy tales and stories that you know
they don't eat people's grandmothers
they they they actually people who live
in places where they have walls where
they've always had walls like many Part
Parts well lots of countries in Europe
but let's go back to Italy for example
most Italian people even people farmers
in the countryside have never seen a
wolf they're plenty of them there but
they're incredibly elusive creatures
they're really shy they keep away from
people um you're they're not and they
don't attack people um so there are all
these ridiculous kind of um
misunderstandings about
walls um which which you know if we're
ever going to introduce them we need we
need obviously to win people over you
can't do it against the opinion of the
of of the large majority of the
population we would have to you know um
bring people around and explain to them
that actually you know they're they're
not going to have their children
snatched from prams or whatever by by
wolves that actually um people and
wolves can live alongside each other
perfectly well well Chris Packham he
wasn't Pro wolf is he not believe it or
not yeah I said that I'm surprised
because I think because obviously he's
based in the New Forest or or you know
maybe he's just being sort of canny and
also you know he works at the BBC the
last thing he wants is the Daily Express
yeah yeah I'm probably probably not as
wise as he is in that respect no no no
no no I think the argument should be I
think the argument should be made but I
think you know I don't see like I say
kangom seems pretty suitable I don't see
why there aren't wolves in the highlands
well there would be huge benefits if
there were because Scotland is is
terribly overgrazed with by deer huge
huge numbers of deer far more than than
at any time in history as far as we can
tell and it means that over great SES of
Scotland trees can't regenerate at all
because you know the little saplings
immediately get eaten um and there are
you know there's a lot of interest in
trying to trying to regrow the konian
forests that sort of and more broadly
the the temperate rain forests that used
to cover large sedes of of Western Wales
Western Scotland parts of Southwest
England um but you can't you can't they
can't regenerate because of the deer and
so that you have to put up really
expensive fence you know 68 foot tall
fences around any patch of land if you
want to grow trees in Scotland um if
there were wolves you know that that's
that's exactly the situation that
Yellowstone National Park was in um 40
years ago where they had a a huge
surplus of deer because there were no
Predators because they' shot all the
wolves and they introduced the wolves
and it had this transformative effect on
the whole giant you know it's a huge
area um and it wasn't so actually it's
really interesting the um it wasn't so
much that the the wolf population ate
all the deer the deer population didn't
actually fall very much
um but they their behavior changed they
started keeping out in the open on on
avoiding particularly avoiding river
valleys with steep sides where wolves
find it easier to trap them uh so they
so they heard together and stay out in
the open which meant that trees have
regenerated in the river valleys which
then provided more food for beavers so
the beaver population Rose which created
more Wetland which provided habitat for
lots of birds and so on and so on so
there was this whole Cascade of benefits
from even changed the the course of
rivers right yeah it's astonishing I
mean this so This terribly overgrazed
landscape where the soil was blowing
away because there was very very little
vegetation to hold it together in a
short period of years was was
transformed with way more wild life just
by putting in there was it was something
somewhere in the region of a dozen
wolves they started out with there's few
more than that now but still not huge
numbers um so you know imagine having a
similar effect in Scotland it it could
be absolutely amazing for wildlife um
and for carbon capture because tree you
know growing more trees means more
carbon locked up um and once the Wolves
were there they they'd do that job
forever um so it strikes me as as well
yeah a sort of no-brainer but uh but
then it's easy to say that cuz I live in
the south of England and you know um I'm
sure I would say the same if I lived in
Scotland I did used to live in Scotland
but um uh but yeah perhaps people all
think it's not fair for me to be saying
you you guys you have wolves I'd have
them in Sussex too but I remember this
is when Ken Livingston was the mayor of
London I remember they introduced Birds
of Prey to to eat some of the pigeons in
trafala square or at least to get you
know sort of for them to sort vacate
that part of the city and I remember
there were these horror stories of like
children with their moms and they would
just see us in this diving bird of prey
and it would be like killing and maming
this pigeon on the floor in front of
small children so the idea that somebody
might take their kid to chesington World
of Adventures or something and on the
way see you know uh a a dog be maimed by
anyway I personally think it's worth it
just saying yeah well obviously I agree
so we're not going to have an argument
over that but but there are many people
who wouldn't agree I think it's highly
unlikely that walls would attack a dog
along the side of the road in the way to
chesington but uh well the the thing
that people forget is also as you've
sort of alluded to wild animals are
incredibly cautious and risk averse
whereas a domesticated dog is far more
irrational you know well of course
domesticated dogs kill lots of people
and maim and you know they attack
children and and the whereas wolves
don't do any of those things they're far
safer um do you think they're safer than
XL bullies oh God yeah yeah much more
because wolves wolves don't attack XL
bullies you know there've been many
instances where they have attacked
obviously you know that tends to be dogs
that have been badly treated badly
reared um but but it it's it's it's a
pretty regular occurrence where wolves
don't do that they do not just dash out
and attack children it's they never ever
do that it's not you know something that
is rare it just doesn't happen um but I
think a lot of people probably think it
does you know because we're brought up
with the idea of the wolf as this you
know it eats all the The Three Little
Pigs or whatever it is and and and Red
Riding hoods gr and all the rest of it
um so we think that they'll they'll
attack people as you know as a sort of
sort a prey item but they don't it's
nonsense the thing well this touches on
is of course this term this
extraordinary idea not an idea it's it's
an empirical reality of Tropic Cascade
um and this idea that you know you
introduce this spe PES and it it has all
these sort of knock on and feedbacks and
the paradigmatic example is of course
the wolf and the Yellowstone and I think
there's some evidence as well in Canada
I think I might be wrong with helping to
renew Boreal sort of forest and wood up
there Woodland up there and it's really
interesting because of course in in the
last few weeks we've had labor announced
this 2122 billion pounds that would be
going towards carbon capture and you
think you know if if McKenzie could make
money
and people could patent wolves beavers
trees you know we would have all of them
yes because of carbon capture but the
the big problem for those guys is
they're free you know nobody makes any
money
from growing yeah no it's I
was gutted when I saw that big
announcement last week I still have high
hopes for our new government but but
they're lower hes lower than they were
well I I it seemed like they were likely
to be a big
Improvement um I
hoped um I and and broadly the idea of
of a of a green Energy company seemed
like a sensible one but I I strongly
disapprove of the the idea that carbon
capture is the way forward it's just an
excuse for carrying on burning fossil
fuels as far as I can see and and a way
as you say for people to make money you
you can make lots of money by building
giant machines but think I mean a it's
essentially on proven technology nobody
knows whether it can really be done at
the scale required um to to actually
make the slightest impact on climate
change when we have natural systems that
can trap huge amounts of carbon the soil
and
trees um but as you say they're they're
they're hard to monetize so um so we're
we apparently we're going down the
carbon capture route instead which is
just IDI I mean aside from anything else
a focus on reducing energy consumption
is what we really need um things like
insulating homes that should be first
thing on your list if you're worried
about sustainability of energy supplies
reduce the amount of energy used in the
first place but again it's hard to
profit from reducing energy
consumption so yeah um disappointing I
have to say but uh I there's there's
been a tidal wave of objections on
Twitter and other social media I've
noticed I don't know whether anyone in
labor HQ is listening but I I I like to
think that there might be somebody it's
also hard to make people feel guilty
about it you know and and this is
something that my probably my biggest
disappointment with green politics and
green movements over the last well over
my lifetime but over the last 20 years
is this obsession with Aviation I'm not
pro Aviation I'm just saying Aviation
cars
um
Recycling and it's really fascinating
for me because when I talk to
conservatives you climate denies but
they're like well actually you know
human interest should come first I'll
say well look we can do things like if
we stop eating fish if we just left the
oceans alone and you all of a sudden
allowed you know a greater proliferation
of things like Beluga Wells Blue Wells
these these extraordinary carbon sucking
machines maybe actually if we did that
if we said as a species we're no longer
going to eat fish yeah maybe you can
still fly you know relatively often and
that's that's a trade-off we can discuss
as a as a culture as a civil ation and
they're like wow I never knew that a
whale is basically a carbon
sequestration machine which of course it
is um and things like beavers wolves um
are effectively infrastructure right
they're infrastructure if we want a
lower carbon Society if we want to
reduce concentrations of CO2 in our
atmosphere which the highest they've
been for 10 million years they're the
highest they we think I mean I wasn't
here 10 million years ago that's the
that's the sort of carbon record they're
higher than at any point in the history
of primate species with think you know a
big part of that is really cheap easy
stuff and actually when you say that to
people on the right they go huh okay so
it doesn't mean that actually um we have
to give up all the things I like of
course you'll have to give up some of
them you might have to do some of them
less uh but there's also lots of really
loow hanging fruit I I feel anyway
that's something that really bugs me and
I feel like the green movement generally
has failed to communicate
that yeah I guess it it's a slightly
different attack but it seems to me that
that livestock is is is another issue
that's doesn't get anywhere near enough
attention that you know this is
incredible statistic that um uh that 96%
of all the biomass of mammals on the
planet is made up of our livestock and
us I think 60% cow cow sheep Pig um and
36% human which means that all the wild
animals in cluding the
whales together weigh
4% um it's just staggering um but it it
just illustrates how many cows and other
ruminants we have all of them with huge
carbon Footprints um and so you know if
we just ate a bit less meat and
particularly red meat it's a really easy
win you know it's you're not necessarily
asking people to go vegan or vegetarian
even but you we could all greatly reduce
our footprint by harving our meat
consumption for example um which then as
you say would would make it much easier
to to reach Net Zero are you a veggie I
I can't I can't resist cheese so I can't
I've never managed to go vegan but I'm
more or less veggie the odd relapse
every now and again um but my son is is
vegan and endlessly badges me to to be
vegan so I I I keep trying and so who
knows whether I'll make it full in the
end but uh um I do occasionally weaken
and have a chicken burger what do you
think of the argument that um actually
meat is kind of important for human
health and I can already see the
comments in you know in response to me
saying that the vegan saying how dare
you but I mean I'll give you an example
after my wife suffered a miscarriage we
I have a daughter you know she was
instructed to eat as much iron as
possible and they were saying obviously
we can give you iron supplement she was
given an iron supplement she lost a
tremendous amount of blood but they also
said try and eat lots of aul right and
that that strikes me as quite an
important indicator that actually some
of these things are quite even necessary
actually for human function we have no
longitudinal study of any society
anywhere ever where multiple Generations
aren't eating some kind of meat product
so maybe actually there is an argument
for the health thing no I mean of course
historically when we were wandering
around as hunter gatherers we ate meat
uh and eggs and and you know the like um
probably not very much most of the time
and it would have varied enormously you
know that some in some areas we were
primarily Hunters probably in the in you
know when we moved up into Siberia for
example trailing mammoths then those
people were probably nearly 100%
carnivores but while we were in Africa
we would have primarily been eating
leaves tubers berries and so on
supplemented occasionally by a you know
an animal if you managed to catch it um
I I there's it's pretty clear you can
eat healthily without eating meat I
think you know there iron for example
there are plenty of source of of
vegetarian sources of iron green
vegetables and nuts and so on but you do
need to eat a lot of them more than
people typically do um but I'm you know
my son is is is vegan he's 23 he's just
in a degree in nutrition he's been vegan
for four years now um he's also into
climbing and weightlifting and he looks
pretty healthy on it um so uh and he you
know would would tell you at Great
length that you don't need to eat meat
to to be healthy and have a fully
balanced diet but it's it's not easy it
makes you have to you have to make more
much more effort with your cooking I I
would also say as well another counter
because I find this really interesting
um is that I mean that's all true you
know you can eat lots of different fruit
and veg and you can cover all your bases
but if we're saying that we need to eat
more seasonally in somewhere like the
northern hemisphere here then I I I
simply don't see how all of one's
calories can come from that kind of diet
I mean that that that that rests on the
presumption that you'll have globalized
Supply chains for food I mean you know
whereas actually in the North in the
north of the northern hemisphere things
that eat grass tend to be quite
a yeah a decent source of calories so
the the the the notion that we should
eat local um is
slightly um inaccurate
in in that if food can be transported by
ship or
Overland um then the carbon footprint
Associated is really quite small um it's
only really airr food stuffs that that
we should be avoiding that because that
is a big carbon footprint um but things
like bananas that come by SL by boat um
the actually the the carbon footprint of
shipping because you can transport
thousands of tons at in one boat the the
per banana carbon footprint is really
tiny but then You' got things like
Refrigeration if even Aly for all of
that um there's there's a there's a
really good website
um uh our world in data yeah okay um
which clearly you're familiar with
Hannah Richie is one of the main people
at Oxford University that created it and
that that
will give you facts and figures for
exactly what the carbon footprint associ
with transpor is for products from
different parts of the world and so on
compared to the carbon footprint of all
the other aspects of their
production um and generally speaking if
it's coming by sea then more than 90% of
the carbon footprint is is it is how it
was grown in the first place not the
shipping cost um so and everyone's
surprised by that but do you know if you
don't believe me look at the look at the
figures so Natalie Bennett green Lord
who recently said we should only have
fresh strawberries or maybe we should
only have fresh strawberries few
strawberries strawberries she's right
because they're air Fred you can't ship
strawberries by boat so any soft fruit
things like grapes strawberries
raspberries and so on that we definitely
should eat seasonally um or Frozen um
it's fine if they've been frozen yes
there's a cost with that but it's not
that great um uh so so there there's
there's a lot of misconceptions there
you know you can you can eat
stuff from the tropics without feeling
guilty if it came over land or sea and
not by PL as long as it's not soft fruit
as long as long as it's not perishable B
in the short term basically which means
soft fruit primarily okay that's good to
know that I've learned something I've
learned Lots but that's um that's
something I didn't expect um let's go
back to pesticides because we've talked
about neonicotinoids MH um glyphosate I
mean you said that you're you're hopeful
with labor
one of the worrying things for me with
labor actually is that they reintroduced
in Brighton which is your neck of the
woods they reintroduced the the the use
of glyphosate in the city yeah so so can
you explain why what glyphosate is and
why it's bad okay uh glyphosate is a
herbicide um it's the active ingredient
in Roundup is what it's usually known as
uh and you can buy it in supermarkets
Garden Center anywhere these days um
it's it's a systemic herbicide you put
it on a plant and it's absorbed into the
plant and it spreads to the roots and it
kills the plant it's an effective very
effective herbicide is that the thing
that makes them look yellow yeah right
it's not the only one that makes them
yellow but usually because it's by it's
the most used pesticide in the world by
far it's it's usually the herbicide used
in parks and city streets and by
gardeners and by farmers
um so so it's an effective herbicide it
helps Farmers grow crops um but it
clears the field before they plant their
crops and it's commonly used in immunity
areas to you know if you've got a drive
with weeds poking up the easiest way to
get rid of the weeds is to spray it with
glyphosate um but um it's become quite
clear I was taught and and to be fair I
believed for years that
glyphosate broke down as soon as it
touched the soil that it wasn't
persistent it turns out that that isn't
true um I believed foolishly that it was
harmless to anything that wasn't a plant
um turns out that that's not true um uh
so in recent years a number of Studies
have shown that it's quite persistent in
soil that it's really toxic to fungi
that live in the soil and we we are
increasingly aware that things like mic
Ariza the fungi that are symbiotic with
plant roots help to link up trees and
are used for communication between trees
and to absorb nutrients and so on that
they're badly affected by
glyphosate um it's toxic to bees or at
least as formulated in Roundup it's
toxic to bees um and the the World
Health Organization um declared in 2013
that it's a probable carcinogen in
people it's that remains hugely
controversial because it's it's hotly
disputed by was Monsanto mon Monsanto
were bought relatively recently by Bayer
but um it's their biggest selling
product um so obviously they don't want
people to believe it gives them cancer
but there's pretty good evidence that it
does um there've been some big court
cases in the US um most of which have
gone the way of the plaintiff so
there've been some big
um uh payoffs the first of which was a
guy that so it's been linked to
Non-Hodgkins Lymphoma particularly
exposure by people who are exposed
regularly to glyphosate so typically
people who are spraying it rather than
other folk
um uh and so a school groundskeeper who
got non hodin lymphoma took Monsanto to
court and got I think it was two and a
half three billion payout um there've
been a few other court cases they
haven't all gone that way um uh
but anyway there's the sufficient
evidence if the World Health
Organization says it's a probable
carcinogen it seems to me it would be
sensible to avoid it um where possible
and yet you see it being sprayed in
Parks I've seen it being sprayed on
children's player equipment in Parks um
if you um if you screen the urine of
people and there was a big study done in
Germany where they looked for glyphosate
in um people's urine and more than 99%
of the people they tested and it was a
big sample of a few thousand people
contain glyphosate with more in the
children's urine than in the adults um
which is concerning to say the least um
and it seems to me that you know yet yet
again it's it's a chemical that we
should be restricting or doing away with
completely um it certainly shouldn't be
being sprayed on things we're going to
eat um so the reason it's in urine is is
if you
test um bread or anything that's made
from grain um th grain crops are
typically sprayed with glyphosate just
before Harvest to make them Dy and dry
at a time that can be controlled by the
farmer so very often a field of wheat
will be sprayed and then a week later
it'll be harvested and the grain will go
off to the to the um to to be turned
into bre bread or cereal or biscuits or
whatever so they all contain
glyphosate um so it's in our diet
effectively all wheat we'll have all
most most non-organic grain crops um
will contain
glyphosate and and so an enormous number
things even things you'd think would be
quite healthy like Quakers oats
breakfast um porridge um that particular
brand as has has turns out has quite
high levels of glyphosate in it um but
lots of others do too there's no point
in sing singling them out it's it's it's
it's everywhere and half the
supermarkets full of
glyphosate that doesn't seem like a
great situation it's it's unclear
whether the doses in food are sufficient
to be something we should be worried
about but then we don't we have a very
poor understanding of what lifetime
exposure is can do to us because nobody
studies that that none of the safety
tests that are done on pesticides
involve exposing someone for years well
they don't involve people at all of
course they typically involve a rodent
like a rat usually being exposed for a
few days or weeks at most and you see is
it alive or dead at the end of it um
what's happening with us humans now is
from the day we're conceived until the
day we die we're being exposed not just
to glyphosate but to a whole cocktail of
different
pesticides and we have no idea what the
long-term exposure effects are are no
idea no idea at all you I mean well I
say that you there have been some
studies which show that people who eat
organic food um are less likely to
develop certain cancers for example but
the those studies are never perfect
because people who eat more organic food
also do other things that are different
you know they're probably more health
conscious they're probably from a
different socioeconomic class than
average
and it's really hard to disentangle all
of these things so it's the evidence
could be
disputed um but there is there is
evidence that if you go out of your way
to minimize your pesticide exposure
you'll you'll live longer basically um
and it you know perhaps that shouldn't
come as a great surprise really when you
think about it now stman isn't saying
that farmers will routinely spray crops
with glyphosate a week before yeah well
it sounds sounds daed and obviously from
a food residue point Point View it is Da
but it's a really handy tool for for the
farmer because he can ensure that the
the crop desiccates if there's a
forecast that there's going to be dry
weather for the next 10 days but the
crop isn't quite ready is isn't
naturally drying off you spray it with
glyphosate the crop dies and dries and
then you can Harvest it before the dry
period ends so it gives the farmer more
control over when he can Harvest and and
and avoid bad weather for harvesting so
it's quite you can why they do it it's
it's you know it's a practical
consideration but it means that that
just before it's got it goes off for
food production the the crop is being
treated with a persistent pesticide
which will therefore end up in a
breakfast cereal or whatever but what
frustrates me and this is and it's
something that you know I I encounter so
much in this country is um you'll say we
need to band something like go say and
then there'll be the example of these
you know plants basically sort of
cropping up through the pavement and
people say this is bad by the way
actually I think in some instances it
can be bad I think it can obstruct I've
seen it obstructing you know a path for
a a a wheelchair or a
ram but cities municipalities dealt with
that for a really long time before we
had glyos Sate you know you can just use
a TR or a jet wash or or whatever
there's a there's a panoply of other
Solutions but it's just this mad mindset
which is either we use this Poss
possibly quite lethal thing lethal for
certain species less so for us but
probably quite dangerous or we do
nothing and it's like yeah there there
are lots of Alternatives um I mean as
you rightly point out glyphosate wasn't
invented wasn't available until 1976 I
think so we you know we we managed
perfectly well for hundreds of years
without it um and there I mean there's
some quite high-tech Solutions one one
of which is a hot foam system that
basically you spray this um it's a it's
based on a natural plant extra extract
the foaming agent um and you basically
cook the weeds by encasing them in a in
a layer of hot foam um it costs a few
grand to buy the machine which is an
obstacle for councils who obviously
money strapped at the moment but there
there are all a completely different
approach is for local residents to
occasionally have a little work party to
go out and and ho off the Weeds on the
just in front of their own homes which
and there are plenty of examples of
people doing that um uh you know it it
seems a bit daed to resort to something
that that might give us cancer for the
sake of being tidy you know uh and the
other thing is I mean I agree completely
there are instances where where you know
Tall Weeds on a on a pavement are not
ideal they're you know for people with
limited Mobility they could be a real
problem but they're not that hard to to
deal with but there are lots of other
instances
where actually the the vegetation was
doing no harm to anybody um I mean a
classic is is the the the the little
patches of soil around the bases of
Street trees which are you know not part
of the pavement people don't walk
through that that patch normally and
I've seen those being sprayed off and
you know there was just a little bit of
vegetation growing around the base of
the tree doing no harm to anybody but
then it's you know it's it's
killed you know my wife's a counselor
she's the she's the group leader she's
the labor group leader in in Portsmouth
where we live and as you can imagine I I
talk about this stuff with her a lot she
said Council officers where she lives
are adamant that having vegetation
around the tree will kill the tree and I
said that is just Bonkers no I said like
there's a what's the what's the saying
about the The Thorn the thistle being
the mother of the oak brambles being the
mother of the oak basically yeah it was
you so that brings me back to NEP um one
really interesting feature of NEP um is
that you see Tusk of Bramble um and um
and Blackthorn and hathorne yeah like
they look almost like darcks these kind
of rounded Mounds which they're nibbled
by the grazing animals but but because
of the Thorns they they slowly grow yeah
and then when the when the when it gets
big enough you'll see a little Oak sa
sapling coming up through the middle and
it's just once once the thorn bush is WI
wide enough that the the cattle can't
reach things poking through the middle
the little tree manages to grow and gets
above the height of the cows and then
you've got a tree
regenerating completely you know
fascinating and a process that you can't
see anywhere else in Britain it must
have happened for thousands of years but
we don't you know we don't allow scrub
like that to develop anymore generally
anyway shows very clearly that that even
a little sapling can grow through a
great Thicket of dense Bramble and
whatnot let alone a little bit of you
know a full-sized tree is not going to
be harmed by a little bit of grass
around bot fake news fake new if you're
a Portsmouth Council officer fake news
I'm afraid Dave yeah I mean this is when
and look this is when I sort of my my
inner farage comes out or my inner
Maggie thater I'm obviously not I'm a
socialist but when I H when I if if I
was like the city mayor and there was a
council officer that said I'm going to
get canceled for this and a council said
that I would say we need to have a sort
of reeducation program for people like
you otherwise you will be fired like
it's insane that you have people paid
money by Council taxpayers who are that
ignorant about something so important
they plants would kill the tree what are
you talk where do they recruit these
people yeah it's I mean there is a
general issue which is this reminds me
of which is is that the people in
positions of in in decision-making
positions in this country politicians at
all levels very few of them have any
scientific knowledge at all um and you
look at it look at MPS only a handful of
them have any kind of Science degree one
or two of them have a degree in biology
um it does worry me that we have a
really you
know the people making really important
decisions have no I don't have a good
grounding in in the basics underlying
that decision you know I mean which
might bring me back to things like the
the the carbon
capture idea you know I think K starm is
possibly doing his best but I don't
think he's he knows much about the
actual evidence surrounding climate
change and how best to deal with and I
don't I strongly suspect the other
people in his SC in his cabinet don't
either um we we don't give enough
perhaps the scientist would say this but
I I wish they would listen more to the
scientific evidences seems that very
often decisions are made without
actually Consulting anyone who really
knows what they're talking about which
is you know which is daed particularly
because Britain we're a wash with good
scientists you know we have great
universities still despite their
troubles U with lots of you know top
ecologists top climate scientists in the
world and yet most of them no no
politician ever talks to um which is
kind of frustrating it's really
interesting actually I want to go back
as well to that that that um phenomenon
of how few um politicians come from a
natural sciences background and how we
teach Natural Sciences in this country
more broadly that's really interesting
you talk about that ins Sun and Earth
but also you talk in you know your most
recent book um or almost your most
recent book you've got a new one coming
out or it's just come out just come out
just come out um the one before that uh
you talk about you know this experience
of going to Parliament and you're going
to talk about bees and and pesticides
and whatnot and expecting you know the
good and the great dozens of MPS to turn
up but in the end it's a sort of mly
crew of of what a dozen sort of Junior
staffers and advisers and well what was
worse was um I think it was organized by
38 degrees and they told me they'd got
80 MPS signed up that were going to come
and listen to me to give them a pitch
about the importance of bees and insects
and why we need to look after them and
all that stuff uh which I thought you
know brilliant this is exactly you know
I've been complaining that politicians
don't listen to scientists anyway I I
went along and most of the seats in
front of me were empty apart from a few
Junior folk with notebooks who are
obviously been sent to report back but
many MPS did turn up but all they did
there was a big banner with a picture of
a be on it and 38 degrees logo on it um
they they queued up to have their photo
taken in front of the banner and then
they bug it off and while they were
queuing up they they were all chattering
to each other not listening to me at all
so I couldn't actually make myself heard
to even the people taking notes in the
they were sitting down it was just you
know really frustrating and bloody
annoying frankly um and showed no
respect at all you know why invite
someone along and then and then just
talk over them and ignore them um yeah
so quite quite disheartening really
that's modern politics they just they
just take selfies they take selfies and
they you know they oh anyway I could
talk all d about that stuff but the um
the interesting the interesting contrast
for me and I hope you don't remember me
saying this is that I was speaking to
Olivia Chung last week and she is a
scholar of um xiin ping and China and
she was saying that the poit bureau will
pretty regularly be briefed by top
scientists on things like the latest in
EV technology um you know solid
batteries biodiversity rewilding now I'm
not suggesting it's all good or that
they necessarily listen but this idea of
a top top scientist maybe on a weekly
basis
briefing the most powerful people in the
country and I'm thinking I'm sure they
do sometimes but why doesn't cabinet do
that you know very good question I
didn't I I wasn't aware that China did
but good for them um seems sensible well
it seems eminently sensible as I say we
have all this expertise on tap you know
and I I don't know a single scientist
who wouldn't be absolutely over the moon
and very happy to go along for free to
impart whatever knowledge they have to
to politicians any politician that would
listen but we never get the very rarely
get the opportunity um uh it seems Seems
like a huge opportunity missed so you
come across as a very um Serene man
quite calm I try you try well as
somebody who's you know um I'm half
Iranian so I don't want to feed into
sort of racial stereotypes but you know
I I've got a bit of hotheadedness from
my father um you you come across as a
sort of very you know calm Serene you
know Englishman with his nice Garden
he's making a Cider on
Youtube but then I read your book and
you're basically talking about you know
civilizational collapse and there's even
a chapter which is a sort of speculative
fiction set in the future maybe 80 100
years from now um talking about
something that looks like um you know
corm McCarthy the road you know it's the
end of the world as we know it so are we
heading for civilization collapse given
the things that you've written about
study about insects collapsing Food
Supplies Etc what's your view if I said
Dave your house depends on it you know
as a betting man How likely is
it I I think we are um I I'm always
hesitant to say this because you sound
like that you know the crazy guy on the
street corner with the plard you know
the end is nigh but I I think probably
it's very hard to predict with certain
I'm getting in my caveats before I give
you what tell you what I think um
obviously things like AI could be a
complete Game Cher in in either
direction um very very hard to predict
impossible to predict um but what's
happening in terms of climate collapse
climate chaos I should say and and
biodiversity
collapse makes me think that and and the
ramifications of of th those events for
society um flooding of low-lying
areas climate becoming unsuitable for
survival
really in large chunks near the
equator um I think we're going to see
massive Global upheaval we're going to
see hundreds of millions of people
displaced way way more you know people
are concerned about a few thousand
people trying to cross the channel at
the moment I think it's going to be
infinite worse and that's just one of
many other problems we're creating I
think the current social system is the
current Society is going to crumble
probably not instantly and it'll be a
more of a slow decline than a sudden
crash um but all the signs are there um
and I maybe sounds ridiculous but I you
know I I Tred to work out how me and the
family would survive if we had to grow
all our own food and
I have plans uh to to to you know make
sure that we can feed ourselves if we
have to um and it's kind of crazy that
I'm thinking like that but but uh it
seems to me wise to at the very least
think about it um and you know um uh
take some small steps to prepare I I
haven't gone down the full sort of
prepper mode yet there's l a bunker in
you know there's no bunker yet so but I
would say that cuz if I did have a
bunker I wouldn't want you to rush
around and and and jump in when the time
comes but no I haven't quite gone that
far but yeah I I I I and people think
this is nuts you know how can
civilization come to an end and I think
the obvious repost to that is well every
other civilization came to an end and
the people in it at the time would have
never guessed it was going you know
Roman Empire was incredible
um and if someone had said to to someone
in the midst of you know the height at
the height of the Roman Empire this
whole thing is going to collapse and
you're going to be invaded by tribes
from the north and and you know there'll
be nothing left at all in in 200 years
they would have laughed they would have
said that's ridiculous but that's what
happened simple you know likewise with
with every other civilization we've seen
so far so why we really that different I
don't I mean of course the the
circumstance Es are different it's a
global Civilization now we've got all
sorts of Technologies at our disposal
disposal but many of them are are not
necessarily um positive um technologies
that you know we can also do terrible
harm very quickly with some of the um
technology available to us um I think
we're in trouble personally um I mean
it's going to be a really interesting
few decades and I I I don't know how
much of it I'll live to see but um um I
you know try to make my kids sort of
think ahead and plan as to what they
might how they might get through tricky
times I think we certainly can't look
forward to you know life expectancy
increasing our children all being better
off than we were which is what we've had
for hundreds of years um I think we're
going in the other direction now
sadly what's interesting is um you you
spoke about the Roman Empire one of the
hypotheses for the collapse of the Roman
Empire Empire isn't actually the sacking
of Rome which happens multiple
times or developments in its its
Frontiers in in what was called Germania
one of the big hypotheses is actually
Vandal invasions of Spain which was the
Bread Basket of the Roman Empire so um
instability in food supply is actually
what destroyed the Imperial
core and it's when you think about that
it's kind of worrying because that is
broadly speaking what's predicted with
regards to collapsing biodiversity in
climate change the the big the big issue
will be these globalized food supply
chains that we become accustomed to and
I don't even think is collaps even the
right word
because I do think it's very possible
that in high GDP Western countries we
will see deurbanization this Century
because it's just very very hard to
maintain those concentrations of people
um and I think you may see an uptick so
right now in the UK about 1% of the
population or less actually work in
agriculture I think you'll probably see
an uptick in that it might be 3 four 5%
and you can imagine those things being
um celebrated and maybe they should be
celebrated deurbanization more labor in
agriculture but actually that in essence
would be um a sign that that that
Civilization civilizational model has
kind of been broken with so I I do
wonder what would collapse I mean like
you say there there's arguments to say
that you know that's already hit in
terms of median life expectancy it's
it's already stagnated for the best part
of 15 years
um so that is that is a really
interesting one for me um and I I think
you're right that you know
civilization's come to an end the the
the the sort of image I have in my mind
is a place called MV in Central Asia I
think it's in usbekistan at one point
one of the most prosperous Advanced
populated cities on Earth there's
literally nothing there now you know um
partly because of Jenis Khan and and the
Mongols
but you know there's nothing to say our
cities one day won't won't resemble that
um so that's the scale of the challenge
do do you think that Democratic politics
is capable
of stopping that mitigating it creating
Solutions it doesn't seem to be uh based
on what's happened so far
um there are clearly many failings with
the systems we have what whatever
variant of democracy you have I mean in
the UK the the
the most recent elections you know the
fact that there was there's only really
two choices and you might not like
either of them but there really isn't
any point voting for anyone else because
they're not going to win um is a is a
fundamental flaw and means that you know
um the green party for example has no
real future under the current system do
you think even with four MPS four MPS
doesn't actually give them any power at
all does it they've gone from one to
four they could get they could feasibly
get 20 in 10 years time that they could
be in a coalition but
is yeah possibly um but you know well I
mean look at the Liv Dems for they they
the greenest of the main three parties
but they never really had any power for
for decades have they I mean yes they
had their brief moment in the Coalition
and look how that went um but the one of
the other terrible problems that I think
we face is is well I mean at the heart
of it is is the growing global
inequality the the distribution of
wealth which means that increasingly we
see individual people with huge power
and influence which exceeds that of
countries you know democracy doesn't
work when you've got Elon Musk putting
hundreds of millions of pounds into
supporting a particular
politician um and therefore potentially
distorting you know democracy for their
own purposes um that's really alarming
uh and and at the root of many other
problems that Society has I think that
you know while a small number of tiny
proportion of the population is
sequestering most of the resources and
there are huge numbers of people that
are living on the on or below the
poverty line that that the the
resentment that that causes is vast it
it it's not stable long term and I think
that underlies a lot of the unrest and
anger that you see you know the the
rioting and so on in Europe in recent
recent years um so
that I don't know what the solution is I
wish I had a solution of how to fix it I
I love the idea of kind of um the
community assemblies that might help to
inform political decision- making but
there doesn't seem to be any real
appetite for um you know citizens
assemblies I should say um doesn't
really seem to be any appetite from
mainstream politicians to take that
seriously um and yeah there's and
there's also the you know the endless
issue of sort of lobbying and Corruption
of politicians um you know having
experienced the power of big Industries
personally with the pesticide Saga that
I talked about earlier um you I many of
the decisions politics make seem to
be decisions made to benefit large
Industries rather than the actual people
of the country often International
Industries rather than um the the people
that are supposed to be being served by
democratically elected politicians um
and you know we all know that that
lobbying is rif in one it's and it's
very clever the way it operates you know
big companies
spend hundreds of millions of pounds
trying to corrupt the decision-making
process of politicians that's what a
lobbyist does um and and while that is
is happening I can't really see how
democracy can can properly
function but we seem to be a million
miles from a situation where you could
could plausibly say we need to end
lobbying in some way um but I unless we
do I don't see how we can end up in
making the right decisions personally
well I suppose the argument is you'd
move towards a model more like China and
I don't mean everything about China um
but the idea that you perhaps there
there's two Roots isn't there I mean I
think for the European context I just
think proport representation would make
such a difference in this country
because I think like you know that the
idea that electoral Cycles you know five
years labor come in they'll invest in
the NHS then the Tories come in they'll
defund the NHS add in an item but if you
have PR and you have to build coalitions
I feel like you would start to get a
perspective of 20 years rather than
minutes it would it would certainly be a
big step in the right direction and you
know I guess it's plausible that Labour
might give us another vote at some point
but it's certainly not high on their
list of priorities is I don't think
they're going to do it in the next five
years maybe if they win the next
election they might get around to
thinking about it I think everyone
recognizes that the the system doesn't
really work at the moment and the fact
that we ended up with a A labor
Landslide when actually that you know
the number of votes they got was was not
that big a proportion of the population
um shows there there's something wrong
you know people aren't being properly
represented um at the moment that suited
labor but uh next time around it could
just as easily suit the Tores if um if
reform and the conservatives merg
together they could win a landslide but
and as you say we then just go flip flop
backwards and forwards
and really in terms of building up the
the infrastructure of saving the NHS and
so on we never get anywhere um so yeah
no I mean certainly I agree about PR it
would that would help um but I don't
think on its own that's going to solve
all of our problems what's really
interesting though is because you sound
I don't know if you've heard this term
before black pilled you know you black p
the red and the blue pill you know in
Matrix but you're the black pill which
is like we're kind of we're kind of
buggered um but on the one hand you're
quite blackpilled about the broad
political process by the way so am I
many people are um I I don't even think
that's particular like left thing I
think that's even people on the right
say politics isn't working which is
interesting because of course people on
the left say well you're getting
everything you want and then the right
say well you're getting everything you
want it's fascinating um but then when
it comes to the personal sphere you you
have very much an activist can do sort
of mindset that we are part of the
solution and you talk a lot about
Gardens indeed so what can I do I mean I
have a small garden in Portsmouth it's
very density populated place but you
know it's it's it's big enough to do
some things what can I do in a in a
small to Med mediumsized Garden to help
insects and pollinators in
biodiversity Lots but actually before
before I launch into that um I I should
say that
that I strongly believe that we you know
we shouldn't get so depressed about all
the terrible things going on in the
world that we give up um
because if if we do give up then the the
game really is up we're going to you
know things are going to be awful um
it's not it's not a win- lose situation
is it with things like tackling climate
change you know if we we we're clearly
not going to prevent 1.5 degrees of
warming we're almost at 1.5 degrees we
probably realistically two would be an
amazing result if we manage to keep it
below that but every fraction of a
degree that we of warming that we
avoid is much better than if we hadn't
if we just give up so you know two
degrees would be a lot better than 2.1
de which is a lot better than 2.2 de and
so on so it isn't that you know things
aren't going well so we should just
abandon all hope and and stop worrying
about it we have to fight every step of
the way is it every bit of carbon that
stays in the ground every every species
that we stop from going extinct is is is
a is a Triumph is a is a win compared to
losing that species um so you know we
the every motive to to carry on to the
end you know fighting to try and Salvage
as much as possible as as we can and one
one way you can do that is in your own
garden you know because it's really easy
to get despondent and you know with all
the all the all the difficulties the
world faces and think and you know
there's nothing I can do about climate
change and there's nothing I can do
about biodiversity l so likely there is
if you've got a garden um even if you
haven't got a garden there are things
you can do of course but if you have got
a
garden you can support an amazing number
of species there's this really um lovely
example from um uh Lester there's this
this lady Jenny Owen I I suspect sadly
might be dead by now she's certainly
very very old if she's still alive but
she did this amazing thing she had a
little Urban Garden and she spent 35
years
cataloging every species of anything she
could find in her garden you wrote a
book about it um and her species list
was two after 35 years was
2,673 different
species most of them insects but they're
all sorts of birds spiders plants worms
and everything I just think that's you
know so thousands of species in a little
eighth of an acre Urban Garden you know
leester is not famous for its
biodiversity so we can all have
thousands of species in our garden and
one Garden is not going to do a fat lot
on it own but there are 22 million
private Gardens in the UK or
thereabouts um and collectively they
cover something like 400,000 hectares of
land so you know my sort of optimistic
dream is is we get most of those being
managed for nature in a nature friendly
way and that would be a really big win
you know that would provide a kind
of Nationwide network of of patch of of
wildlife friendly habitat and it's
really easy to do and and I mean I guess
excitingly as well it's there are lots
of people doing it already there's lots
of people who are Keen to Garden for
wildlife or sometimes called garden
rewilding and actually I think the
reality is they're one and the same
really but simple things like not using
any pesticides in your garden reducing
how often you mow the lawn plant some
native wild flowers put up a little bee
Hotel be a bit more tolerant of of weeds
things like dandelion and so on all
stuff that and don't be too tidy don't
dead head at the end of the summer um as
people often don't dead head at the end
of the summer yeah leave leave the leave
the dead stems through the winter
because there's loads of hibernating
little insects the seeds in the dead
seed heads for the goldfinches will come
and feed on um tidying it away and worst
of all chopping off the dead heads and
burning them you're killing all those
little critters and getting rid of the
seeds um so ideally wait till late
winter early spring when the insects
that are hibernating there are starting
to wake up and when the ginges have
already eaten all the seeds then you can
chop it down and allow room for the
fresh growth to come through so let's
say I've got some hanging petunias
outside my front door they're going to
die anyway yeah sure I've been I've been
deadheading them all year yeah and
there's some there are some dead heads
now yeah what should I I mean you're
saying they're going die anyway you just
taking off the flower buds the petunias
don't produce seeds that birds eat
anyway so so that feel free to tidy away
those but what I'm thinking more of if
if you've got herbaceous plants um you
know things like lavenders and Cat mins
and and mckl mzes and so on that often
grow you know perhaps a Meer tall and
there'll be lots and it all dies off
back down to ground level in in the
Autumn and you're left with these sort
of stems and shriveled leaves and
flowerheads um just leave them ideally
um they look a little you know it's
again it comes down to a kind of
aesthetic you know if you want your gar
to look super tidy then you that's why
people clear them away but there's no
need for that tidying and it's um
harmful to to Wildlife otherwise he's
using that resource so generally try not
to be too kind of overly tidy things
like raking leaves you know that's
Bonkers why do people or even worse
bloody leaf blowers I mean I never
understood the point of blowing leaves
from one point to another cuz they're
going to blow back again as the wind
blows but um raking up leaves if you
leave them on the ground worms will pull
them into the ground and eat them and
that'll release your grass will die it
won't it won't no it'll it'll increase
the fertility of the soil and make the
grass grow better but if you have if you
have very little solar exposure and you
have lots of leaves then obviously the
grass isn't going to well if you if
you've got lots of big trees you're not
going to have a good lawn anyway because
there's not going to be enough light
getting through in the summer and you
look go into a woodland you don't see
lots of grass growing under the trees so
you've got probably so let's go back to
my garden right that's exactly the issue
in my garden we have we do have a lawn
it's just you know just about manages uh
sque it's a squeezed lawn in the words
of Ed milleran in you know 2014 just
about
managing but what you're saying is
perhaps actually it would make more
sense for my garden to not have a lawn
yeah Lawns La Lawns are a bit of a waste
of space from a wildlife perspective a
lawn is has very little value a wildf
flower Meadow which you might cut once
or twice a year and is full of flowers
is amaz is great for wildlife but the
traditional moan lawn is usually got
very little Botanical diversity and
because you mow it all the time nothing
flowers even if there are any flowers in
it um and it essentially serves from a
wildlife's perspective has very little
value at all um so that generally
speaking less lawn and more flower beds
and other and shrubs and trees and so on
is is better for water walk where so on
the two on the two sides you've got you
know you've got um Green Gauge Plum
you've got you've got that you've got um
what's the what's the name of the thing
called uh it's a very old fruit it's a
Victorian fruit which nobody likes and
you have to put in a brown paper bag and
then you can eat them out for a few
weeks no medlers medlers medlers yeah
there a med which my dad loves them for
some reason anyway fine so we got meder
Green Gauge we've got some roses they're
bad okay we we we'll get back to that in
a moment but then through the middle
you've got a lawn but you're basically
saying I should turn the middle bit into
a wild flower metal but but then how do
I walk around I walk through the cut cut
a path is is fine if you need a path or
or just reduce the lawn to a to a a
strip that you walk along right um right
if you don't want to Wade through long
wet grass which is understandable um but
the less lawn the better from a Wildlife
perspective and if you find that it the
the the leaves are smothering the grass
then just Rak them onto the flower beds
next to it rather than you know raking
them into a big pile and burning them as
some people do um because the the
nutrients in those leaves are really
important to go back into the soil um
which is where they came from in the
first place um so yeah and
um choosing plants that I mean generally
speaking avoid
um double flowers things like the
classic kind of hybrid Rose which is
just this bundle of petals with no
middle is many flowers are mutant many
of the double flowers on sale they're
actually weird mutants that um where the
anthers which are the sort of male parts
of the flow that produce pollen have
mutated into an extra set of petals so
you see things like um double varieties
of Hol Hawks and cherries and aqueles
all sorts sorts of things they have more
petals so people think they look
prettier but from a bees perspective
there's no pollen so they're completely
useless um so sticking to single
varieties of roses can be great for for
wildlife but just the the single
varieties with a nice open flower with
just a ring of five petals and the
anthers and poll uh producing pollen in
the middle um uh and generally old
fashioned Cottage Garden kind of flowers
things like lavender and Hol Hawk and um
Fox glob comrey rosemary thyme lots of
herbs chives um are all really good for
bees and you could some of them you can
cook with as well um there's lots of
choice of beautiful plants you can grow
you know Wildlife Garden can look really
pretty it doesn't have to be a you know
shambolic mess of nettles and brambles
as some people imagine can look
absolutely stunning but as well as
having pretty flowers you've got the
extra dimension of of bees and
butterflies and Bird Song and all the
rest of it which
for me brings it all to life um and and
I I you know I think kids should grow up
in a world where they see insects and
and other Wildlife so they don't end up
frightened of bees and wasps when they
encounter them um I I I I think we
should try and sort of turn our cities
into oases for for nature maybe wolves
would be going a step too far in the
middle of London but uh but certainly
you know there's no reason why we can't
have thousands of species of insect
living right in in our cities in our
parks and Gardens and so on so I presume
for the same reason you said about roses
peonies bad this single so I I saw this
um Q Garden no yeah Q Gardens they they
were growing um a single variety of pey
and it was absolutely covered in bees
I've always said the PE is rubbish for
insects and they generally are the ones
that are this Mass great mass of petals
they're absolutely useless um but the
original um wild piy which is what they
were growing at Q Gardens is it was
absolutely smothered in in bees so it's
if you can find those they're not so
easy to get uranium's bad pelagonians so
the sorry this is that's good this is
important well it's not that important
but it's important to me um people get
really confused they call what we often
call geraniums are actually pelagonians
they're related uranium but they're um
from South Africa the things that people
often have in hanging baskets and pots
and whatnot really colorful usually pink
or white they're rubbish for uh our
native bees because they they can't
reach the nectar um they're designed to
be pollinated by weird long Tong flies
that live in South Africa but geraniums
proper
geraniums um L which are Hardy perennial
plants that grow in clumps and often
have usually have purple or pink flowers
many of those are re there there are
lots of native geraniums um and most
varieties of proper geranium are are
actually pretty good for for for
wildlife fuchia flour for ages as well f
fuches aren't terrible um but they're
not amongst the best though if I was
giving you top tips for insect friendly
plants I probably wouldn't include
fuches although they do have the
advantage that you if you're lucky you
get elephant HK moth caterpillars eating
the leaves which are these
the if you see the moth it's the most
beautiful lime green and pink moth it
looks like something from the tropics
and they're they're quite common in
Britain but unless you put a moth trap
in your garden you probably never see
one but their caterpillars will eat
fuches Dave Wilson you have taught me a
great deal about how to improve my own
back Garden I was going to say if
nothing else but also learned a great
deal of other things too thanks so much
for coming and joining us on Downstream
it's been fun
