the system that we have created it has
been hijacked and we're caught in this
trap and we are worthy of so much better
this is not what we're here to build and
I think everybody on the planet can come
to that conclusion if they just have
that scaffolding and that support and
then you'd want to empower them to know
Drive the change but I think that's
actually the core of rediscovering what
it means to be human and changing that
story and the rest I think would
actually sort itself
out I often say that it is an unusual
time to be alive and for many of us the
places we live and the problems we deal
with uh were ones that the human brain
evolutionarily was not meant to hold uh
navigating the challenges ahead of us
will require a change in Consciousness
uh for many humans which of course is
much easier said than done joining me to
discuss this topic today is Eric
fernholm Eric fern has dedicated his
career to unraveling how personal growth
connects to building a sustainable
Society he's a philosopher social
entrepreneur and has an academic
background in cognitive neuroscience and
happiness research Eric's been involved
in launching a variety of initiatives to
create forums for inner development
including the co-founding of the
29k foundation which has a mission to
democratize Inner development by
building the world world's first
scalable platform making mental health
and in development tools available to
Millions free of charge for the users
Eric has since helped in founding the
inner development goals initiative which
offers a framework to assist individuals
in navigating and developing their inner
lives to catalyze Outer change in
today's conversation he and I unpack
much of the nuance and complexity that
goes into creating and working with such
an ambitious project alongside the
importance of offering just one way that
people can approach personal growth and
mental health within the broader human
predicament I will also point out
because it is often forgotten that every
episode including this one has a very
long and thorough list of references and
show notes which can be found both in
the description and on the site a link
uh at greatthe greats simplification
tocom with that please welcome Eric
fernholm Eric welcome to the show my
friend thank you so much great to be
here great to meet you in your country
last year was it last year yeah I think
so um I I have to admit I quite like
Sweden it feels like um it's a merger of
uh what's been what is and what could be
and in ways that the United States is
not yeah it was great having you here
really appreciate it it um and Sweden
the Scandinavian countries are they're
an interesting um place to be in uh
Troublesome in some ways as well but but
interesting for sure um I only saw
Stockholm and then I went up to visit
ptil on her farm so I I can't say that I
saw much of the
country um so uh finally we have you on
the show um and for those who are
unaware um of your work uh it spans a
lot of areas which I described in the
intro but you spent much of your career
studying the psychology of Happiness
eventually leading you uh to your
current contributions in developing the
inner development goals the
idg's what are the inner development
goals and and how can they uh um inform
and midwife the creation of of better
more sustainable societies yeah so so
the in development goals is a
communicative framework basically trying
to map out um that I mean the context is
basically that we know that you know
more than half of the time has passed
for reaching the SGS the sustainable
development goals from the
UN and we're getting more and more
information that things aren't
progressing in the right direction and
we aren't adapting to that information
so we're more or less kind of immune to
that change uh that we are the ones
causing the problem that we're trying to
fix so what we kind of POS we being the
humans on the earth yeah exactly
yes and and accepting that this is not
just a information or technical
challenge but this is an Adaptive
challenge where we are you know the way
that we are solving problems is the
problem then what we're exploring in the
IDS is what shifts what inner shifts in
culture and individuals are needed for
us to actually achieve theg like to
unlock this situation um and to build
the capacities not only to process the
information and to take that on because
that is an emotional quite heavy thing
to do uh you have a lot of psychological
immune systems as well within the
individual that will kind of try to stay
away from that or try to neglect it um
but then not only to take it on but then
to um you know take in the complex view
of that and care for the entire system
and act for that system in a more um in
a better way basically that is more
generative so so what are they what are
the inner development goals and I I uh I
have lots of questions yeah um so what
we what we did was that together with
this huge network of researchers we we
kind of posed the question what inner
skills capacities and qualities are
needed for us to reach sustainability
and have a a thriving future and planet
and what we got back from that huge
amount of data like 4,000 experts on the
topic uh was five categories and 23
skills indexing really kind of like
these are the core things at least at a
first iteration um that can point us to
kind of where we're lacking or the
skills that we need to build and enhance
so that we better can act on driving
sustainability uh and it really it opens
up a different types of conversation
saying that there's this inner dimension
of sustainability it's not just this
external systems change that we need to
fix out there but there's an inner
aspect of psychology and culture that we
need to change um and it's all so it's
saying that the inner and the outer are
interconnected but it's also a story of
of a more hopeful Narrative of saying
you know what um humans and cultures can
develop and that means that the system
that we have created is not the only
system that we can create uh we have
created this one but it doesn't mean
that humanity is destined for
unsustainability but that we actually
can um develop past this and create
better
systems so it's it's natural that
someone would eventually be working on
this because we have a supply problem uh
which is we're our culture is based on
um fossil uh carbon and fossil minerals
we have a waste problem that emanates
from that but then there's a demand
problem what is it that we want what is
it that we need how do we relate with
each other and I've been saying uh for
quite a while uh and a lot recently that
the real energy transition
isn't really about switching from Dirty
energy to clean energy it's changing the
relationship we have with energy which
gets to some of these inner development
goals like what's it all for how do we
relate with each other and with the
natural world um so you're you're
looking on that on the demand side and
uh presumably how we cope uh and
presumably how humans can measure our
success in things other than material
throughput yeah I mean so as soon as you
open up the box of of the inner
Dimension you you really come down to
kind of like
um the demand side or what do we really
value what is truly important for humans
uh and how do we build the sustainable
system around those needs um and here I
mean research is quite clear um that for
one I mean human beings are hackable uh
so we are shaped by social norms uh but
we're also hackable from the
dopaminergic system of effective
forecasting and stuff like that where we
we can be fooled into thinking that if I
get what I want then I'll be happy if I
get X then I'll be happy then I'll feel
this um and and then and within the
inter development goals it really kind
of invokes and invites this conversation
really of what is truly valuable what is
a uh life well lived
really and I mean it may be surprising
to some people I don't think the
audience of the podcast would be
surprised by it but from the from at
least in Scandinavia I mean there's this
indiv idual istic um very uh kind of top
down approach to happiness that if I
just get more optionality if I just get
more
freedom and so money and power will give
me freedom and if I get Freedom then I
can do whatever I
want and then I'll be happy because I
won't be limited and that presupposes
that you
know uh what you want and that aligns
with what you need and it doesn't unless
you're very eyes and have you know have
had a great childhood where you really
are
aligning uh what you want and what you
need but for most people those things
don't really point in the same direction
so um exploring that um is and and the
research on that topic I think is
fundamental where you know nobody wakes
up in the morning hoping to have a
meaningless day even though we're all
individuals nobody wakes up in the
morning want to be controlled by other
people or wanting to feel less confident
ENT or wanting to be excluded of their
social group we all have these basic
human needs um and and if we could focus
more on experiencing a fulfillment of
those needs instead of getting X um I
think that's a really uh it's a
fundamental conversation to be had in
the the realm of sustainability at large
of course so what are the the five
categories and if if you want to list
the 23 that's fine as well yeah I'll
stay with the five uh so it's it's um so
what what kind of uh from a dely process
of the data so just a statistical
analysis of kind of grouping that what
we found was that um the first one was
the a being category basically of like
uh understanding who I am what is
important for me the story of my
identity um like for me that kind of
pulls into where do I think that I end
uh and expanding that really shifts uh
what I want what I need what I focus on
second category is thinking uh so I
thinking in a like kind a simple linear
way or I'm thinking in systems and and I
mean there there's a lot of different
types of research from Peter S sh that
we uh pull in on um then also relating
so how do I relate third category is
like how do I relate to myself others in
the world um and then the second two
categories is uh collaborating and
acting so that's much more um you know
outward oriented getting things done
moving people are more comfortable in
those categories because we have of
course a culture that's built on getting
stuff done and the first three uh being
thinking and relating are a little bit
more about you know slowing down and and
uh reflecting and maybe changing these
deeper Nar that we have of who we are
what is valuable um what is really
important so you said you had 4,000
experts contribute um or you looked at
their their research is this like when
we talk about climate change and uh oil
depletion and and those things there are
check marks like we each need 2, 2500
calories a day um and there is a CO2
footprint from flying a plane and things
like that but the list of things that
you just said are are uh not so discreet
and they might be applied in different
contexts to different cultures so is it
a checklist or is it more a directional
um uh aspiration some of some of these
categories yeah so I wouldn't say it is
a checklist at all so I mean within each
of the five categories we have you know
a couple skills skills that came out of
the data um but uh like empathy and
compassion and stuff like that uh or
systems thinking or courage um but I
would say it's much more a a um a way to
start a conversation about what is
really needed for us to uh take in care
and act on these really complex uh
challenges uh like the M multi-polar
traps or
uh stuff like that it really needs you
to kind of move away from a simple way
of looking at the problem um and it
invites a lot of more perspectives uh
where there are interventions then that
idg's points towards like programs or
tools evidence-based processes that we
know will actually build these
capacities um and cooperations in a lot
better way so are these uh ID G's in
development goals um from the
perspective of the dominant Global
culture which is the economic
superorganism spurred by the global
North right now or are they also
applying to cultures that aren't the
dominant cultures that are pulled into
what's happening right now and and
integrating those perspectives or how
how do you even manage such a thing
there's 8 billion people in wildly
different contexts in the world yeah and
this is this is actually been um one of
the big things that we've been working
on and struggling with because you know
we started the framework of saying like
how could nobody have not invented the
inner development goals like the inner
side the inner shifts of motivation and
care and systems thinking towards the
stgs like like when we registered the
domain we're a little bit sad because
we're like how like inner development
goals uh and then and then you found out
why then we found out why yeah it's a
really complex task
but um I mean doing it with the some of
the top thinkers in the world within
this field really I think that enabled
the project um to to take off uh but
what happened was uh once we released
the framework it it just exploded uh we
had people all over the world reaching
out saying like we are starting an idg
Hub here or completely emergent organic
and now we have 700 plus hubs around the
world more in I think Brazil than we do
in Sweden and um so per
capita uh and it just took off and then
as a kind of consequence of that this
this topic kind cames up is like is this
just representative of of the like a
small group of of um like northern
European thinkers or is this
representative of of the global movement
and like this conversation is not is not
ours to dominate or to to um you know
have a veto on so now what we're doing
to kind of um integrate all these
perspectives of you know native wisdom
and and all these different ways of
thinking is is expanding the survey
again not going for you know four 4,000
thinkers or expert but actually inviting
2 million uh people to respond um of
course that takes a lot more time um but
it is it is really something that that
kind of has happened as a bottomup
process um
but what we're seeing also in the
dominant culture is kind of a longing
for this type of conversation because
we've been looking at we've been
fighting for the the people who have
intrinsic motivation and really care
about these topics they're not seeing
the results that they want and the years
are passing and they're starting to feel
it like unsustainability is now touching
us right and for those people to have a
completely different level of
conversation has really um been
inspirational both on the corporate and
governmental level
so what happens at these in development
hubs you said there's 700 of them what
are those
about yeah so um so the the barrier to
entry to to start a hub is really low
and I think the the limit is like you
need to be three three people who join
together and want to work on these
topics in a systemic way right um and
and spread uh those types of
interventions and we we try to stay very
close to to the signs of what actually
is
um what drives these types of skills and
capacities um but then there's there's
the possibility to start a a center as
well and so some some hubs like the one
in Barcelona I think it has like
hundreds of members um but then a lot of
them are just a few people who really
care about the
topic uh but we're also seeing is
governments even coming on board and
saying we're starting a we're not
starting just a hub we want to be the
representative of for the entire country
and the nation uh so in Costa
Rica the Costa Rican government um for
the second time in a row like
going uh they changed the the election
shifted parties but they're still
implementing the IDS centrally in the
government into all of their
institutions and agencies educational
system because they said you know we are
pioneering sustainability but we know
that we are the ones getting in our own
way so how do we even start exploring
how we can get unstuck here um which is
really interesting so I know you know
when I met you in Sweden we talked about
human behavior quite a bit I'm not sure
I knew your role in in this um org like
what what are you doing now are you
running this idg's uh who else is
involved are you doing this from Sweden
what what's the structure yeah so no I'm
I'm I'm not running it uh we're a big
team I mean I was one of the co-founders
um but we really we've been extending
the co-founding team cuz really now now
it's uh I mean a lot of top researchers
have have joined so I think the context
of it was really the Oak Island
foundation with Thomas burkman um and
then I was working a lot with 29k
Foundation which is basically Wikipedia
platform for scaling evidence-based
processes for inner development for free
so it's really a true Wikipedia open-
source project um with Nicholas adal the
founder of
noran uh and in those conversations I
met a lot of philanthropist
and I had to spend you know maybe you
get 45 minutes maybe you get 20 minutes
with them and I had to spend the first
you know 80% of the meeting trying to
explain why uh building the capacity to
even care for the system that you're
part of um and to then build the
capacity to act in that for the greater
good is something that's important uh
and and that's where for me at least uh
the in development goals kind of at
least frame came from so I I imagine you
had have um some examples of how inner
development creates outer change in
service of the larger good um do do you
have any you could
share yeah of course so um so the one
closest to heart is actually uh my
co-founder Nicholas albat who founded
clana uh the payment Service uh so he's
high net worth individual who when he
was younger he took part of this um
training leadership training an
experimental program and he said that I
think like by day two he completely
pivoted in his uh identity and how he
saw himself and how he saw society and
he really made one of these
developmental leaps um and that changed
his way of thinking about his own
ownership and where that comes from and
how he he is part of the society and
where he's not you know if he's
successful it's not because he's amazing
it's actually because he was really
lucky and has had all this support
throughout the years um and he says
explicitly that that's why he started
norim Foundation which is now you know
Shifting the entire Norm in Stockholm
and Sweden where we are now at the point
where we have 38 times the global
average of VC Capital going into impact
and if you ask people at the uh business
school the top business school in
Stockholm most of the students now uh in
contrast to a couple of years ago uh say
that I don't want to go into to just you
know building a company earning a lot of
money and making an exit but I actually
the majority say I want to go into
creating a better world um which is
amazing uh so one person shift uh
trickles down has these huge Cascade
effects uh it's it's I mean maybe you
can't say that he wouldn't have done it
anyways um but his narrative at least is
uh that that the this support uh has
enabled him to to see himself and in a
system instead of separate from it well
you said when he was younger like in his
30s or is this when he was like a
teenager no I think this was this was
probably when he was like 1920 something
like that wow yeah beautiful beautiful
yeah and he always says that like he
held this perspective uh even though he
started clana which was the payment
services but he always knew kind of that
he was going to do something else with
it right um and this you see again and
again and again and Thomas burkman
co-founder of the Oak Island Foundation
same story he had a transformative
experience when he was even younger at a
youth camp um that changed his entire
perspective and he accredited that to
him starting the oalen foundation later
on I you have Rosa Park she even went to
to the Highlander Folk School um and
there's a quote from her saying you know
I wouldn't have had the courage to sit
still on that seat on the bus if it
weren't for the support and the insights
I got from the Highlander Folk School so
inner development for teenagers is
really a high PRI in our culture right
now I would say yeah I mean for
everybody but uh but yeah I was in
California last week at a staff Retreat
and and I met with some friends and uh
we sat uh and talked for 10 hours about
related topics uh on a
Friday
um one of the projects that I have in my
Bend versus break uh list I call the
1500 which is the 1500 Elite humans on
the world some of them need to have a
Consciousness
shift um and it's almost like they uh
had traumatic childhoods or or whatever
and go through the world as if it were a
video game amassing digital wealth and
like hungry ghosts and so my my question
to you is do these inner development
goals apply equally if not more to the
philanthropist that you're seeking and
the elite um you know billionaire class
um do they need to uh take these courses
and experience this uh um as much as
they need to donate their
dollars yeah I mean any movement of a
powerful player that would that would
support them to move towards wisdom
wisdom that would you know help them
thinking generationally and whole system
so including externalities instead of
external creating more externalities to
increase speed um would be a win I think
uh and there there's you know different
theories of change it's like what we've
been talking about in the Oak Island
foundation for 15 years is basically you
know uh if you could create a Tipping
Point uh of enough people who start
seeing themselves as you know Tethered
to society uh who care for that who
think about its longevity um they will
automatically move towards uh creating
sound systems that regenerate themselves
and that could be the bus driver it
could be the teacher it could be the
parent it could be the farmer doesn't
really matter but eventually that
narrative uh would be
um
self-empowering and could hopefully tilt
uh the system I I wasn't being critical
I just I really think we're out of time
uh our cultural Runway is is quite short
and I think we need everyone uh to play
a role um urgently in in these issues so
I I do think a shift in Consciousness
from those Riding High on the
superorganism is one of the things uh
that that's
necessary um yeah I mean that's my uh my
take as well
um like with my background in in
cognitive neuroscience and just the
understanding of how these types of
changes happen I mean some people go the
cognitive route to understand how
systems work and how their actions
impact that system I mean there's even
uh Psychopaths Who start who stopped
manipulating people because they
understood how that affected their
relationships long term which is really
cool so there's in I've seen interviews
with people uh who have actually
concluded this for themselves um like
people who are diagnosed and I'm working
with tri with ways to cope with their
own illness basically um and I think
that that unsustainability is now
becoming real a felt sense for a lot of
people really creates the kind of
conditions for a different conversation
to be had and if that conversation is
only about technical means and Technical
Solutions we're not really solving the
root problem which is the type of deep
disconnection that we have in our
culture I can already
predict that we're going to run out of
time because I have so many questions I
haven't even gotten to really the idg's
but let me ask you this so my my coach
and I need uh I have several coaches
because um I'm I'm carrying a lot uh
here keeps telling me Nate you need to
stop thinking and start feeling because
I do like you just said I process all
this by thinking and I did a frankly a a
while ago that we think that there's the
the cognitive mind uh on top of the lyic
system on top of the reptilian system on
top of the anic system but in reality
it's not a a straight thing it's a it's
a pyramid and those underlying systems
are much much stronger than we give
credit to uh so I'm just wondering in in
all this work is it educational that
people think about these five categories
or is there an experiential way that
people feel uh the relational quality
can you can you tell us about that from
Neuroscience what we know is that you
know 0.5% of your decisions are are
cognitive rational the thing like the
words in your head you associate with
the conscious choices that you're making
and even a lot of those are very biased
u i I didn't know that but that makes
sense it makes sense I mean we don't we
don't know how we use language we don't
know that we're you know all the
biological processes going on in our
bodies right now um
so and usually when I work with leaders
is is like just getting people to
acknowledge that they don't know why
they trust people they just got a
feeling for it they they don't know why
they feel you know trivial example is
like who do I feel attraction towards
like a romantic partner that I met the
first time we met I felt something first
then I found the maybe later cognitive
reasons for that and I put words on it
but but who sent me the emotion what
process in me sent that to me and as
soon as you start looking in you start
realizing that wow something below the
surface is actually directing me and
telling me what in this conversation is
interesting uh what kind of has this
emotional salience to it and not and
that invites a lot more humility to any
human system of saying you know the
agents the the first principal agent in
the system is not a rational mind
running around controlling top down so
why would we build systems like that and
if we want to create change it's not
about understanding the IDS like you
reading up on the 23 skills will do
nothing if anything it will actually
make you maybe less humble because
you'll be like yeah I'm good at uh these
five skills and is and it'll also create
the story that you know that you are
good at leadership you're good at
sustainability which makes you you know
it's a it's an attractive hero story but
it won't make you curious and make you
want to
explore where you where you're lacking
or where you need to learn
right uh so so breaking the kind of
rational uh myth is a fundamental piece
and that also plays into any of the
developmental processes so this is where
I the idg's is is this neon sign telling
people you know what the reason why
you're seeing these outer symptoms that
you're not being able to cope with we're
not adequately responding to is because
um we're lacking the conversation about
the inner and the tools for that so then
direct them to these processes that are
much more embodied relational
experiential uh where people uncover
these experiences about themselves it's
not that they read up on them does the
3,000 or 4,000 contributing experts to
uh your idg
framework is there evolutionary
psychologist or evolutionary biologist
informing uh what these five categories
and 23 um subcategories are from an
evolutionary perspective where we uh for
you
know 20 290,000 years of our modern
species we lived in small Hunter gather
bands on the PTO scene and what was
conserved in what drove us and made us
satisfied and motivated us um Rhymes in
a wildly different envir today with
technology and supern normal stimuli and
all that is that does that map to your
your framework or is that
tangential I mean I would say that it
Maps but not directly like we the way
that that the process was done to
distill the 23 scills was not through
the evolutionary lens that was just the
statistical analysis of what the the
expert on aggregate thought was was kind
of uh needed right uh but when looking
into how do you build perspective taking
when do you build these thinking
capacities or rela capacities the
Interventional programs that research
has shown are effective um I mean
they're running on that substrate right
so if they have an effect they're really
developing these capacities within the
individual so just one example is we ran
uh a program for leaders in six
different countries uh with support from
the Templeton Foundation and what we
found was that the majority of them
afterwards had started new initiatives
for sustainab sustainable growth
sustainable development um just because
they had been in in a process that
really supported their um them taking on
the seriousness of the of the situation
and then being able to have that kind of
communal support to actually drive that
change
forward so you you mentioned communal
support um I've recently intuited that
healing um and growing largely doesn't
happen at the individual level that
someone heals and grows in relation to
someone else or to Nature or a group of
people or you and I have a relationship
and we have a discourse and from that I
I heal and grow so how much of the inner
development goals are at the individual
level or how much happen in relation to
other humans uh in a context yeah yeah
so I mean at face value people usually
think that that the idg is because it's
skilled is this um individualistic
framework but it but it's actually not
at all um most developmental processes
are relational um and as you said we
develop in relationship to others
communities or relationship to Nature to
the world um and the when looking at all
the different types of programs that
really have an effect uh they usually
have three components uh one is great
evidence-based tools two is that you
practice over time it's not this kind of
oneoff firewor I went to the jungle and
I did the cool thing where I had the
offsite team leadership stuff like a
week or two weeks but it's actually it's
continual practicing in your everyday
environment because you need to be
working down the stack from the rational
into the embodied and the social way of
relating to each other so you're
actually you're working on changing
within and with your
context uh and the third component is
this safe and trusting relation ship
where you feel that you can be at home
and by me just putting words on and
sharing with
you the kind of messy inner workings of
my emotions and thoughts and Reflections
and I mean it's not super clear why I
feel the way I do why I react the way I
do uh we are not transparent for
ourselves but by putting words on it um
we're actually um making sense of the
chaos that we're in and that creates
agency create sense making so I mean one
like a really powerful exercise that an
intervention program is the pen a baker
Paradigm basically
where you write down 20 minutes a day
for 4 days in a row the worst things
that you've ever done the worst things
that You' that has ever happened to you
so it's just free writing you don't have
to think about grammar editing you don't
read you don't show it to anybody then
just by putting your inner world into
words um the positive effects on Mental
Health
were they were insane like 2 years later
H they were still having positive
effects from this thing that basically
took them you know an hour or two why
would that
be so one way of thinking about it is
that so
um if we have this rational mind the
metaphor that that I usually use is is
the ride around the elephant it's from
Jonathan Heights his metaphor of the
brain right and the rider is not
cognizant of the elephant but it's
getting all these emotional signals
he'll tell it like be stay away from
that situation or in this situation you
have to take control here and it's
basically all these past memories that
the elephant is telling you what to do
how to react and sending you these
emotional signals
right and by never working on the stuff
that you've been through the
disconnections that you've experienced
what your selfworth is how you work with
shame what is shameful and not
by never making sense of that you're
you're not relearning you're just
replaying that old memory or that old
sequence right but by putting words on
it what they found also in the research
was so cool was that the amount of
causal words was highly correlated with
the the positive effect afterwards so
the more do mean so a happened because
of B uh so just causal links right so
I'm trying to make sense of like
sequencing what happened first what came
after what was in effect and the more
they had those types of causal word
words uh the the higher the positive
effect was and you can see this in other
research as well like in in soldiers
coming home from PTSD or having po
postmar stress basically is that people
who share more about their experience
they have a lot less PTSD and they even
live longer of course I mean because
they're they're going through this
process of making sense of the world um
and some sense on a bigger level I think
that that's really what we need to do
right now is to make sense of where how
did we get to a place where we are not
proud of the world that we've created um
and and how do we get out of that right
here's a thought let me replay that back
um based on some recent experiences so
what you're saying is by by writing down
the worst things that happened in the
last couple years what you're doing
uh metaphorically is showing elephant
Footprints uh to your cognitive brain
but there's an elephant here and that uh
opens up a portal to dispel the
ginormous cognitive dissonance that many
in our culture are
feeling and I I've recently been in some
some groups as I mentioned earlier and
it strikes me that a lot of people in
the peak oil and early climate change
and the systems
uh collapse uh framework a lot of them
and I think there is some evidence here
and I'll I'll have to ask my friend Tom
Murphy to find it have a depressive
realism personality uh and certain um
Myers Brig categories and some of the
people I've talked to had recently like
um philanthropists that totally shifted
their worldview had a tragedy in their
family and such so I I wonder if you
need to have some piercing of the
consensus trance of our cozy fossil
carbon pulse uh reality to be able to
emotionally process these things are are
actually biophysical reality that is
staring us you and I are are fluent in
it but a lot of people it's too scary to
touch so the the pneumonic the tool that
you just mentioned is one way of
accessing that what do you think about
that I think that that would be I mean
that's mainly about mental health and
processing kind of my own emotions but
it's also listening to them uh and
giving them the right place um and and
so the research in kind of adult
development theory shows that we all go
through a first phase of socializing
where we're actually downloading the
culture and that's why you know you have
the ash Conformity studies where people
really are shaped by their ingroup and
and it's an evolutionary adaption like
if you did not do that and you're 15year
old and you actually are completely
self-directed but you don't know the
language you don't know the Norms you
don't know how things work it's too
risky so you download first as a young
person right and you can you can see
this either as an as a life Arc or you
can see it as a domain specific thing so
first you download how does this game
work how does chess work how does
Monopoly work right and once you
understood it and once you found your
place in it once you found your way to
kind of Master the game you're not that
interested in becoming maybe just a
little bit better you have diminishing
returns on that from an emotional
perspective and what starts being evoked
unless you're traumatized really because
then you just want more more more more
more is you start listening inward you
become more so moving from the
socialized mind to the self-authoring
mind of kind of so the ladder that I was
received that somebody put put up
against the wall if I'm just climbing up
to the next rung and I'm not feeling
more maybe pointed towards the wrong
wall and then I myself grab it and I
start thinking about what values do I
want to lead My Life by taking back a
lot of my direction right my my ability
to self-direct so first I can gain
agency in in the socialize mind I can be
an an an agent of this current system
but I'm not holding the system I'm not
seeing it and that's the self-authoring
move is I'm instead of being inside the
current pyramid I'm actually moving
outside and thinking yeah this is just
one of many pyramids so where do I want
to live my authentic life so that's the
self-authoring right and it doesn't
really end there self-authoring can also
be quite self-centered it's about being
authentic it's about being true to your
emotional systems you kind of discover
the elephant right but um you're still
part of a context and that's usually
what Dawns on people when they move away
from the self-authoring is seeing myself
in a system where I actually have to
honor other norms and other people being
authentic for different reasons than I
would and to act for that whole so
that's a self-transcending perspective
and these individuals they can really
start Moving Systems because they're
very few they're like 5% of the
population and they can start seeing not
just the norm not just my will to be
authentic and to to lead my you know
real life but then I can also start
seeing myself in this context and
starting to act act for
that what type of individuals are are 5%
of the population the self-transcending
ones so people who um I mean and and if
we could increase that way of it so I
mean saying that people are on one in
one stage I I I kind of want to avoid
that way of thinking about it I mean you
could I have one of like my oldest son
sometimes he's really acting for the
whole of the system the family system um
in a way that's extremely wise maybe
even more wise than than me a lot of the
time um so so it could be a state but it
can also be a stage way of thinking
about it but like how am I acting for um
what other people have told me is is
good and true am I acting for what I
feel is good and true or am I acting to
I mean we could put it in in like the
the Monopoly frame right so am I trying
to be the best player I can and win the
game or am I trying to be myself as a
player or am I trying to create a better
game so we um at least in the US on
social media um and just traveling
around there's so much advertisement and
um buzz around personal development how
how does the inner development that
you're discussing here differ from from
personal development is there an overlap
are they quite different or what are
your thoughts yeah I mean I mean I spent
my most of my uh professional life in
this space
and I'm really uh disillusioned of the
kind of Market version of a lot of these
self-development programs personal
development courses first of all they're
usually based on uh the development I
can sell you um and they're built off of
this individualistic frame so you take a
course you buy the book you go to the
keynote you do the thing and then they
drop you back in the exact same context
the exact same situation and your
conclusion of why you're not integrating
and changing is because you didn't try
hard enough and then you have a
recurring customer right come back it's
because you didn't take step two right
um so there's a lot of that with people
who are really struggling and who really
need support uh who aren't getting
it so a lot of it is good A lot of it is
are are people deeply caring about
supporting other people's growth and
development um but there is this this
tricky part of it being captured into
kind of Market incentives that optimize
for recurring customers instead of
actually honestly helping
people
um and in some cases uh the people who
design the programs or buy the programs
in the corporate setting for example um
if they are only saying like how can I
what can I get out of this what does the
corporate win out of this um it's it's
it can the the program will be be very
directed towards the metric and it'll
maybe increase people's capacity right
um and maybe that's a good thing maybe
it's not uh but the deeper programs will
usually help people you know mature the
entire system so that it maybe takes on
more responsibility longer time Horizons
and those are um I mean I really have an
an amazing uh privileged position
because uh I have the opportunity to
work with some of those who are usually
self-owned so they don't have external
fiduciary responsibility on a cly basis
but they actually have so one of the one
of the corporations that I'm really like
I I was working with them in Austria
last week it's an 11th generation family
um business and they have a uh Seventh
Generation perspective at least into the
future so in their boardroom where they
have some of their boardrooms they have
a glass wall where they see the
employees kindergarten so they see the
kids that they will take decisions that
will shape their future just the amount
of care that some of these organizations
have so I'll give you another example
from them like the people who can train
the trainees in this
Corporation it's the it's the top skill
from the from the their Factory floor
like you get nominated it's the it's the
biggest privilege you can have in the
entire Corporation is to train the Next
Generation of you know 15 16 year olds
and that's not if you have a short-term
incentive to really you know win you
wouldn't do that but they're really
building generationally here if they're
really thinking Seven Generations ahead
I hope they have ecologist uh on staff
um I mean they would should be hella
worried about climate uh I I would think
yeah and this is where this is where you
know a lot of these individuals that I
work with they start seeing that they
are part of the problem and that that's
an an emotionally heavy thing to
hold but if they can do it within a
context uh that can support that and
within other with with other people who
are in similar situations they can
really start being inspired by each
other and starting to move a completely
different narrative so I I totally agree
with that which is why I okay so here's
my question is the inner development
goals like are they actually goals or
are they more like are they proximately
goals But ultimately just a bridge to
allow this company in Austria and the
people there to talk and process and get
this conversation going to kick up the
things that need to be kicked up um you
know what I mean is it is it one or the
other or both I mean I like the way that
I think about it at least is not to say
that they are goals as destinations
right uh but it's rather this attractor
to have this conversation to find the
process and tools and uh like-minded
people uh that can start moving from The
Narrative of this inner shift that has
to happen for the outer chains to to
take place um I mean the metac crisis is
is uh really deep in the IDS I would say
um but it is a different way of framing
it um that'll
attract uh more people to the narrative
than
I mean I I mean I've been trying to work
with some philanthropists and it took me
like three years to get them to kind of
get the the metac crisis narrative
sending them you know podcast after
podcast and they're like it's way too
complex for me like I I I don't
understand it um so this is a way of of
creating a
a a different way of attracting people
who sense that there is a there is
something more we can do here we can
really build the soil that can be more
regener generative um yes maybe we are
part of the problem but we could also
become agents for the solution that is
an an inner Journey that has to play
take place within us and the culture and
maybe also as system movers in the
market so I mean we work a lot with Ikea
for example I mean there's a they're a
huge player and they they honestly
honestly care about these topics they're
like Eric don't sugarcoat anything we
want to hear all the the um how how the
situation really is and we can take it
cuz we really care about this and we
know that we're you know producing a lot
of furniture but we we honestly want to
do our best in this and we want to see
reality and face it as it is um and that
is for me
um yeah I mean people are great uh they
can be they can be hijacked into really
disastrous stories but but for me this
brings a lot of Hope if you're um give
me give me three answers um to this um
if you and your team and this effort on
um developing inner development hubs
around the world and and scaling this
work um not as goals but as a as a
direction to get these conversations
going what is a a minimal uh base case
and a wildly successful outcome and goal
for you and and your colleagues uh with
this
framework um okay so minimum case and
then wildly ambitious goal uh so minimum
case would be you know changing the The
Narrative of sustainability to say you
know what it is it is not a technical
challenge it is an Adaptive challenge so
if we're going to uh navigate
existential risk of of of sustainability
but also of AI like we need to change
the The Narrative of how we think about
systems how we think about a multipolar
traps how we think about all of this
because reality is a lot more connected
than our thinking has been therefore we
need this this inner shift okay so that
would be one just coupling
unsustainability to the inner aspect of
individuals groups countries um that
would be
one uh the
wildly ambitious case uh and I can't
speak for the organization but but if
you're asking me
um that would
be um having
these 700 hubs turn
into 700,000 hubs and not it being a hub
but actually a place where this
conversation has um uh turned into
developmental processes that are
distributed for the many people and
where it becomes Norm that you go
through a process that will scaffold
your development where you end up in a
in a place where you see see yourself as
part of this entire system you know
warts and all uh with this long-term
perspective and where you are in service
like your own conclusion of course once
you see that is how can I be in service
of life and not of
myself um so communities of practice U
folk schools basically all over the
world uh building the wisdom that is
needed to tame the the technology that
we now have shouldn't something like
this maybe not this exact thing be in
every freshman College curriculum in the
world um you learn about science and
chemistry and philosophy but shouldn't
there be some inner development uh um
part of a curriculum yeah I mean I I
mean School wasn't designed for that uh
I think that's why you know in
Scandinavia I have the history of the
folk schools that was a parallel system
because they were like if we try to
reinvent schools we're going to get
stuck uh so let's build a parallel
system that is about inner development
and Technology like building and this is
actually what is now popping up in a lot
of places around the world like we have
one Center here in in the center of
Stockholm that we're now building at the
Oak Island Foundation which would be a
type of FK school which is you know com
combination of latest technology but but
mainly these type of interd
Developmental shifts and Scaffolding
support for that
um so I mean there there are some things
that I think are are also hopeful in
maybe shifting at least the conversation
at large um so I mean we have uh so for
like in two weeks I think uh roughly we
have a round table at the White House
where uh you know their Chief
sustainability officer is inviting Ikea
which is our partner at IDs the IDS um
the world Business Council for
sustainable development U charmer to
talk about the inner development goals
and how we can actually have the
conversation about the the inner shifts
that are needed and the capacities to
actually drive sustainability CU what
we're doing now is not enough it's not
working time is running out uh so doing
like increasing our speed won't
compensate for heading in the wrong
direction so so what would it difference
how would changing direction actually
look like and of course it will be
uncomfortable like uh but but feelings
don't bite so if you're if you just
don't want to be uncomfortable and
that's your reason for not you know
taking on The Meta story and listening
to Daniel mackenberg and Zak Stein and
Nora biton and all these great thinkers
like it is an inherently very
uncomfortable process um I mean I'm a
student of these people informally like
I really uh have been through years
taking on trying to learn from them and
a lot of the time it's this dizzying
experience where I'm like I'm losing my
footing here like am I even contributing
to this movement I just want to give up
basically and you can see it like when
we do workshops I I work in the Yar and
if you haven't had him you should
definitely have him because he's
scheduled for two weeks from now okay
amazing so I mean so we're doing this AI
in development uh session at the last
year's Summit and you could just see
that like people can hold the narrative
for just a while and then eventually
they just glaze over and I recognize
that so well that like okay and I even
had to pause the room and say okay guys
can you guys see what happened here like
98% of the people are not still in the
room like they're physically here but
they are not here because they're so
overwhelmed that they're not in the
process and usually my conclusion when
I've been in those conversations is I'm
not smart enough for this this is over
my head this is over my pay gr I should
kind of get out of the conversation
and I think this is one of the key
things from a developmental perspective
is you being over your head you feeling
that you're losing your footing is not
an indication that you're in the wrong
place it's the indication that you're in
the right place this is the feeling of
being in transition right um and if you
can talk about that and share that
experience with others you'll actually
stay in it and you'll grow throughout
the years I've found the only well the
main coping mechanism I have for this is
that I have friends like you and and
Daniel and Nora um and Zach and others
that are experiencing the same thing so
I I process with them so that's why I
asked you is the inner development goals
and and the hubs is the sharing and the
sitting in a in a circle in the
community is that a big part of it or is
it more formulaic no I would say that
that is the part that is the the driving
force of it so I mean
um and it's so it's so uh sad like I get
a little bit emotional talking about it
because so we had this master class and
this woman came up to me this was Peter
Sang's M Master Class A woman came up to
me and she said like this is the first
time she was 45 I think this is the
first time in my life that I feel at
home that like no matter I no matter who
I turn to I feel that we share so much
um and that is like it's it's
heartwarming it's amazing but it's also
so sad uh when when thinking about all
the young kids who have never been heard
who've never felt that they are really
truly seen because you know the phones
are there or or they think that they're
actually you know consumers of the
society or that that's their value and
it's just this um Soul crushing
narrative that that hasn't been fought
off really we haven't defended
the values that are truly important and
I think that one part for me at least of
why I care a lot about the inner
development goals is that it it evokes
this question of what is truly important
and what do we want to hold sacred like
what is the thing that is the highest
value that we want to sacrifice other
things for I mean sacred means to
sacrifice right so what is the thing
that is the most important because if if
I was a young girl or guy today I would
say that that's money and power that's
the thing that we sacrifice all other
things for um but it's not I think if
you were a young girl or guy that would
be the cultural context of that question
but I would actually think most people
wouldn't think that um let me ask a
followup to that and then we can Circle
back to this uh in one of your recent
presentations you cited uh if I recall
correctly that 56% of young people today
think humanity is doomed
in their lifetimes because of climate
change uh and climate change as you know
is just one aspect of the meta crisis
what what might a tool like uh inner
development uh goals offer to these
young people who are so worried about
their Futures and are losing hope of
seeing positive change in their
lifetime yeah I mean on one
level uh we don't know if they're right
or not right um it's a feeling based on
sence but yeah it's it's a
feeling yeah
um and I think that that like uh no
matter like one thing that I at least uh
lean towards uh in kind of My Darkest
Hours when actually I feel that you know
maybe we are doomed maybe things aren't
moving fast enough enough is
um so I mean one is like how how are we
uh effective in driving these change
these changes that need to happen so
that we can protect what is sacred um
and another one is am I showing up in a
way that is actually right now
protecting what is sacred or am I still
reliving these old patterns from my you
know lmic system or my conditioning uh
so there's two kind of destinations
right one is the destination of the
system and this kind of sustainable
future but there's also the destination
in this present moment
um and for me uh the kind of
Developmental move or the the
journey um is about definitely both of
these where you know what um how about
we try to protect what is sacred right
now and let's focus on what we have in
front of us right now uh and like the
next step approach of doing the the most
the next most important
thing and that for me brings a lot of
hope uh and it also creates the sense of
you know focusing on what we can manage
instead of this entire overwhelming
system shift so I know what is sacred to
me is the natural world that is here now
and that will come uh a generation and a
thousand Generations after I'm gone but
I think in the 700 and hopefully
700,000 uh hubs on inner development
what's sacred to the people in
Madagascar
or Bolivia or Barcelona or Brazil or
Stockholm might be different for those
people than for me and for you so how so
I assume there's not
uh one answer to what is sacred it's
it's dependent on the context of the
people that are having the
conversation yeah I mean I definitely
but to act from your values um for the
highest good uh would be the common
denominator right and what does
cognitive Neuroscience say about that
just that that we are able to act for
some greater good um I I think maslov's
hierarchy Scott Barry Kaufman wrote some
uh read some letters that um that he had
written uh before his death that said
that the Transcendence wasn't the top of
the maslo pyramid it was there was
another thing which was in service to
something greater than self so what
evidence is there in the literature and
what have you seen when people are able
to go from self to we to us and some um
greater
aspiration yeah I mean so I wouldn't be
pulling necessarily on Neuroscience for
that maybe there is great research on it
um but but for me um I mean just the
just the research on adult development
of of looking at okay so what does a
wiser life look like
um and it is moving beyond self
actualization which is you know
self-authoring like it's focusing on me
and living my authentic life and you
know doing that fully um but eventually
that that usually uh if you have the
right support um that moves into how can
I be in service of something bigger than
myself
um and that I think from an evolutionary
lens is uh quite obvious
that we are both individuals but we're
also part of the
whole um so so it it it does make sense
that that would be something that we
would uh you know be hardcoded to do and
if you backtrack and look at like what
do people you know um regret on their
deathbeds or what are the happiest
people on the planet have in common it
is not a life that is focused on their
own happiness it's not like I mean
people who focus on their own happiness
are more miserable and more depressed
because it's about me and my happiness
and how I'm
feeling does it almost feel in a this
feels like a movie like a twilight zone
or a Groundhog Day the things you're
saying make so much sense to me and your
colleague Thomas bjorkman was was on
last year and it was the same thing it's
like at the 11th Hour just before the
meta crisis is going to explode we've
had this awareness oh my God how myopic
and and diluted have we been as a
culture do do you get that
sense yeah fly I mean I've had that my
entire life so so um that's that's my
father was an Olympian so he was a
discus thrower yeah he was a Swedish
discus thrower who moved to the states
to train in Provo and Utah met my mom
who was uh then Mormon um so I was born
into a Mormon family uh but with a
atheist Olympian father who had the
religion of success that was that was um
killing him like he he died when he was
37 I'm 38 now and just like him I have
three boys um and and he passed away due
to a pill
overdose and I was there in between
these two worlds right of like Mormonism
which which on one sense it really held
our family together and it and it held
it scaffolded the support that we needed
both when we were in the states and when
we came to Sweden um and then my father
being this you know hot shot out in
society so everybody thought I was cool
because I was his son but at home you
know he fell as he fell asleep in his
food like he almost drowned in his you
know like old meal it was insane to have
the dissonance of like how could that be
success in most people's eyes um and
even also like how can Mormonism be so
weird in other people's eyes cuz I was
getting that signal as well but that was
something that was in many cases healthy
for us with family dinners and play
nights and you know going to church um
but but I also understood that like both
of these stories can't be true at the
same time like he can't be right about
the how the universe is sorted and my
mom can't be right I mean she's not
Mormon anymore we we lived in Sweden
most of my adult life um but to
to see that we can be captured by these
stories and uh in a way that makes us
blind and makes us sacrifice so many
values that we truly hold dear um that's
been kind of my core assumption my
entire life of like how can we be so
captured by um something that is so
apparently bad for
us that's that's powerful uh and I
increasingly think that we have the
mother of all cognitive dissonances as
our culture we feel that something is
horribly wrong I I I refer to people as
the walking worried that they they know
that something isn't right but they
can't articulate it but to do the work
and to peer behind the curtain uh to do
a Wizard of Oz uh analogy is is
potentially painful and scary and so
it's my hope or it's my recognition uh
in this conversation with you that inner
development goals or something like that
um anything like that even sitting in
ceremony with with people or um just uh
Oprah book club uh town meeting about
climate change in Topeka Kansas or
whatever act as Bridges to get that cogn
to to see the footprints of the elephant
and start these conversations and I
think they have to be conversations not
you clicking on the internet um in your
basement at 11 p.m. um yeah so I really
do you are you hopeful that it's going
to scale I mean is are things exploding
for your your org in this effort yeah
they are exploding completely uh and and
like honestly I don't care if the IDS
become super successful or not I just
want this topic to be integrated into
society and these conversations to be
had like the RSA they've also developed
a framework for for the inner skills for
sustainability and the thriving future
the EUR the European Union they kind of
copy pasted the IDS and now they have
the green comp I mean all of those
efforts are amazing like nobody there's
no winner of this field like any
movement towards this direction is I
think more uh apt in solving the
complexity of this issue short of
creating their own inner development Hub
uh how can people listening or watching
this show start working on inner
development are there first steps for
those that are recognizing that there's
an elephant uh underneath their their
cognitive uh
mahoot uh what do you have any
advice first is like um all of us have
an immunity to change uh both on a
cultural level and an individual level
so for you to try to decide that you are
going to develop yourself and to force
yourself into that um I'd say uh I would
invite to take a relational uh you know
approach to that and say you know we
have to become a community of practice
who meet up and practice and talk about
this over time uh so that's first like
input to the to the process or
scaffolding of it right reading a book
won't do it understanding it cognitively
most likely won't it's a really good
first step but but there are several
kind of threads that need to be woven
here behavioral emotional social
cognitive um so so do it as a a part of
a community and but find that tribe
where people will be honest to you about
you know your shadows or what they see
as your next step is is there a
container or framework that if someone
said yeah I have these four really close
friends and we'd like to explore this is
there a video or or some online resource
that could get them
started because of the network asking us
for this we're actually in the process
of developing uh stuff like this um this
is also why we built 29k so the aware
platform uh if you download the aware
app you'll find uh hundreds of the
developmental evidence-based tools which
you practice in group either in in a
physical setting or online with live
video where you see each other and
there's this kind of recurring format
where you can come back and meet same or
similar people working on that process
uh we've had 100,000 people go through
processes that we know have an
evidence-based effect on their lives
that is um
significant um and it's free uh so so
it's it's actually funded by mainly
norim Foundation um so so there are
scaffolding for that uh if not reach out
to me and if there's a specific topic I
can point you in the right direction um
so so getting into practice with others
I think is fundamental so building that
kind of community of brothers or sisters
or siblinghood right
um so that's one uh another one is
actually um think about think about the
kind of aims that you have and the goals
what you're striving for you what you're
putting your money into what you're
putting your time into is it this kind
of like if I reach X everything will be
different uh or look for the look for
the lived value of that instead when do
you feel like what do you think you're
going to feel when you reach X and
instead of going for the X go for the
feeling so try to uncover like when do
you feel connection instead of posting
on social media when do you and try to
impress people what you're striving for
there is a longing for connection right
that's the need that's a deep need and
everybody has the same need on on needs
level we're all the same right it's
autonomy it's relatedness or or
connection it's it's uh competence and
it's feeling feeling safe that's
basically the the needs that we have
right
psychologically so instead of going for
the the goal when do you truly feel
connection like when do you feel held
and seen and okay and feel when do you
feel L like what is that because the
research here is really cool and really
it kind of shocks people but um so um uh
Sonia lamiri wrote a book on this called
love 2.0 where she found that the amount
of milliseconds you're looking into
other people's eyes where you feel love
and connection and you're not talking
necessarily you're just holding each
other the amount of milliseconds was a
was a predictor of mental health
happiness connection I think even
longevity or sickness it was just like
the it was insane I mean so she
basically coined the broaden and build
theory of positive emotion and then she
double clicked on relationships cuz what
she found was these micro moments micr
seconds of connection were a driving
force for a lot of health benefits um so
instead of looking for the goal look for
the lived
experience uh two thoughts there number
one is I used to live in New York City
and you would travel you would walk down
the boulevard six AB breast and everyone
was looking down there was no looking
even for one millisecond into someone's
eyes and that that itself is a a little
bit of a microcosm for our current
culture yeah um and and secondly um H
how do uh how do people start on on that
like what what's the mechanism of
visualizing the feeling and and then how
does that change their behavior in the
future if if they they play that out in
their minds I mean so this would be
moving towards becoming more
self-directed and trying to understand
what what what really makes me come
alive what really makes me feel purpose
and you know uh connection love autonomy
like when do I actually feel that
instead of going for the for the
symptoms so so so if you experienced
that a few times in your mind um then
little Eric in the future when you're
about to do something on social media in
order for you to feel held and respected
and have status you're like ah but that
that's not what I'm really after so it
informs your future actions of
sort exact I mean it's like any
addiction right you don't go for like go
for the reason why you're addicted to
alcohol uh and you try to to um rewire
the approach to working with that
anxiety or that longing for connection
or that feeling of inadequacy and the
thing that you are fleeing from when you
go for the alcohol right um yeah and the
it's usually some type of of deepening
of these these needs right um and I
think this is on an individual level you
see this but also on the aggregate level
where the more needs deprived you are
the more you're chasing for the goal um
and I mean I've been working with um
billionaires uh and then philanthropists
and it's really always this huge
difference
and uh both how how they relate to their
needs right where you know one of them
is where I'm talking to them about you
know sustainability and I'm like so what
what are your goal what are you kind of
striving for what is your motivation
right why do you do what you do and
they're like more I have to have
more and I was like this is a billion
like one of the richest people in
northern Europe and he's like I have to
have more and then you talk to Nicholas
and where he's like I'm just so lucky
that I was born in the right country
with parents and I got so much free
education all of that so this these
these billions of you know dollars are
not mine I I I just lucked out so I kind
of now have to give back right Nick
Nicholas is a pretty rare individual uh
I would love to have him on the podcast
but he's such an introvert that he
doesn't like to speak uh but but I know
this and I feel this I don't know that
you know this about me but 30 years ago
I I managed money for billionaires at
Solomon Brothers on Wall Street they
were the same way they they needed more
because it was the it was the dopamine
and the feeling of status was the the
proximate uh I mean the dollars were the
proximate but it was the feelings were
the ultimate and you can never get
enough I mean I can give you one example
that's really uh both scary and sad um
so one very wealthy individual that I
was working with um not super in-depth
but but a bit he had like he couldn't
sit he couldn't sit on a chair he was
laying down on the
floor uh and eventually like we a
conversation about why he's not you know
in the process in the group doing the
sharings and he's like no I I I I've um
broke I have a hernia in my disc in my
back because all I've been practicing at
the gym was my abs up until the point
that I broke my disc right um and this
it says something about the it's not
about this individual it's it's about
the human psyches that we can get so
into the flow channel of getting the
metric that everything else I mean it's
really this left hemispheric way of
thinking right as long as I get the
symbol as long as I get the token
everything will be fine and that is an
evolutionary adaptive way of solving
problems in some conditions but if that
is the thing that also sets all the
goals and sets the direction then we
lose the entire right hemisphere wisdom
right that ABS example again uh for like
the third or fourth time in this
conversation is a microcosm for our
broader cultural um uh context also
renewable energy like renewable energy
is the answer for climate change is like
lifting weights with your right bicep
and getting
super buff but you have diabetes and and
the rest of your body is flaccid or
whatever it's that's why we need systems
and we need inner inner development
conversations um yeah yeah yeah and I
mean and I mean um
so honestly like I I had a massive
burnout like a couple of years ago so I
don't see myself as like a peak
sustainability guy I understand
happiness and psychology and all of that
um so running 29k like I'm not the CEO
type but I was we were looking for an
external CEO for this foundation and we
couldn't find one so I took the job
because otherwise it wouldn't have
happened um and it was super complex and
I just ah we we just had two kids and I
was miserable eventually I was I was so
burned out that I couldn't read write or
uh count for like 16
months and my wife pulled the entire
like ship of the house I was only on the
property like on in our
garden 15 months couldn't do anything
didn't meet one single person um except
my family uh so a couple of Reflections
on that is
like knowing a lot about this is not
going to help like but having a
supportive community that could have you
know both we pull each other through uh
tough situations but we also scaffold
ourselves so that you know what hey Nate
you need to take a break right now or
you know supporting each other and
seeing ways seeing the things that I
can't see myself CU I'm so captured and
like this is so important I need to you
know deliver the thing um but one thing
that I really like I'm so grateful for
that experience um is
is two things one is uh the people who
are really struggling in the
society um who are emotionally
cognitively just not where they need to
be this Society is so violent for them
CU when I went to the grocery store when
I was trying to slowly get back when I
saw the offer like buy two for the price
buy buy three for the price of two or
get this or like have salesman called me
I couldn't say no to anything I was just
like I didn't have the emotional you
know power to self-direct at all so I
was completely following everybody with
with whatever they wanted with me and it
it just became so apparent that this is
a very violent society that we have
built um and then secondly was was that
I um I started like a permaculture
Garden because the only thing I could
process the information only Pro
information I could process was was
Farmers talking slowly I couldn't even
recognize
a healthy regenerative system that
humans have built if I saw it I would
probably just brush it off and say
that's you know BS or I wouldn't even
recognize it and it became so apparent
that of all the work I've done I I
didn't really have a clue of what health
looked like I mean I know it in nature
right but I don't know it in a human
system so what is a a really
regenerative healthy human system look
like uh and that just has ke kept me up
since then it's like
uh what would the kind of threads that
need to be woven that would start first
of all building the soil for that to
take place and then what would the
specifics of that look because the the
kind of the the dream or the Hope like
you you asked me earlier like if we're
aiming really high what would that look
like I mean imagine coming to a place it
could be a um municipality or city or
whatever where
um all these principles all these ways
of thinking we've learned from Daniel
and Zach and all these great thinkers
have been
internalized where they're a lived
reality you don't talk about it they
just live it differently right I mean
they could talk about it but like that
would be such an heartening hopeful
experience to enter a space where you
know it's like wow something's different
here what is
that so let me ask you this uh a thought
just came to mind because one of the
things that I've been asked from our
viewers is can you make a two our video
series that gives an introduction to the
human predicament and oil depletion and
climate and human behavior and debt and
the economic system and why it's
relevant to our community so that we can
start having conversations locally um
without you there because I can't be
everywhere but I almost wonder if this
inner development or whatever it's
called Uh about human behavior and our
needs uh our basic
psychological um requirements if
something like that were to be able to
be seen and experienced with
a unofficial city council that starts
talking about it in a in a city that
that would actually act as a gateway to
the larger conversation because the
larger conversation is too politically
fraught uh to start unless you have
close friends that are already
well-versed in these things what do you
think about that 100% is like if you
bring people into so I mean we've been
talking about this for for a couple of
years but like one metaphor is thinking
about it as a as a temple a temple
experience but it's not a religious
place but it is a sacred place where you
know life is the thing that we that is
sacred and we're actually everything we
do here is in service of that to enter a
space like that um I think could be one
of the most powerful interventions a
person could go through
um uh so just I'll give you one example
and it's actually from this this
organization that I met the the other
week where
um when they bring in like the president
of Austria or you know the ministers or
whatever they don't bring them into
through the the big uh entrance they
bring them in through the entrance where
half of the wall is just a glass wall
where you can see into where are the all
these 15 16 year olds are going through
this trainee program and learning
English and learning all the machines
and all of it right um because that's
what they're most proud of and the cool
thing is not that they're proud of the
kids and look at what we're doing the
signal towards the kids
is you are our reason for being like you
guys are going to carry this into the
future um and this is kind of what
breaks my heart today because like in in
Sweden um the average 13-year-old is on
their phone 6 and a half hours wow and
it's I think it's actually more on
States and that's outside of school and
not including TV and the signal for that
is like we gave you to Mok we gave you
to the market dynamics and these things
are not good for you and you know the
content that you're looking at is not
like if you ask kids uh they don't want
to have Tik Tok and Instagram a lot of
them would say that I I I I want Netflix
but I don't want these other platforms
but since everybody else is there I have
to be there exactly right worst thing is
that we as parents we gave it to them
and we did not protect them so the
signal is like and this is where I I
think it's so I gets hard to talk about
because the last thing we want to tell
our kids is that they are not worthy of
protection
right uh and this is where I think the
the market and protecting the people who
are vulnerable uh we we need to um make
some big changes here quickly uh and and
that is also moving beyond on the
postmodern perspective of saying you
know what everybody can just self-direct
and go for their own happiness but is
actually saying no no no there are
things that are more sacred and this is
not a matter of opinion uh this is a
fact about life that life wants more
life and we're here to protect that
process and that's actually moving
beyond the postmodern is saying there
should be a directionality in society
that creates more generative life um and
anything that is not that is actually
bad for
society and and uh we just went way too
far into the postmodern perspective um
and let the market take over our
children's lives and it's it's so
violent so what can someone who is
listening to this episode right now and
if they're listening it means they're at
least somewhat if not very familiar with
the metac crisis what is something they
can do today uh this week this month to
help address um these broader issues you
did mention how to get started on the
the inner development goals earlier um
but what's your advice to people
listening to this podcast to make some
changes or is it all up to the leaders
and politicians and and the post
postmodern removal of marketing and and
some of the market leading our world
yeah yeah I mean I would say um get into
practice with others but not not in
relationship to just a random like inner
development I want to become more
perspective taking more blah blah blah
like try to take on the most meaningful
challenge you can and when you notice
that you need to check out when you
notice your capacities are not uh up to
the task that's when you need
development right so take on the most
meaningful change you can drive in your
system and because it's a stretch it's
the most meaningful right um like 10%
more than you think that you can handle
that will become a developmental process
especially if you have a supporting
Community where you can reflect and put
words on it and find tools for you know
whatever it is that stopped you right uh
so so find that edge through caring as
an agent in the world and this is what I
said to to these um corporations as well
is like for Ikea is like it's not about
you guys integrating the IDS only it's
not about you becoming the best in the
world like as soon as you have capacity
and power it's about becoming the best
for the world uh so it's you in the
market how can you shift the entire
market and not just try to win and
expand right so for any level of the
system how can I act for the the highest
value so one intervention that I really
love is is the is the question that one
of our professors taught me and he he um
he teaches this to to the astronauts uh
that are potentially going to Mars and
he says so it's just one question it's
it's basically this is it's um in this
situation are you acting to avoid
discomfort or are you act acting for who
you aim to be so it's really pulling on
the highest values that you have and the
higher values are always about purpose
and about me in the context and about
relationship and about giving I like who
I aim to be would not be like
self-serving shortsighted
narcissistic uh that's not the answer to
that question for for almost anybody um
so it really pulls you away from
Hedonism and shortsightedness and it
really pulls you towards these values
that are higher than you
um and it it has helped me a through
many times in my life um like small
things it's not only avoiding discomfort
I would include seeking Comfort um in
there as well for some people anyways
yeah yeah for sure and um and the people
who I've seen do this um they move from
kind of
overwhelm to this kind of sense of of
Hope
uh not necessarily because there's more
you know of a solution out there but
they're not alone and they're doing
something for um what they think is
really important I want to be respectful
of your time but you made me think of
another question it it so happens that a
lot of our
listeners are uh
autodidactic um looking at how all the
systems fit together understanding that
something is is not right and wanting to
connect the dots but they don't have uh
a circle or a tribe or a group um that
they could process these things with and
I think it's really difficult to handle
these as an individual person and you
need such a group but if people
listening to this don't have such a
group in your you know lifetime of
looking at happiness research and social
dynamics do you have any recommendations
for them yeah I mean of course it's find
your peers right um it's it's really
moving into these these uh communities
where we are where we share these kind
of basic axiomatic ideas about the world
and and the future um and then move into
practicing together and then move into
building structures together I mean this
is what we've been doing in the in in
Stockholm here for for years and where
we see that so we've been running youth
camps for 15 years almost uh where
people find each other work through the
processes reflect on who they want to be
um Etc and the re feedback from their
parents is really like what did you do
to my son what did you do to my daughter
now now they come home and they're uh
completely um contributing to the family
system instead of receiving it as
passive agents right um so I think
finding people who are like-minded who
share that story uh and online offline
offline is of course better but online
is a lot better than nothing
uh idg hubs could be one of those um if
not I
mean how does someone start an IGG Hub
just go into the website then and uh um
you'll find the instructions there it's
basically teaming up with a with a small
group first and then you register uh and
that becomes an attractor for more and
more people who want to have a similar
conversation and then it grows from
there um a lot of people are meeting
online uh and really Gathering around
this um so so that's one way of doing it
um but but honestly it doesn't have to
be the idg Hub like it could be it could
be your neighborhood talking about how
can we create a better you know uh a
better Street uh where we where we're
living the values of how we would aim it
to be right what do you care most about
in the world Eric I read this question
uh in the the notes that you sent before
and actually started
crying um I didn't know why and I still
maybe don't
um but I
think I mean it's of course it's love
right um I mean my kids pop up um I
think about myself as a kid
um and it just becomes very apparent
that from that question
some things are are worthy of protecting
um and and I I can't see anybody
regretting working for that on their
death death bed uh that that would be
probably what they would be what I would
be most proud of um was you know acting
from care and love and compassion and
also trying to figure out when do I shut
off love care
compassion uh and just working on that
um healing or
forgiving so from a place of love care
and compassion if you additionally had
access to a magic wand what is one thing
you would do to change human and
planetary futures for the
better it would be
um
enabling like all people maybe
especially young people to
discover when they feel uh the most
alive the the most meaning the most
connection and to really cement that
experience that they decided on that
they found the patterns
in because if they
did they would not accept the system
that we have created they would say this
is not human what we've created has been
hijacked and we're caught in this trap
and we are worthy of so much better uh
this is not what we're here to
build uh and I think everybody on the
planet can come to that conclusion if
they just have that scaffolding and that
support and then you'd want to empower
them to know Drive the change but I
think that's actually the core of of
rediscovering what it means to be human
and changing that story
um that would be it and the rest I think
would actually sort itself out well said
um I did send you a list of uh uh rough
questions and we only got to 20% of them
uh because of all the tangents if you
were to come back um and for round two
and take a deep dive on some topic
relevant to the great simplification the
metac crisis that that you just
personally interested in is there such a
topic and what would it be
yeah I mean I think it would be actually
like how can we
start integrating The Meta crisis into
our lived
experience and how can that process go
from as it is right now maybe a little
bit of overwhelm and people checking out
and like this is way too heavy way too
complex and I hope you guys are wrong
but you sound really on on point but I
can't process it to actually step by
step integrating maybe in like a
curriculum form that has this pedagogy
of integration so it becomes a lived
experience and how can I then move into
an agentic experience how can I a gentic
way of relating to the metac crisis
individually collectively because if we
get that right um it'll not be people
just talking about the meta crisis while
the house is Burning uh we we actually
get stuff moving and it doesn't have to
be the right things um it'll just be
uh the the point of the projects the
point of acting in this world I think uh
where we are so much kind of interwoven
into actually being the
problem uh the point of any project that
we think is Meaningful is I think
equally Parts outer system and equally
Parts inner system the learnings of us
trying to create meaning and trying to
to change the world for the better will
actually uncover where we are have where
we are kind of off
right um yeah so that would be something
and if we have 1% or 3% or 7% or 12% of
people that have experienced that then
those are rocks in the river to change
the flow of the water uh that's coming
our way I I like that um line of qu
inquiry yeah and I mean and I think that
um the water that is hitting us the
unsustainable direction of
society is so powerful right now people
are starting to feel it
um that when
they uncover discover uh something
that's authentic and real uh the feeling
of community is probably beyond what
most people have ever felt in their
lives uh so it's an equal attractor like
the the the kind of chaos is actually uh
calling for uh um humans to to step up
um this is what Indie said as well is
like the darkness is not here to scare
us or to help us or to make us give up
it's actually a call for human
greatness my cognitive brain hears that
and my lyic system and reptilian system
feel it as well um so I'm I'm on board
with with that direction thank you for
all your work Eric and thank you for
your time today and and to be continued
for sure thank you so much Nate for
having
me if you enjoyed or learned from this
episode episode of the great
simplification please follow us on your
favorite podcast platform you can also
visit the greats simplification Doom for
references and show notes from today's
conversation and to connect with fellow
listeners of this podcast check out our
Discord Channel this show is hosted by
me Nate Hain edited by no troublemakers
media and produced by Misty stinnet
Leslie bat Luts Brady hyen and Lizzy
serani
