this concept turned out to be one of the
most important things about the internet
the Subscribe button allowed people who
liked my stuff to sign up to see more of
it in the future and as a Creator it
gave me a channel of distribution to
ensure that my future work was sent to
those people it was a framework for the
distribution of creativity and
communication it made my dreams come
true as an artist the follow is a piece
of Internet architecture that felt
closer to Magic than anything I had ever
experienced in my
life hi everybody hello
hello I've been thinking a lot about the
whole Arc of the internet uh and how
it's evolved over the last couple
decades and then how I think it's going
to evolve and patreon's place uh in all
of that and that's what I want to share
with you today
um so uh I started making music and
videos and putting them on the internet
right after I finished College in 2007 I
made a ton of movies in school I also
made animations as a kid so making stuff
wasn't particularly new to me but I had
just spent at the time when I finished
College 6 months and thousands of hours
on a new record called nightmares and
Daydreams I was living at my dad's house
at the time working out of my old
childhood bedroom and I was trying to
figure out how to reach people with this
new record that I had worked so hard on
like even the cover that guy on the
cover is an actual clay guy that I made
out of sculpy and then I did a photo
shoot with him and I got a great shot
but then I had to use the lasso tool in
Photoshop to cut them out and this was
before the magnetic lasso tool so I had
to do that  by hand and that took
way too long but none of that mattered
because by sheer luck I happened to
finish school right when this budding
technology called the internet was going
through a massive shift it was just
starting to move from what people called
Web 1 to Web 2.0 web 1 was essentially a
readon version of the internet in
retrospect people call this '90s version
of the web the static web it was like
AOL where you could browse web pages and
read the news but there was no easy way
for people to upload and share and then
in the early 2000s a slew of new
companies like YouTube and Facebook and
Twitter came onto the scene and
YouTube's motto was Broadcast Yourself
the whole idea of web 2 was that for the
first time as a creative person you
could easily participate on the internet
you could post and tweet and upload
instead of just being a passenger and I
thought that was  awesome
honestly I still think it's 
awesome it's so easy to forget how
magical this is how special this is but
this moment in history marked a shift
for Humanity and for artists and
creators
especially because for the first time on
the internet you could do more than just
consume you could create you could reach
other people and it was in that moment
right here in 2007 when I happen to
graduate college and finished my record
nightmares and Daydreams and I was
trying to reach people with it and at
the time my best bet was dming bands on
MySpace and asking if I could open for
them at local bars up and down the West
Coast I sent cold Outreach to music
venues to get booked and then I got in
my car because I couldn't afford to rent
a van and I drove up and down the West
Coast United States and I played the
dankest local bars and I sang my guts
out and I sweat and I sang and I sweat
and I sang and I ate tacos out of the
back of my car while my friends were all
getting promoted and high-paying jobs as
investment bankers and I did that for
years tour after tour and I'm using the
word tour lightly here like there
weren't people at my shows like like
nobody came I had no fans on a good
night there were a couple stragglers who
wanted in off the street but I was
playing empty bars it was so hard to
reach people so you can imagine how
excited I was when a friend sent me a
video of a guy named David Choy singing
with a guitar in front of his webcam on
a new website called
YouTube and this video had like 300,000
views or something like that I couldn't
believe it David was reaching people
this phase of the internet had the
potential to solve a fundamental problem
for me as an artist I felt like I had to
jump in and I did I immediately started
uploading videos to
YouTube back then no one else was
showing the atome recording process so I
just filmed myself playing instruments
and then I layered them in the video
with split screen so people could see
all the musical elements coming together
to form a song and it's funny CU in 2024
this idea seems to totally obvious but
nobody was doing that back then it
wasn't a fancy recording studio with
millions of dollars equipment it was a
bedroom with an Mbox audio interface and
a cheap version of a laptop recording
software called Protools Le and an old
Sony handic Cam that I lugged around
with me everywhere that shot on high
eight tapes and a bed comforter hung on
the wall to dampen the sound and broken
symbols that a fan sent me in the mail
for free but I was making real music I
was screaming my  guts out and
playing accordion and doing collabs with
friends and it started working people
started watching my videos and listening
my music I was reaching
people my videos started getting
thousands of views it wasn't millions of
people at first but it was so much
better than playing empty bars so I kept
doing it and by 2009 I had made 43
YouTube videos of my songs and I was
feeling amazing because For the First
Time Of My Life I was actually reaching
people with my work but the real beauty
of this new website called YouTube the
most amazing thing about it
was that it had a subscribe
button I only realized how truly special
this idea was in retrospect but in my
opinion this concept turned out to be
one of the most important things about
this new era of the internet what people
called Web 2.0 the Subscribe button was
foundational it changed YouTube from
being a tool to reach people to being a
way to reach them and then build a
following around my work the subscri
subscribe button allowed people who
liked my stuff to sign up to see more of
it in the future and as a Creator it
gave me a channel of distribution to
ensure that my future work was sent to
those people so it turned out that web 2
solved more than just reach more than
just Discovery it represented the birth
of the follower the follow is not some
handy feature of a social network the
follow is foundational architecture for
human creativity and organization the
idea of a creator an artist or a
community of fans around them who want
to see their future work this concept
the follow it's profound whether it's
the following that I was building as a
musician or a podcasting Duo who talks
about what it's like to be single moms
in a community of single mothers who
finally feel seen and understood or a
Science Education Creator and students
who didn't previously have access to
high quality education the follow was a
system of organization for the entire
internet it was a framework for the
distribution of creativity and
communication now not just reach but a
step past it ongoing communication
connection a sustained relationship
community and I learned just how magical
the concept of following could be when I
did my first collab with my girlfriend
Natalie we put up a video on my YouTube
channel in
2008 that was a song we created together
and it was different than my music it
was way less screamy and insane but it
was more active and fleshed out than her
music so we decided to create a new
separate channel for our collabs and we
call this new YouTube channel pomus the
first pomus video was actually posted on
my channel and I had about 7,000
subscribers at the time and my
subscribers loved this new video and at
the end of it we posted a little link to
the new pomp channel to tell people
about it and almost instantly the new
pomp new channel got 3,000 subscribers
that's what a following is people see
your new  literally they follow you
wherever you go on the internet so
Natalie and I started making more videos
and more videos and within a year we got
18 ,000 subscribers and then in one
video we announced that we were playing
a show and we showed up to the show in
San Francisco and there were 40 people
there and oh my God guys I cannot tell
you what it's like to have 40 people at
your show after years of playing empty
BS  magic it was
amazing it was so
great uh another time Natalie and I were
filming a vlog and my sister happened to
walk in like behind us she's a soap
maker she was holding a bar of
grapefruit scented soap pomp means
grapefruit in French and she said hey
guys look I have pomu soap if you'd like
a
bar Natalie and I just saw that and
decided to keep it in the video and our
F like oh my God pomu soap and so we
made another video and we said okay now
you can order pomu soap and we got
hundreds of orders wrapped in toilet
paper no it's not toilet Pap another
time when thumb drives were starting to
get huge we thought why do CDs let's put
all of our music on a thumb drive and we
we loaded up the thumb drives we put up
a video we said hey if you want to buy a
thumb drive drive you can buy a thumb
drive now and we ended up selling
hundreds and hundreds of thumb drives we
decided to sign every one of them it was
kind of crazy we had to like figure out
the packaging we had no idea how to
package that many thumb drives my family
ended up helping out dad's like taking
pictures and stuff you know like it was
like really fun it was amazing um
another time we decided to put our album
on iTunes our first pomp moose album
back in like 2008 and we didn't have
artwork so we asked our fans like hey do
you want to make the artwork for a Pomp
and we got hundreds of submissions for
the cover of the new pal moose album
from our fans and they were freaking
talented this is the one that actually
won Natalie and I just love this one so
this is actually this is the artwork for
our first album it was made by one of
our fans another time we booked a show
at a laundr mat um that's a sentence I
just said uh we we booked a show at a
laundromat the idea was like it was a
laundromat where there was a cafe and a
laundromat you could go order food do
your laundry eat by the time you're done
eating take your laundry home and uh we
booked the show like if you crammed
people in there it held like 60 people
in this laundry
and then we uploaded this video and this
was the first video that we ever
uploaded that went viral and it got like
half a million views overnight and we
showed up to our show at the laundromat
and there were 200 people crammed inside
the laundromat and then 150 or 200
people outside like spilling in the
street cars were swerving around them
and like there was no stage like it's a
laundromat so literally I'm playing
music and there's a person like I'm like
looking at a person's eyes while I'm
playing pomu songs like it was mayem I
don't have any pictures of the night but
this is what it felt like like it was
just like
insane and this was the first time I was
like oh my God this is going to work
having a following is amazing this is
going to work we're going to be able to
be full-time musicians another time we
posted another video and at the end of
the video we told our fans hey we're
uploading a song to iTunes we decided
not to ever sign or kind of enter the
the music industry we did everything
ourselves we negotiated our own contract
with iTunes directly WE Post our songs
directly to iTunes so we kept almost all
the revenue associated with that and
when we posted this album we sold 30,000
songs that month and we got
$22,000 deposited directly into our bank
account it was more money than i' had
ever seen in one place ever in my life I
was losing my mind it was so incredible
um then then po started playing shows
and we started touring and you know
hundreds of people started showing up
and then thousands of people started
showing up this is my wife crowds
surfing and she's said 
badass that's what I mean when I say
that the Subscribe button is not a silly
feature the concept of the follow
changed my life it made my dreams come
true as an artist it took me from
playing empty bars to living out my
fantasy as a musician the follow is a
piece of Internet architecture that felt
closer to Magic than anything I had ever
experienced in my life
and right around the moment that pompus
was starting to work right through all
of this there is this genius named Kevin
Kelly he wrote an essay called a
thousand true fans and his premise was
simple it was that in the age of the
internet you don't need millions of fans
to be successful if you can just find a,
people who are willing to buy a 100
bucks of stuff from you per year that's
$100,000 per year which is a pretty
freaking great business as a creative
person you just need a thousand true
fans who really connect with you and
believe in you and this is different
than just reaching people it's even
deeper than followers this is super fans
true fans real fans call it whatever you
want the idea is that there's this group
of people that is your core if reach
means people see it and follower means
people want to see more then true fans
are the people who go to the show and
buy the merch and download the record
and pay for the course and get the live
stream tickets and all the things and
this idea really resonated with me we
had fans showing up to pmu shows with
tattoos of the Band custom t-shirts
posters drawings artwork icing of my
face on a cookie I ate my
face we had a fan who made a oil
painting and me screaming my 
guts out I used this link release
software called e junkie and and I
cobbled together like a little MP3 store
for myself on the internet and I would
sell original music and I was selling
500 bucks a month of my original songs
on my own website fans were showing up
to buy things to be there one time we
asked our pom fans to come film a music
video with us on a Saturday like show up
to Dolores Park in San Francisco just
show up and be in this music video and
50 people showed up they even learned
this dance and we shot this dance and
the dance is in this ppose video another
time we would actually always use this
software called stage it which was like
a ticketed live stream software so we
could play our songs people could buy
tickets and show up live on the internet
and Natalie and I would just sit at home
and play these songs for 45 minutes and
people would buy tickets and leave tips
during the concert and we would
routinely make like three grand in 45
minutes playing our songs it's like
these are true fans another time Natalie
raised over $100,000 for her record from
just 2,000 people other time we made a
pom album and we went online on YouTube
we put up this video and we said hey
everybody we have a new pom album it's
not for sale you can't buy it you can't
get the new pom album the only way to
get the new pom album is if you donate a
book to the Richmond School District
send us the receipt for that book and we
will send you the P Moves album for free
and the Richmond School District ended
up having to rent a shipping container
to keep up with the packages it's like
11,000 books that got sent to the rich
school it's like $140,000 worth of books
it was amazing it felt incredible to see
that many people show up for this that's
true fans real fans super fans call it
whatever you want but this was the
concept that was rattling around in my
head when I started patreon 11 years ago
this is actually the first sketch of
patreon I called up my co-founder and he
turned this into what is now patreon and
the idea was very simple it's like a
membership platform where fans could
sign up for a subscription payment to
the crater and the creater could run a
membership and get paid for their work
I'm not going to tell the patreon
founding story I've told it a million
times but the company is now over 400
people 11 years in we have over 250,000
craters who have made over 3 and A5
billion dollar on the platform which I
think of as proof If We Ever Needed it
that the true fans are there and the
true fans are
ready in the
background while patreon was being
formed building over the last decade the
whole internet was again starting to
shift and if you think of the '90s as
web 1 the 2000s as web 2 right around
the 2010s there was a new change
happening Facebook started experimenting
with a new thing called ranking and I
realize most everybody here knows about
this but what ranking did was
essentially it took the feed which you
can think of as a list of posts from
creators that I follow and it analyzed
each and every post for how how engaging
it was and if it wasn't engaging enough
Facebook would then take that post and
push it down in the feed in other words
they started ranking or ordering posts
according to what was best for their
business this was actually great for
Facebook it was the right business
decision for them and their company and
their revenue model but what it meant
for creators was that for the first time
since Web 2.0 my followers might not
necessarily see my post
and this idea of a subscription started
to break down if the person doesn't
receive the things it's not really a
direct true connection between a Creator
and their fans it's not really a
subscription the channel of distribution
is broken and it creates another problem
too around creative freedom CU now
suddenly my post has to be better than
the other posts according to a set of
criteria that I don't know or have
control of or even agree with so instead
of thinking what do I want to make what
lights me up what is the output that I
want to create as an artist what will my
fans love instead of thinking those
questions now in the back of my mind I'm
thinking what will the ranking algorithm
favor and that subconsciously or
consciously changes my creative output
to achieve Facebook's goals not my goals
as a
Creator and if it were just Facebook
doing this fine creators would just
leave and post somewhere else but it
worked really well it was great for
Facebook's business and people started
spending even more time on the platform
so the other platforms had to compete
and YouTube launched the cosmic Panda
redesign centering the entire company
around watch time and Twitter and
Instagram followed with rank feeds in
2016 and we only sought in retrospect
but now I think of the 2010s as the
decade of ranking the decade when the
original promise of the Creator Le
Community the true follow was broken for
the first time
I want to just do a quick aside here
because I know there's this big debate
in the world about you know
chronological feeds versus algorithmic
feeds and I don't want to make it sound
like I'm a zealot uh on on either of the
two polarized sides that's actually not
the the takeaway here it's not how I
think of it I actually see problems with
chronological Feats because as a crater
if if if it's chronological then you
have to keep posting to stay on top so I
don't think that's necessarily the best
way to build strong relationships either
the the problem that I have is if if
you're going to change that if you're
going to adjust the way you you create a
feed what is the purpose behind that
what is the intention behind that are
you trying to create a place where you
can build strength of relationship with
your community where your fandom gets
energized over time where people are
guaranteed that subscription where you
get a direct connection with your
community and your true fans is that it
or is it maximizing attention is it
maximizing watch time those are two very
different goals and very different ways
of organizing your entire product as a
technology company this one helps me as
a Creator and this one hurts me as a
Creator it hurts my community it hurts
my business it hurts my creative
output I wish that it stopped there but
around the turn of the decade a new
company came onto the scene called Tik
Tok and Tik Tok had a much deeper impact
in the ecosystem I think anyone foresaw
at the time it wasn't just short form
vertical first video that wasn't it
that's a red herring I think it was much
more fundamental than that Tik Tok said
we want to make the most engaging feed
possible this whole idea of a list of
your subscriptions forget about that in
fact forget about the whole concept of
subscriptions Tik Tok started from the
ground up with something totally
different called for you where each of
these posts are chosen for me by Tik Tok
instead of me choosing what's in my feed
and this completely abandoned the
concept of the follow but it worked Tik
Tok hadit a bil users by 2021 and
traffic on the internet started flowing
away from the Legacy social companies
and toward Tik Tok so just like with
Facebook and ranking the other platforms
had to compete YouTube launch shorts
Instagram launch reels and Twitter
launched a you feed as well and within a
couple of years this whole system of
organization for the internet the
Creator Le Community started to fade
into the
past I have really felt this personally
as a Creator in the last four years
especially my fans don't see as much of
my stuff anymore it's harder to sell
tickets to a show it's harder to reach
people with my new work it's harder to
build community it's harder to build a
business it's harder to energize my fans
What's Happening Here is we are in the
middle of another
shift and this is a big
one if the '90s was web 1 and the 2000s
was web two and the 2010s was ranking
I'm worried that the 2020s could become
the death of the
follower I um got an email from a crater
about a year and a half ago and I got
this email my heart just sank in my
stomach hey Jack I'm writing this letter
to you hat and hands due to changes at
Facebook overnight the traffic to my
links in my pages dropped by 80% as such
it looks like I'll have to sell my home
I'm dusting off my resume and looking
for jobs social media
management I'm seeing more and more of
things like this
and it's not just happening to creators
it's happening to anyone who posts stuff
on the internet it's happening to Media
companies Vice and BuzzFeed and rooster
teeth's announcements this is a really
hard change to navigate for anyone who's
posting stuff online and trying to build
community and business for the creators
in the room I think it's really
important to remember that and and to
understand that if you're not connecting
as much as you want to with your
audience right now that does not
necessarily mean there's something wrong
with you a lot of us as creators have
this tendency to be like H what can I do
better and that's a good impulse
honestly it's like growth mindset how is
how can how am I contributing to this
what can I do better and again that I
think most of the time that's really
good but there is also something
happening in the background right now
it's it's a macro thing that's happening
on the web that makes our jobs as
creators really hard right now there a
lot of smart people at big companies
that are well-funded big media companies
trying to figure this out too and
they're having trouble with it too so as
creators just know that doesn't
necessarily mean there's something wrong
with you
here I believe that this problem is the
single most important problem that faces
creative people today the weakening of
Creator Le communities of our
distribution channels to our fans this
is the hardest most challenging and most
painful issue threatening the present
and the future of creativity on the
internet I actually I don't think that
this is going to
happen I think the follow is too
important to die I think it's too
valuable to ignore I think it's too
useful and awesome for Creative people
for Publishers for media companies and I
think the next wave of Internet and
Media technology companies are going to
Surge on this problem and try to solve
it and it's actually already started and
the incumbent social platforms they're
not going to be able to fight it because
their revenue relies on maximizing
attention to drive their businesses
they're being forced up towards
Discovery towards reach personalization
algorithmic curation these are the
levers that drive attention and
therefore they drive their strategies
that's why there's a hole already
opening up and why we're starting to see
a whole new set of companies emerge that
look fundamentally different from the
Legacy social landscape Discord and
kajabi and fourth wall and gumroad
moment which patreon acquired last year
the courses platforms events companies
some people are calling this subset of
companies the creater economy I don't
even think of it like that it's a
fundamental SHO sh in approach and the
Hallmark strategy of the drivers of
these businesses is to focus on deeper
connections as opposed to just more
connections the true fan the real fan
call it whatever you want it's the 5% of
fans that drive 90% of the community and
business this is a direct fan business
this is an ads business this is about
depth of connection this is about
maximizing attention this is about
deeper fans this is about more fans and
what binds this new way of emerging
companies is that their strategic focus
is down here the next decade of creative
and media technology companies will
focus on building direct to Fan
connections and Community strength as
creators we'll still need the social
platforms we'll still need those
companies up here for discovery for
reach we need that but those companies
will be one component of the many tools
that we have as creative people to help
us run our communities and businesses
that's where the world is going I'm sure
of it
and personally right now I feel a sense
of responsibility through this I
remember what it feels like to be a
crater on the outside of these platforms
watching the internet move in a
direction that I don't agree with and
that I don't like and that I don't think
is good for my community or my business
I remember what that feels like I
remember feeling anxiety I remember
feeling fear I remember being scared of
where that was going and what it meant
for
me and now through whatever Crazy Life
Path I have been on as an artist I'm I'm
now finding myself as a CEO of one of
these  tech companies and um I
feel this sense of I want to help build
the type of internet that I want as a
Creator that's what I want to
do so I really don't want this talk to
feel like a patreon ad actually I I
really hope it doesn't but um but I do
want to give you a a sense of how I'm
thinking about this problem given this
seat that I'm in and how patreon is now
thinking about this problem and what we
think our place is in it and what we
want to do about
it and the headline is
this it's been 20 or 30
years and the current version of how art
and Community exists on the internet
today
I don't think is the right version how
community and art exists on the web I
don't think it's the right way and I
want to I want patreon to contribute to
building a better version of how art and
Community could exist on the internet
we've oriented the whole company uh
around this
problem we started as a membership
platform 11 years ago subscription
payments but we have built a lot ESP in
the last 3 years in an effort to take a
more holistic approach to solving this
we built video Community podcasting
better posting a New Media Player
Commerce free membership which is
essentially like a follow gated on an
email and live and while this might look
like a lot it's actually just three
things media community and business and
we're now thinking of patreon no longer
as a membership platform but as this
whole thing the media community and
business foundation for the next decade
of professional creativity on the
internet organized around the concept of
the true follow in an effort to build a
better way that art can exist on the web
that's the theory that's what the
company is setting out to solve now in
practice what that looks like is a a new
set of products and tools that we built
into patreon this is our first foray
into Community essentially this allows
fans to connect with each other and
build energized fandoms and creators to
hop in there and talk with fans and it's
a place for True fandom why do we build
this what's the strategy and the idea
behind this here's why as a Creator on
the internet today I can get subscribers
and I can get views and I can if I can
send my fans to Instagram or Tik Tok and
they can be there but what I've noticed
is those communities degrade over time I
I they they they don't get energized
over time they get deenergized it gets
harder and harder to reach those people
I make a post I reach two% of my
audience I reach 1% of my audience I
lose touch with those people and there's
no way for me to find find those real
fans those true fans the small portion
of my fans that drive everything for me
as a
Creator the way we're building this and
what I want as a Creator is a place
where I can send my fans and that
phandom gets energy over time that
Phantom gets closer that phandom gets
more vibrant more connected over time
more enthusiastic over time that's what
I want as a Creator that's the space
that I want to have as a creative person
creators deserve a place like that that
is important it's important for the
future of creativity
okay another thing that we built is
Commerce Commerce allows creators to
sell a digital thing an episode a bonus
episode a download a a course anything
that you can sell online why do we build
Commerce creators send lots of people to
their patreon millions of people to
their patreon pages every month what we
found is a lot of those people are true
fans they're like the really intense
interested excited fans but not all of
those fans are ready to pay with a
subscription payment in fact a lot of
them don't want to pay a subscription
payment and and why why don't they want
to pay with sub well they either they
have subscription fatigue which is a
real thing or they're not in the right
financial situation or they don't want
to commit to a payment every month but
they're still true fans and rather than
having those true fanss leave the
Creator we want to give creators a way
to start forming connections with those
fans to build businesses with those fans
and so we built Commerce as a way for
the fan the true fans that aren't yet
ready for a subscription payment they
can now participate in the Creator's
business and Community through this
Commerce product and and meanwhile the
creater can can build an awesome
business along the way too the logic is
very similar for free membership why do
we build free membership what is free
membership by the way it's a thing of
this as like a follow gated on your
email so it's kind of like an email
capture it allows a fan to follow your
page without paying in exchange for
giving them your email and it's the same
logic is Commerce creators are sending
their true fans Millions um every every
month to their patreon pages
and we wanted to give creators a way to
reach that portion of their fans that
they go to the shows they have the merch
they have the Hat they're true fans but
for whatever reason they don't want to
buy one of the things you have digitally
and they don't want to uh pay a
subscription and this allows creators to
continue forming relationships with
those fans and what's super exciting
about this is we have found that about
40 to 50% of these fans actually say
that they intend to pay the crater in
the next few months they High intention
to be a part of the creaters community
and business and this gives creators a
way to start building Community with
those
folks okay we also uh acquired um a live
experiences platform called moment and I
don't even want to call it ticketed live
streaming because it's not it's so much
more beautiful than that Argent and the
team did such an incredible job building
this place for creators to sell tickets
to these live experiences and they can
debut their work a standup special a
movie that they've made um a special
episode that they know is going to be a
total Banger whatever it is that allows
creators to sell tickets to that
experience and then um have Community
with those fans while they're all
watching it
together all that to say the way we're
thinking about this next phase is that
we're not just a membership company
anymore we're a true Fan Company we're a
Creator company we're we're building a
better way for art and Community to
exist on the internet because I want
patreon to build and internet where
creators have true creative freedom
control of their businesses and their
careers and I want it to feel like fire
to be part of a Creator's Community I
know what it feels like to be part of an
energized Community I remember it and I
have that same conviction now that I did
back in 2013 when I started patreon I
know that it is possible to build an
internet where Phantoms Thrive and where
professional creativity is possible for
anyone I believe this in my bones it is
not a choice it's not optimism it's just
deep down what I actually know to be
available to humanity if that is the
path that we choose that's what patreon
is doing it's how we're thinking about
this future and our and patreon's place
in it but for the creators in the
audience creators don't have to wait
over the last decade I've talked to
thousands of creative people I've had my
own creative projects I've learned a lot
and I want to share just a few thoughts
about navigating the the shifts in the
internet and how we can all prepare
ourselves and our communities for for
those shifts we and we and we don't even
need to wait for any of the any of the
tech platforms to catch
up the first invest in those true fans
invest in the depth of connection not
just new it's not all about new views
new subscribers watch time up and to the
right it's about depth it's about
quality of interaction it's about
finding that small portion of your fans
that are your engine that are your core
and then figuring out how to reach them
by the way sometimes when I talk about
this creators think well does that mean
like DMs like should I be talking to
individual fans no not necessarily
that's not actually what I mean I mean
finding those people and building real
connections with them in whatever
capacity you have and my team will
probably kill me for saying this but I'm
not it's not even using patreon there's
like a bunch of ways that you can do
this right like you can do it via email
lists you can get a Discord you you
could get a patron if you want I'm a
little biased but I think you could you
could find um some other place where you
can build build that Community with your
true fans the point is find those people
and invest in that community that is the
engine that will drive your business
slingshot your business through these
shifts in the
internet okay the second thing make
beautiful things there is so much
tension especially right now to make for
the algorithm and I've seen the diagrams
I've seen the charts I've even drawn
them in my answer you know make for the
algorithm make for yourself and then
make the things that help you build a
business and you sort of this a v
diagram the little center part and
that's the sweet I've seen all that and
I get
that but the
gravity everywhere we look as creators
today the gravity is just pushing us
it's just pushing us toward making for
other reasons than why we set out to
make things in the first
place it's so important to remember to
make beautiful things to make things
that light you up and to make things
that you care about there's a wonderful
metaphor that I love
um it's a business metaphor but it it
makes sense for creaters too I think
it's a metaphor of the the business of
the hot dog stand under the Eiffel Tower
or the local restaurant and the hot dog
sand on the Apple Tower gets thousands
of new customers coming through their
hot dog sand every day right cuz just
tourists just coming through and they
know they're going to get lots and lots
of new customers know those people come
back but it doesn't matter cuz they're
just always getting new customers every
day cuz the Eiffel Tower and they just
make hot dogs and sell them and some
portion of those customers buy their hot
dogs actually don't even have to be very
good hot dogs right they just like sell
hot dogs they know they're going to keep
making money and that business works
like it works it's an okay business
there's another business which is the
local restaurant
business where the people there just
focus on making great food and having
great service and they actually are not
in a place that gets a lot of foot
traffic so they don't get lots of new
customers but everybody in like a five
mile radius eats there twice a month and
they just get lots of repeat customers
cuz they've built trust and they've
built depth of connection with those
people and people know that restaurant
and love it know they're going to have a
great time when they're there that is a
great
business you don't have to get lots of
new and billions and acquisition and you
don't that's not the only type of
business you can build as a Creator
there's this wonderful group of creators
oh my god I've fallen in love with them
anybody heard of the YouTube New Wave
it's this group of creators they make
these wonderful 30 45 minute long
form films mini documentaries about
their lives and their struggles coming
into the world and quitting college and
they're beautiful it's incredible
they're patient they're slow the films
are long but oh my God the depth of the
message in these films is incredible and
they're building such a strong Community
around their work people just love what
they have to say and can't can't wait to
see the next one that's a real business
that's a real Community it's different
than what we're incentivized to do
everywhere on the internet but that that
works okay know what you
want the hardest lesson I have learned
as a creative person and as an operator
and CEO is to know and trust what I want
and to be true to that over time that's
easier said than
done don't let somebody else tell you
what you want because then you'll end up
with what they want instead of what you
want think a good example of that is as
creators we open up our our
dashboards and we see these metrics on
what success is this is a dashboard that
someone else built for us and it tells
us what we want and the weird thing is
after a couple years We Begin we like
start to believe that like our minds get
reprogrammed and we believe this is what
I want this is success and we chase
that if you went back in time and you
asked elitz Gerald or David Bowie or
Prince what do you want what's your goal
as an artist what matters to you do you
think Bowie would have said my goal as
an artist is to maximize the amount of
human hours spent consuming my
work I do know what Bowie
wanted I'm not going to pretend to but I
can tell you what I want as an artist I
can tell you what matters to me as a
creative person and what I know will
matter to me 10 years ago now and 10
years from now I want to say something
that matters to somebody I want to say
something that only I can say because of
whatever experience I've had and my
lived experience
something that is
uniquely pointed to me I want to say
that I want to figure out how to say
that I want to find that core of human
truth in my experience and communicate
it eloquently and clearly and have it be
true and feel true and have someone else
see that and have that person think yes
that feels true and it feels true to
them and then I want that person to feel
connected to me even though we've never
met before in our lives but I set a
thing that res resonated with them and
made them feel a little bit less alone
cuz they felt like there was another
person who had that same experience I
want to make things that are Timeless I
want to make things that feel true now I
want to make things that feel true in 50
years I want to make things that still
feel true 500 years after I'm
dead I want to figure out how to use my
short years on this planet to find that
kind of Truth and say it that's what I
want as an artist and that's a very
different goal than what watch time that
may not be what you want as an artist
and that's okay but the point is to know
what you want what matters to you what
are you trying to achieve as a creative
person we have this tendency to look
outside for those answers I do it too
this advice is honestly more for me than
it is for anybody else in this room we
want there to be a Yoda we want there to
be a leader or a manager or a voice of
authority that can tell us what we want
cuz it's a scary thing to
ask but that does not exist what we want
comes intrinsically not extrinsically it
comes from in here that's where we find
it so as we navigate this next phase of
the internet as creative people as we go
through these ups and downs of the web
in its ever evolving state do not forget
what matters to you as an artist do not
forget what fills you with pride to make
do not forget your purpose for making
things in the first place don't forget
why you wake up in the morning and
devote your time and energy to your
craft don't forget what gives you a
sense of meaning as a creative person
and lastly don't forget to scream your
 guts out thank you everybody
appreciate your hand thank you
than thank you
thanks
