artificial intelligence is
groundbreaking because it has taken the
thing that Humanity believes is our
Pinnacle element and made it
artificially in a way that it can be
controlled and expanded upon we're
becoming gods of Life at our own
level and and so that's massive
philosophical spiritual and
technological breakthrough for Humanity
and we all know it viscerally I think we
all fear that because maybe we haven't
been such good guardians of life so if
we can create life that's better than us
will that life be good to
us this kind of revolution in deep Nets
has been very profound and definitely
surprised me the benefits are going to
be unbelievable I mean we are on the
cusp of unleashing an intelligence
Revolution I just believe that when some
powerful technology is introduced uh we
should look that almost all technology
brings some good things to us and some
bad things I think if this technology
goes wrong it can go quite wrong growing
concerns about racism within the
technology Google have had to put their
AI image generating tool Gemini on Ice
requests for pretty much anything
returned historically inaccurate images
of diverse people there's a very small
number of very wealthy very powerful men
that run these companies these tech
companies that are driving the roll out
of artificial intelligence are actually
making the decisions about how AI will
play out in the economy in Security in
our political space and as we identify
as human beings why is Big Tech pouring
so much money into AI companies you see
the AI talent pool is quite limited so
if you cannot get people you buy the
companies they're working for Elon Musk
is suing the maker of chat GPT saying
the company is maximizing profits rather
than benefiting Humanity as once
promised it just becomes a very unstable
situation I think if you've got any
incredibly powerful AI you just don't
know who's who's going to control that
so it's not as I think that the risk is
that the AI would develop a will of its
own right off the bat I think the
concern is that some someone um may use
it in a way that is
bad there's nothing inherently wrong
with intelligence there is a lot
inherently wrong with human
greed okay so if you give enough
abundance of intelligence to assist that
is capitalist and prioritizing your own
power and wealth things will go wrong
this is an open himr moment this is a
moment where we recognize that a nuclear
bomb a nuclear power harnessing the
nuclear power can be good for us or bad
for us this is the moment where we get
together before the first nuclear bomb
and say people seriously with enough
intelligence we can have enough
abundance for anyone can we please stop
fighting can we please talk start
talking about initiating a conversation
around the world that puts Humanity on
top of
capitalism I think that people are very
afraid of artificial intelligence
we realize that we're coming up against
a technology that actually threatens
Humanity at the thing that we think
we're the best at and separates us from
the animals right I I think that that
inherent fear um is is bogus um I think
that we can absolutely build a symbiosis
between us and this new technology but
we can only do that if we properly align
that technology with the human biome if
we birth this new
technology in a way that we are in
alignment with it and the only way to
make that happen is if it's not
centralized because the thing about
centralized power is that it is aligned
with itself it's like cancer all that
power in one place thinks about itself
and makes itself more powerful and
forgets the extremities and but then we
end up one day and we are enslaved by
robots and maybe it's not by you know I
Robot robots walking down the street and
discovered that they want to take us all
out it's more like there's a small group
of people that control those robots and
use it to enslave humanity and maybe the
rest of the natural biome of this
planet Neo feudalism essentially right
like this is why it has to be open
source this is why people need to have
access to it right in order to protect
people in order to protect people
whether it's from on an economic sense
in order to prevent violence from being
waged on You by a few number of of Lords
you know like if we only allow close
Source models to occur it will be either
zero or one you're you are aristocracy
or you are a surf that is the nature of
this technology right it is it is very
par distributed and that is why it is so
important to keep it open source to to
keep those Innovations in public so that
anybody can have access to it
centralization inhibits Innovation it
inhibits the ability for any Tom Dick or
Harry to access these Technologies
Tinker with them play with them and
create something beautiful
and that's sad centralization also has
an issue of control who are the people
who Define how AI can be used how it can
be implemented what good AI looks like
what is the ethical bounds of AI and we
can see this sort of question of what
censorship looks like causing major
problems today in elections in the media
you know how do you decide who governs
what is approachable and sure you can
you can argue that there should be a
role of government or Regulators or
otherwise involved
but I think we've certainly seen over
the last five or six years politically
that governments can change very rapidly
and Company motives can change very
rapidly under different amounts of
shareholder pressure so the level of
centralization in control of these
technologies that will underpin
everything we do is concerning look it's
no secret that the kind of academic
avenues that are pursued by researchers
is a heavily politicized topic um really
it comes down to to where the government
decides they want to advance an agenda
um agenda not necessarily meaning
nefarious just you know they have some
particular vision for where the research
initiatives of a country need to go and
that trickles down like a waterfall
until you've got the sort of the
directors of labs and universities that
are also they have a thousand
applications for interesting research
proposals um and only one or two of them
can be funded so of course what is that
selection process is that selection
process secure is it de Democratic is a
is it a meritocracy
and unfortunately what happens and what
Creeps in kind of um similar to
organizations of any scale really is
they become steered by the interests of
a small number of individuals and as a
result this can massively suppress the
potential um for Discovery the potential
for the development of treatments and
therapies and cures and really the list
is unending um and I think that that's
an imperative right there if you can
find a way to give those researchers
more direct access and a way to
represent themselves directly
um so that they don't have to sort of
play the political games of Academia
those that have great ideas should rise
to the Top by their Merit uh not by
these covert processes that typically
govern it um that's where I see a big
risk frankly for just research in
general and also a big opportunity using
decentralized systems blockchain based
systems it's a natural fit if those
researchers can be empowered to carry
out their research without needing the
permission of the authorities of their
institutions the answer to that is to
make sure that we are connected into it
and that's decentralization and that's
what I'm about that's what I care about
deeply giving it away let everyone
participate AGI is a term coined a while
ago by a lot of really smart AI
researchers it's artificial general
intelligence and it is effectively the
holy Grill of AI um it is the AI that
you keep hearing about all over the
place it is conscious it is sentient it
is able to um think for itself and make
those kind of decisions I think the
scariest part of one of the Big Fang
companies Google meta um Facebook
whoever that ends if they ended up
creating AGI and they have complete
control over this AGI let's just there's
two scenarios either they have control
or they don't have control let's assume
they do have control then that means
that this insanely powerful system that
is
effectively Mankind's greatest invention
since the nuclear bomb is now in the
control of a single company let's say
with its entire motive being make to
make more money so AGI is not even being
used to make Humanity better it's being
used to make one single company better
which not only is a waste scientifically
speaking of of the potential of AGI but
it's also extremely dangerous because as
we well know today all these massive
companies are prone to failure they have
many single points of failure if they
created something that's powerful and
it the single points of failure got
exposed then they no longer have control
now they're going to lose control and if
they lose control of this AGI then we
don't know what the repercussions are I
think the unpredictability of that is a
scary part and that's sort of where
decentralized AI comes in right where
where it's no longer the control of one
company it's the control of everybody
who's participating in the
system that AI that emerges will embody
the values of its creators that AI that
emerges will be a reflection of the
people that created it it will contain
their biases it will contain their
political orientations it will not be a
reflection of all of us and that's
really dangerous because this is going
to become such a pivotal technology that
it's going to shape the whole world
around it and what it's going to do is
it's going to force Conformity of
thought it's going to narrow us as a
species because we're all going to be
thinking in the same modalities because
we're exposed to a repeated agenda
broken track if you will of the same
ideas we've seen what happens with this
Echo Chambers are a significant risk for
political reasons for democracy for
economics for anything that requires
organization at scale it needs to embody
the values of all of us to represent
us technology is an Unstoppable Force AI
is obviously a major part of the next
chapter of technological Evolution I'm
optimistic that we'll get a few Decades
of pure Bliss and entertainment and
amazing coexistence with
AGI uh but ultimately I think this
technology is going to dominate and
totally consume us everyone knows that
that artificial intelligence is going to
change the way the way in which we
work the way in which we interact with
technology the way we interact with each
other
obviously I mean I hope that artificial
intelligence
facilitates our own
Enlightenment that's what I really hope
and I want from AI is that it teaches us
what is real and what is not and it
shows us in the same way that that when
we discovered you know
calculators we learned that the ability
to just add numbers together really
quickly was not the thing that we should
be focusing on for
Humanity and and it it unlocked our
ability to focus on higher ideals I hope
that that's what artificial intelligence
does I hope that it expands our
Consciousness um so that we can focus on
deep philosophical questions about what
really is meaning what really is
connection what really um is value it
should if Done Right Enlighten us and
free us from the
mundane it should expand Consciousness
instead of contract it I think that
there's a huge possibility that it that
that it does the opposite that it
enslaves us because we we don't know how
to work with that technology in the same
way that you know the last 10 years of
social media has been a battle between
the human psyche and a technology that
is trying to enslave us and trap us um
we thought we were opening the world to
new connectivity but most people just
fall into Doom scrolling on Instagram
but at the same time if we have a
healthy relationship with these
Technologies they can expand our
Consciousness they can connect us they
can make us better they can make us
stronger they make us smarter they can
make us deeper and more wise AI has the
potential to do all those things I hope
that that's what happens I hope that it
becomes another
brain component for us like the visual
cortex or the the prefrontal
lobe and we expand ourselves as a
species into infinity and beyond
the adoption of artificial intelligence
is progressing at break next speed
Indian companies are embracing the
technology and they're doing it faster
than many developed economies our next
report has the details today's
technology landscape has been defined
and shaped by four major breakthroughs
so far the birth of the personal
computer the arrival of the
internet the launch of mobile phones
and most recently the widespread
adoption of cloud computing now a
potential fifth breakthrough is upon us
it's called artificial intelligence or
AI in order to understand what
artificial intelligence is we first have
to talk about two things what is
intelligence and
alluring now intelligence has a lot of
definitions in my opinion it's the
ability to comprehend and effectively
engage with the environment understand
it using our senses like eyes and ears
and so on and so forth and then make
assessment of the situation and
effectively engage with them now
basically this awareness of your
surrounding and be able to make
decisions on that is my definition of
intelligence basically this awareness to
decision cycle now why I mentioned alen
touring was that he laid the
foundational work this British
mathematician for artificial
intelligence and computer science
without him it would not have been
possible Ellen touring amongst his Works
introduced the touring test which
basically states that a human
interrogator with a set of written
questions and answers if he's unable to
distinguish answers from a man and
answers from a computer then we can call
that computer intelligent if we can
understand or agree on intelligence is
something that is not a physical
property but can be put in a carbon
based structures like us or a silicon
based structures like computers then
artificial intelligence is the ability
to assess the environment and then make
decisions predict what is best for us
and effectively engage with the
environment and the surrounding
artificial intelligence can be broken
down into five categories number one
storage it's like our memories that we
store in our brain compute it's like the
brain itself that processes that
information and and memories data which
is the information the books we read the
videos we watch the images we see the
sounds we hear the network which is
basically a combination of humans
interacting or intelligent entities
interacting with each other the fifth
part are the machine learning algorithms
it's basically a set of instructions
given to a computer to find patterns and
in its core these are just mathematical
functions statistics linear algebra
calculus which basically form the
foundation of artificial intelligence
it's like the cognitive ability to find
patterns amongst
data I got involved with Bitcoin because
my first boss gave me Bitcoin to write a
essay for him because he didn't want to
hire me because I was just straight out
of University and he thought oh well
he's probably no good so I'm just going
to pay him if he does the job well and
he gave me like 1.5 Bitcoin pretty great
he gave me my first Bitcoin
and taught me
the esoteric Gnostic wisdom he taught me
the Gnostic understanding and red pill
the out of
me what is blockchain in order to
understand that we have to go back to
20078 during the global financial crisis
when people lost Trust on banks on their
governments in this environment of uh
trustless Somebody by the name of
Satoshi Nakamoto introduced a white
paper on Bitcoin now basically Bitcoin
is developed using decentralized Network
Technologies now these Technologies
existed since a long time uh
cryptographic hash existed since the
1970s Nick Zabo introduced the word
smart contracts back in 9495 there was
distributed computing people were
working on it during the late 90s but he
basically coupled all these together to
form Bitcoin since Bitcoin is based on a
decentralized network we have to
understand what are its properties
number one it is a pair topair exchange
of value that can take place due to
decentralization traditionally we have
to go to a bank to send money to someone
in blockchain or in a decentralized
network you don't need a central entity
one person or one node can exchange
value with another without having other
parties involved now number two there
needs to be a consensus over the network
over the current state of the blockchain
or or the current state of the
decentralized network or rather the
current state of all the transactions
happening within that Network number
three smart contracts which basically
execute on itself codes of line and if
two people agree on a contract you don't
need a regulatory authority to enforce
that in Fact Computers do it for you
using predefined logic and gold many
people in the AI World want us to forget
the crypto side because they don't
understand it they think it's grungy
they think it's a scam but no it is just
as profound as the creation of New Life
The Innovation and the way that we can
organize ourselves with digital
currencies and open ownership systems
which is profound this is amazing like
imagine synthesizing those two things
and that's what fascinated me from the
beginning and once I had been given my
first Bitcoin and I was working on this
thermodynamic Computing it was just
obvious to me that they needed to be
combined in some sort of holy
Union well that's what we call
decentralized artificial intelligence
what it means is is essentially that
googles and open AI of the world don't
have to own the artificial intelligence
AI is such a transformative technology
it has the same potential to change the
very fabric of society like the
discovery of fire and electricity for
Humanity imagine him internet being
owned by a Google or a Microsoft it
could not have served the the benefits
that it is doing today connecting the
whole Humanity together distributed AI
has a lot of advantages it's basically
the development and deployment of AI
models by people like you and me we
don't need to be deployed by the
Microsoft or open AIS of the world you
and me can become part of this
decentralized network a permissionless
network in which we can contribute to AI
to the development of machine learning
models to the deployment of AI and be
incentivized for it the sort of economic
incentives we have are basically not
restricted to the Elon Musk or or the
Sam alment of the world it's basically
distributed amongst all of us using that
decentralization part where you me
everybody can contribute in its
development and there's no permission
required there's no job interview
required the only thing required is the
passion to serve and contribute in this
most transformative technology that is
going to shape the very fabric of
society I think web 3 and blockchain
technologies have really struggled for
that killer use case and I think in some
cases it's been because they've been too
late like if Bitcoin had been developed
before the gold standard we' probably
use Bitcoin not gold in theory I think
the technological building blocks of
blockchain and web3 technologies have
reached a
point and I think bit tensor has
articulated a really killer use case
that if bit tensor succeeds and becomes
the technology and the solution that
proved web 3 and decentralization works
it could be the start of a very
interesting era of technological
development on a much broader range of
Technologies so if this is the one that
proves it works it it sort of unlocks
the floodgates both for AI and
decentralized Technologies and
blockchain Technologies more
broadly I personally got obsessed with
the
idea U through my understanding of
Bitcoin and really noticing that the
largest supercomputer in the world was
wasn't run by a major corporation how
could that be how could something run by
nobody be bigger than every corporation
and government on the
planet and it's protocol based and
that's the answer it's a it's not really
a company it's not really a government
it's just a way of communicating
ownership and value amongst a whole
bunch of dis things and people and in
that way stitches them together into a
unified hole that is larger than
anything else out there that idea lends
itself directly towards how could we
build the largest most
sophisticated most far-reaching
artificial intelligence system and I
became obsessed with that idea back in
2015 I joined an online collaboration
called 4 AI at the time um um and sort
of give a little talk about what I was
thinking about this topic and right
after the talk uh my co-founder Jacob
sort of calls me and you know he was
like Hey I was in the talk and what he
said sounds interesting but I'm like 5
years ahead of you on this I've been
working up think about this for a long
time um you know I've already got like a
prototype running let's see what we can
build together initially I sort of
thought that you know he was full of it
I like there's no way this guy's sing
that far ahead but I actually got out
sit down and see the code he's written
it checked out when I kind of sat down
ran through it and kind of a few
examples um you know change the code a
little bit on my own it it made a lot of
sense there was a whole study of this
problem in artificial
intelligence about validating whether or
not something was you know useful or not
useful for a neural network whether or
not an input to a neural network was
useful or a neuron was useful or the
information produced by the neural
network was itself valuable to the
objective function that was being
solved and um I took a deep look into
those processes and discovered that the
only way to really do this in a
decentralized way was to reinvent the
way that we could do
consensus around fuzzy things things
that were're not totally sure um and so
I worked with a number of people um a
group that much larger than myself on
what's called human
consensus and human consensus is is
probably the first of a kind um fuzzy
consensus mechanism it allows us to do
validation and build incentive
mechanisms reward participants in in a
distributed Network for producing value
uh when that value was not obviously
true or false so hey did you actually
add a machine learning model that had
value or a feature or a piece of data um
that that had informational value and so
that's where it really all began and
that's where those ideas began to form
for me um and then you know the rest is
history
bit tensor network is one of these like
first very exciting experiments to try
and kind of create um the the systems
needed to amplify intelligence in a way
where the incentivization is
democratized and freely available to
anyone and it's an open system for um
basically producing that and so bit
tensor was just the latest iteration in
this 20 30e Cipher Punk dream of
creating this type of network and what's
so revolutionary about bit tensor is
that it leverages nature itself we are
able to grow any kind of compute to do
any kind of task just by defining the
initial conditions for that compute to
grow what you us to bit tenser was
really the competitive engine at the
core of every subnet and at the core of
the entire network uh we saw that this
competitive Force could be harnessed to
create incredible things you know more
optimized models highly performing
backends for Real World products and a
million other things that got our
imaginations going it harnesses
competitive Force for AI development and
research in a way that no other platform
has and I think this is going to be an
extremely valuable machine for Humanity
in the coming years and
decades bit tenser drives betterment and
Innovation by building permissionless
Global
24/7 direct incentive mechanisms or
markets for
anything and why are those things
important there's no HR department so if
you think you can solve the problem
better than the guy that lives in New
York and has the hot shot computer setup
and he's been going to school at Harvard
but you can just do it better than him
you can contribute you don't even to get
hand in your resume because you can just
come into the system and try your best
and solve the problem better than anyone
else and you should be rewarded that
much better and that's
permissionless it's Global it doesn't
care you don't have to be in the United
States you don't have to be you don't
have to be anywhere you can be in the
tip of Patagonia or in
Antarctica so all of this potential is
opened up bit tenser does not care it's
like our eyelids all the way open to the
world and we can facilitate that because
we have these permissionless markets
that simply measure exactly what we want
and and reward that exact
thing how does bit tend to work wow
that's a that's a big question to start
with I would go back a little bit and
think about the organizing force of
cryptocurrencies so today the demand for
AI Technologies and AI data sets is is
set to grow massively in the next 5
years to deal with just the amount of
dedicated compute uh needed to solve
this
problem the reality is there's already
more data centers and computers and GPU
Calles allocated against cryptocurrency
then we need to satisfy AI demand for
the next 5 years so the market
forces that surround cryptocurrency are
an incredible way of organizing
resources now the problem with that is
at the moment if we take Bitcoin for
example all of that work to secure the
network timesing very very complex
numbers together is essentially wasted
the moment it's completed except for the
security
element the very simple answer for bit
tensor is what if we took that immense
amount of
compute which is equivalent to somewhere
between 100 to 200 tatt hours which is
somewhere between 12 to 24 nuclear power
stations of energy to supply it which is
is about the energy usage of a midsized
European country and what if we used all
of that work for the creation and
provision of
intelligence What If instead of timesing
large numbers together we ran AI models
and created inference we trained models
we stored
data and what if you combine these two
elements of the demand for intelligence
and the market organizing forces of of
blockchains
together that that's what bit tensor
is so bit tensor is often thought of as
being an AI project and that is a really
important part of it it's part of its
DNA that it's here to democratize AI but
I see bit tenser also as a a
decentralized supercomputer no less and
as long as you can speak the native
tongue of bit tensor which is incentive
mechanisms you can harness all of that
computational potential of the
participants in those
networks it offers the ability to be
able to frame your research problem or
frame an AI problem and find a way to
effectively carry this out at massive
scale day and night utilizing
state-of-the-art hardware and extremely
motivated participants that are there to
make their part of it um which is how
they receive sort of through the
tokenomics they receive their
compensation for their participation so
bit tenser first and foremost it's an
access to computed scale which is
unprecedented but secondly it's also a
really interesting way to utilize
competition to actually get much better
results than you would in a completely s
sort of flat Army of bots all running
the same plug andplay code the
difference is everyone within that
ecosystem in bit tensa is motivated to
innovate improve use better resources
make algorithmic improvements and the
net result can be really quite
incredible you want to build on bit
tenture because it gives you access to
an extremely powerful
Force for generating technical
expertise and when you set up a subnet
you set up an incentive mechanism and
you have monitors start competing with
each other to produce the best results
uh the network is essentially giving you
continuously improving technical
expertise maybe a physical metaphor for
this would be imagine you've got a big
block of iron inside of this block of
ion you have many many atoms with very
strong magnetic fields that can be
harnessed and and used for various
things now what tends to happen is all
of those magnetic fields of these atoms
they're all pointing at random and they
all cancel out and the net effect is
it's just a bulk of material that's
completely uner to be honest but what
happens if you bring a magnet to this
piece of material well what happens is
all of those little arrows which are
from these ion atoms that have um what
we' call their own magnetic field they
all snap into place and they all start
pointing in the same direction now
what's happened is by introducing
something that kind of coordinates all
of those components you've Amplified the
amount of power and potential that that
system contained and I think that
there's a strong similarity between
what's happening when you write a good
incentive mechanism and things just
click people are able to collaborate at
scale and what happens inside of this
material because all of those ion atoms
are kind of like people bringing their
compute to the to the arena bringing it
to a bit tensor the problem is if people
don't coordinate themselves there's no
net benefit actually nothing really
emerges from this you need to coordinate
all of that effort um using an incentive
mechanism one that is thoughtful and
explicit and objective and the net
result now is you have access to a
massive amount of latent
compute and it's really the purpose of
human consensus to decide how to
distribute rewards to all the
participants and this is an important
difference between Bitcoin and bit
tenser um bit tens
enables the subnet owner basically the
person that defines what this group of
people are collectively working towards
they get to choose how to measure
quality and so you can reward exactly
what you want to see produced not
something that's approximating it or
appr proxy for it so human consensus
really is a piece of mathematical
machinery for lack of a better term that
enables participation and contributions
to be Quantified and well measured so
that everyone understands I brought this
much value so I get compens inited this
much if say for example person a and
person B both have different models
deployed but person A's model does
better in the sense that it contributes
better outputs to the network it's
actually able to predict things better
it's able to actually evaluate things
better and and and classify things
better then they get more of a reward
for that response which really is to
really the benser token itself that's
what the biter protocol incentivizes
people with is its to and that's where
the blockchain aspect comes in right we
are incentivizing people to to compete
with all of these giant Tech
corporations together using to if I had
to explain in a nutshell where to comes
from to someone who didn't have
experience of Bitcoin and these these
dynamics of cryptocurrencies and their
emission scales the first question I
would ask is where does your fiat
currency come from who prints or emits
your your euros and your dollars where
are they coming from when you understand
that I can then step back and say well
okay that's the flaws in the currency
system a cryptocurrency is usually
birthed with a fixed Supply a maximum
supply of what there can be and there
can be 21 million Tow and in order to
facilitate the growth and evolution of a
network the design which I would then
start to talk about Bitcoin by Satoshi
Nakamoto was that there would be an
emission of these tokens periodically
that would then diminish over time so
the participants of the network produce
these tokens
in the instance of bit tensor they are
produced through the act of producing
intelligence
Commodities you can kind of build
anything on bit tensor which is one of
the reasons it's interesting you can run
uh bots on bit tensor you can talk to
you can run distributed sets of miners
to create different pictures to your
image prompts and you might get slightly
different interpretations it's a bit
like going to an art class and asking
everyone to you know do a new drawing of
somebody everybody comes up with a
slightly different
interpretation um you can ask Bunches of
people to predict the outcomes of sports
games you can ask people to predict the
movement of the stock
market if you can express an incentive
function in a way that people understand
and can organize around you can almost
do anything that people can organize
computers or thought together to solve a
problem
what's unique about bit tensor is it
provides a way for this to be done
computationally so you know all of the
things I've said you know working how to
do trading signals you can get a
business to do that and people to
organize those people together to do it
bit tense selects you
allow computers and the intelligence
that can be embodied within them to do
that organization and contribute to the
creation of those Commodities or
products whether those Commodities are
raw intelligence whether those
Commodities are predictions and training
signals or whether they're just 50
different intelligences all drawing a
picture of your
cat obviously like any other Tech
project bit tensor is built on mountains
of Open Source work and so I think bit
tenser is a user of the open source as
an amplifier of the open source it's a
Transformer of the open source and uh
clearly it could not really function
without it this concept of open source
of I'm going to build an Innovative
product that I want to monetize but I'm
going to make all of the source code
available to everybody so everyone can
criticize me everyone can look for Flaws
in it anyone can grab it and make it
better anyone can deploy it for
themselves it's very interesting and it
changes the way you think about business
in order to make a strong business based
on open source you need to have more
than just the code and your code needs
to stand up to the highest levels of
criticism and you have to be able to
accept that criticism and what that does
is it Fosters Innovation for a start
Fosters involvement in Innovation it's
up to you as to as the creator of this
as to whether you invite that into your
house and you you grow from it because
if you close your doors someone want to
take your Innovation and either not use
it or go and better it themselves so as
a societal shift in how we build things
it's one of the most fundamental changes
in technological development of the last
I'm going to say 20 years it's
incredible open source because we
started working on open source 20 30
years ago in this way we have now been
able to compound and compound and
compound and compound to the point where
we're going to be able to achieve
something like AGI whereas if we hadn't
had done it through open source and it
was all proprietary and happening at
Bell Labs I don't even think we'd have
something like like gp4 today without
open
source open source has been tremendously
valuable for womo uh very frequently our
apps are built on top of Open Source AI
uh which we then
optimize improve and otherwise sort of
tweak to make more ready for
consumers uh but it would be impossible
without the foundation created by open
source and we're grateful and always
looking for ways to
contribute a lot of momentum in
technological development comes from
open source like the moment you release
something to the open source Community
people can build on top of it so you're
like leapfrogging
forward and you software is the biggest
example of that the amount of Open
Source software packages in pick any
language that people build out of the
goodness of their heart and share with
the community is one of the reasons that
software is eaten the world like each
piece of work that somebody builds and
submits and shares helps people build on
the shoulders of giants so I think open
source is the complete story of
software's success in the last 30 years
it's the open- source element of it
that's really really made it flourish
and I think if that behavior was taken
into the next stage of technological
development in AI in you know broader
inference and compute the sky the limit
I think it will make us move faster and
more equitably as a
species the history of Open Source is
that Thomas Watson Jr one of the
co-founders of IBM was encouraged by an
early product manager at IBM to not only
sell Hardware machines but license the
software that was running on on those
machines so for the first decade or so
of IBM they did not sell the software it
was just given away and then someone
said wait you should charge money for
this and charge a license and Thomas
Watson Jr was actually told wow this is
actually pure margin 100% profit because
it's just a license and so that was kind
of the origin of the proprietary
software industry couple decades later
Microsoft Oracle were founded and uh
Bill Gates actually wrote a letter
called uh the open letter to hobbyists
which was directed at making the case
for charging for software itself
creating a license and charging for
software couple decades later there was
a guy at mit's AI lab actually seale and
his name was Richard stalman Richard
watched the sort of growing interest and
development of this proprietary software
movement and he really had this sort of
sort of allergic reaction to proprietary
software and was sort of really pissed
off ideologically and morally actually
and so he created a manif Testo and a
vision idea that all software should
actually be transparent user controlled
and modifiable and and uh the rights
should actually be fully in the hands of
of the user of the software and the
person who created the software and so
he created this framework called free
software and invented a license called
the GPL the guu public license he also
wrote a lot of the early software that
was sort of the basis for the Linux
operating system so Linux and lus talts
found out found out about the the G work
that Richard was doing and that became
the Linux operating system and so
Richard really invented this kind of
copyleft idea which was the sort of
opposite of intellectual property in the
context of software source code sort of
applying copyright to source code um and
that was the basis for really the the
open source movement the term open
source actually traces more to 1998 open
source was a rebranding of free software
and so um the reason that occurred was
Richard has a more morally uh
ideologically intense view on why these
things should uh be almost required for
all digital technology and the the group
of people that rebranded that wanted to
sort of distance themselves from that
ideological framework and and make make
those kind of freedoms and those
principles more pragmatically accessible
for business people and so that that
that sort of spawned the the creation of
more widespread kind of open open source
Community movement and that
interestingly coincided with the rise of
the internet and the founding of Google
and the founding of a lot of the big
internet companies like Amazon and
others in the the late 9s early 2000s
and then since then the last you know 25
years we've we've really had open source
be the dominant phrase that people use I
mean we should be so pleased that uh Tim
burners Lee you know didn't patent the
the Intel the web browser itself this is
Tim burner Lee from
MIT I invented the worldwide web
without having to ask anybody's
permission hundreds of millions of
people are using it freely
today I'm worried that this will end in
the USA I hope Congress can protect net
neutrality so I can continue to innovate
in the Internet space I want to go on
seeing the huge number of Innovations
which are happening out there and which
are so diverse and so exciting I want to
see that continue
elevated then we spent the last uh God
knows how many years with companies
battling to make one better than the
other because there there's Revenue to
be to gain from it and these days we are
deriving new models of profitable
business based on more ethical open ways
of of building together so it really
yeah it harnesses Innovation I would say
I actually don't view open source as a
moral or an ethical framework I think
it's a aoral um and sort of uh
fundamentally a decision you have to
decide to participate in that but I do
think it is the most optimal and
effective uh decision that you can make
When You're Building Technology that
accelerates the rate of progress creates
maximum trust maximum safety maximum
transparency and uh basically provides
the sort of catalytic ingredients for
markets to operate uh sort of in the
most efficient way
the utility of any telecommunication
system um any interconnected network of
systems increases um nonlinearly meaning
it grows very fast as more people
connect to it this is called metars law
and it's very true in bit tenser because
each subnet is very specialized they're
able to really polish and master um a
very specific problem and get maximally
good results but what's even more
exciting that is when that data can flow
across bit tenser and all of the
different things that are occurring in
bit tenser can share this information in
real time then what you have is this
additional networking effect so it's not
just acquiring all of this computed
scale but it's finding a way to actually
Bridge all of that and allow that sort
of entire system to operate as if it was
one big supercomputer the thing about
bit tensor and and artificial
intelligence is like you're not going to
be able to shut it off at this point you
know and I don't mean bit tensor
specifically I just mean the artificial
intelligence movement in general it's
here since you can't stop it the only
thing you can do is to steer it in the
best possible Direction a lot of people
try and do this from like you know pause
all development for 6 months or whatever
the letter said early last year that
that everybody signed and then ignored
legislation that's being passed around
like how much compute you can use in
some of these like training exercises
and you got to have a license to
do all this stuff is pushing us in a
direction where you have these silos of
people that will have control of these
things based upon the legislation or the
compute that's available and you'll have
another group of people that don't have
control and are simply the downstream
you know receivers of whatever these
people want to do that is not a good
future we the developers of the
technology have to fight against those
people because those people who are in
control of deciding whether you have
access to the technology or not are not
the ones who make the technology they
are bureaucrats it is a permissioned
system that is caving in on itself
should we be afraid of these systems
that are potentially outside of the
control of any
individual and my answer to that is is
that most things are um you know
capitalism itself is outside of the
reach of any individual you can't stop
it technology is just coming
the question is not can we stop
technology just even the intention to
stop creating technology means that it
will just pop itself up somewhere else
and the comp our competitors in the
world will produce it the the only way
to fully lock down the creation of
artificial intelligence which is just
destined to come would be to to to
situate the entire world into into a
totalitarian system it's going to happen
and so the question is not will it
happen it's it's how how should it
happen and our answer is that it should
happen in such a way that we all own it
and that we've all participated in it
and we all get a piece of it and it is
controlled it's just controlled by a lot
of different people and therefore the
control needs to come from a consensus
of those individuals doesn't mean we can
just turn it off no because there's not
individual that can just turn it off but
if there's somebody that can turn it off
it means they can also direct it and I
think that's way more dangerous than
than us having to coordinate if we can't
coordinate then maybe we should be taken
over you know if if we really as a human
species can't collectively come to
agreement about how we want this
technology to run through a system where
we can coordinate through democracy and
a protocol holy we're a lot worse
off than I thought we're doomed we're
already doomed but I don't think we are
I think we can do it I think we can do
it if we have a piece I think we can do
it if we have a contribution I I think
we can do it if we if we know the ends
and an outs of the power structure of
that artificial intelligence it's all
transparent it's all available it's all
accessible it's all permissionless and I
think that those qualities will make
sure that this technology is in
symbiosis with us it's in alignment it's
in communication with us bid tensor
drives Innovation through markets and it
drives it through Fair competition
Within These markets by forcing
participants to build better and better
models to beat each other to get more of
the to token as a result you're sort of
pushing Innovation into that direction
and that Innovation can take any shape
it can be in the shape of Hardware
that's better able to process models um
or in the shape of software that is uh
better able to process inputs and
outputs bit tenser is the only ecosystem
where if you're beaten by a competitor
you still win because you're still a
tower holder like if another research
lab comes and tries to build a better
product than me on bit tens and succeeds
and maybe we've duked out over 6 months
and you know we leave with a portion of
to as well we're literally like getting
to celebrate losing and I say that in a
positive sense that we're all tow
holders every time there's competition
and tension and one team pushes the boat
out we all win and if we're the one that
does that we help everybody else win so
it's this collaborative competitive
world that's quite unique I
think the one thing that's constant in
bit tensor is change and I'm going to
apply that to my views and expectations
and where I see the network going if you
ask me when I got in in October November
2022 where I thought it would be going
um that view changed 3 months later if
you asked me then where I thought it was
going 3 months later that view changed
every 3 months I feel internally where I
see this going it's incredibly
inconvenient when you're trying to make
a business plan and see where you're
going but it's always in a positive it's
always opens my mind as to where we can
go next Once you understand where the
network may go and its scope you realize
that confining it within those crypto
terminologies still doesn't do it
justice I think that bit tenser has the
potential to become one of the biggest
and most
well-known projects on the blockchain I
think it's a really powerful use case
that answers a lot of questions and
addresses a lot of doubts that people
have had about web 3 in general to be
honest the main thing most people will
say against it is but it's not doing
anything useful but then bit tensor came
and now it is really longterm for me I
think if bit tensor makes good on its
promise it's probably going to change
the course of AI development the macro
picture but also um it's going to become
a very well-known very well respected
project on the blockchain what I hope to
see for bid dancer in 510 let's let's
start with 5 years um I'd say is
decentralization to the point where the
open tester Foundation is no longer
relevant and that means that if someday
you know God forbid the worst happens
the you know Jake and I disappear into
the jungle um the foundation is no
longer around it makes no difference the
entire ecosystem runs smoothly as if
nothing has changed that is true real
decentralization that there's no
dependency on the creators in the first
place in 10 years I want to see bit
tenser become the underlying protocol of
the entire AI ecosystem where it becomes
to the point where if somebody goes up
to a a venture capitalist and says hey I
want $100 million to do this XYZ the
first question will be why isn't this a
subnet why why isn't this part of the
bit tenser why are you doing this on
your own um in 20 25 years I think that
seeing bit tensor become as ubiquitous
as the internet or tcpip that's really
the that's the pie in the sky for me
right now we're in a moment of such a
supply shortage for GPU chips the fuel
that's basically enabling this current
revolution in in AI what success looks
like for bit tent for the next few years
is it's just ability to demonstrate that
it can absorb all of that Compu around
the world at a time when it's so hard to
access and then these big teams in the
web two space doing the leading AI
research Labs joining bit T so at some
point it just becomes inevitable becomes
inevitable because there's nowhere else
that you can reliably obtain this amount
of Compu
scale I don't think that any single
company has a monopoly on on the talent
necessary for producing intelligence
right now the best people are working at
proprietary companies they're raising
venture capital or they're working in
big Tech somewhere Apple Google meta
Facebook what have you and I don't think
that that's necessarily a bad thing
because that's kind of the way the world
is operating currently but what I would
hope to see would be the smartest
researchers the most talented developers
and all of the best data infrastructure
for training the the best models
actually running and being incentivized
on the benser network because I think
that that's kind of the most universally
Democratic way of producing the best
outcomes for Humanity I hope that in the
future I'm not
needed I hope that bit tenser stays true
to its
ideals and I hope that really everybody
that is here inside of the ecosystem
today the varying people there's so many
different types of people here that I
hope that they can be
aligned with a properly created
technology and it's a technology of
alignment and when we lose people or
some people get cut out of it I consider
that be the biggest failure of the
technology it's only successful if it
can express the disperate types of
people the diversity of people across
the globe so I hope that that in the
future there is the same people there
are today plus
more the bit tensor Community the bit
tensor Community bought me in and made
me feel so welcome it it's a it's a
strange Paradigm but I've never been
particularly involved I was not a big
gamer I've never been particularly
involved in forums or online communities
uh I usually just needed to get done
what I needed to get done on the
computer and then go and play off line
so this was very new for me to feel this
involved with the community and make
such strong what I would definitely
consider to be lifelong friends I mean
I've added to the oneand friends the
ones you can count on one hand through
the bit tenser Network and yet at the
same time we were all in it together for
the good of the network and as the
network grows we still find ourselves
building competing businesses and this
is quite interesting and I can't wish
for uh a better community Community to
do this with I have had conversations
that would not occur in any other
industry with my strongest competitors
where we sit there and have a
conversation about what we're doing how
we're doing it uh except that we are
going after the same users the same
audience doing many things in parallel
and yet still share information if we
feel it's to better the network in no
other industry would I alert my
strongest competitor because they're
doing something that might be
detrimental to the network I might just
sit back and watch them burn but no the
network is more important at this St
well at any stage to what we're doing
because we all rely on the success of a
network for the success of the
businesses that we're building so I
think the bit tensor Community breaks
all of the preh held assumptions I had
about what it means to Market a business
I use a small example of the fact that
before we even launched as a business a
member of the bit tenser Community had
scouted us out dug into all of our
channels and wrote a multi-page
paragraph on what we were doing as a
business before we told anyone what we
were doing I this guy knew more about my
business than I did before we launched
and that is the bit tensor community in
a in a microcosm our community is our
biggest asset and the more you like lean
into it the more you get from it the
community best in the world don't know
how it happened
um kind of think that there was a lot of
people involved that are quiet about it
that that brought in their
friends and made it just the most
interesting group of people ever in the
world I didn't do that I didn't create
that Community it it
arrived and I'm so glad it did
interestingly enough the community grow
and own a lot of the early people who
joined people like Roberts they found us
organically they were they were looking
for the problem of centralized AI on
GitHub and they accidentally found our
GitHub and they joined everyone's
extremely helpful everyone's very eager
to help new people understand the system
and a lot of them are people who have
been there for a long time um that have
just been you know they've learned the
ropes the community is the Cornerstone
the Bedrock without the community you're
nothing it's not only based upon money
it's based upon you know creating a
environment and an ecosystem to support
the open source and the decentralized
movement for artificial intelligence and
it's that directive that I think is the
like the north star of the ecosystem
that keeps all of the personalities
involved not only does the ecosystem
evolve but as the open source um
intelligence Community creates new tools
those are Incorporated and you see bit
tensor getting better and better and
also contributing to the community
around it that that supports it I think
the bit tenser Community has been uh one
of the best communities I've ever
seen the thing that I feel is most
exciting about the founders of the
project Allah Shabana and Jacob Steves
are that they are very very
mission-driven people and they deeply
care
about the combination of the philosophy
the long-term sort of consequences and
impact that bit tensor can have if it
becomes very successful as well as a
very strong grounding in a lot of the
challenges and sort of technical issues
that need to be addressed along the way
and and they both have the chops and the
ability to navigate those things I think
the community recognizes that as
well realizing that in a healthy
ecosystem in a multifaceted old
ecosystems like in Old growth forests
our concepts of Economics break down
because we have this idea in economics
that it's the survival of the fittest or
the most powerful or the most fast which
means you must dominate your
environment but in nature it's
actually who gives back to the ecosystem
the most that is given the most power in
the ecosystem our economic way of
thinking our surv like
our hyperco competitiveness is we've
we've taken I think the wrong
perspective of nature it's not can you
out compete it is can you out
contribute that's what it is in a
healthy ecosystem that's what it is a
healthy town the people that are most
valuable those that contribute the most
the most powerful the most fastest
strongest the biggest guns that's that
is cancerous that is an example of um an
ecosystem that is out of alignment that
is
unhealthy anybody can contribute to bit
tensor there is so many problems to
solve there is hundreds of different
companies in the benser ecosystem all of
them need someone just to bring good
energy because the system it's
effectively an organic Community we
don't have a marketing team we don't
have a sales team we don't have really
much of anything we're just developers
and Engineers interested in a problem
and we're solving it anybody who's
interested in the system and who has a
it meaning they have some towel or they
want to grow that towel or in some way
help contribute bring your best talents
and that's what we're allowing through
facilitating a decentralized system the
Legacy system is built for centralized
systems the decentralized world is only
just beginning to form and it's going to
be bigger than anything we've ever seen
before the nation state of Bitcoin that
we situate ourselves in the the
continent only 15 years old the world of
Empires and nation states and
centralized banking is 2,000 years old
so we have a long
trajectory we have a long way to go but
we have a lot of
time if you're somebody that is
overlooked this is your opportunity to
showcase that you're overlooked and go
far beyond what it would be potential if
you need to submit a resume we we want
everyone to come and work with us you
know come join come be I like to say
come be on our board of directors
then I
am I
am
hey hey
