n
I
a
w
a
he
you
oh
all
right hey
everybody hopefully you can see
me all
right all right here we are for uh
Doom's 30th anniversary
he you should still show as hidden on
stream here oh really okay let me see
what's
up oh yeah no you're there yeah I have
twitch open I see both of you all three
of
us yeah okay
um just get my camera
fixed how about this
all
right oh that doesn't
reset there you just lean back there we
go
okay cool well uh Hey everybody here we
are it's been 30 years Doom's been out
um we have David kraic here to moderate
this and uh think it's going to be some
pretty cool discussion with John here
John
carac and uh we have a a bunch of
questions here and I'm sure we'll be
reading the stream
and some people will probably throw some
extra questions in there we if we have
some
time oh Romero has audio on left
only how about
that left Channel Romero
nice
okay am might not love
channel it's always been trying to set
up a stream why you sounded quiet to us
earlier
yeah
yeah so it only comes stereo when you go
live let me let me tell it to just go uh
mono and there we go okay there it is
okay all right good
now I'm loud enough
great all right I guess we're ready to
go ready to roll
uh so David did you want to ask us some
questions uh oh geez I didn't prepare
for any of this yes I have uh I have a
number of questions for you both uh
thanks for letting me be here um let's
start it off by saying we're going to do
a follower only chat for the questions
not to get subscriptions but because
that'll kind of help our moderators uh
be able to stem the flow of all the
questions we see already coming in a bit
um what I'll do for this John and John
is uh for each question I think I'll
pose it to one of you but both of you
can answer I just figured I'll do that
to keep us from stampeding over each
other as we talk so uh to kick things
off obviously we're doing this on the
30th anniversary of Doom's release um
John car uh John carac as you think back
30 years to this day what are some of
the first memories that come to mind for
you so for this day it was always you
know Romero being in charge of getting
the the final final Build Together
getting it all ready and getting it out
to people but this was the culmination
of almost a year of work at that point
and we pretty much knew we were on the
Glide slope to this kind of explosive uh
reception of this we had had early
alphas and test things out that
different people had seen and we knew
what we had
and it was kind of a triumphant moment
for us because it was it was all
together we were proud of what we had
done and we knew it was going to land
really well we probably couldn't have
guessed that it landed as well as it did
but there was no doubt in our mind that
it was great at that
point yeah yeah it was uh I remember
that last 30 hour
day it was pretty crazy we we had the
last bug which had to do with the uh
timer uh overflowing or SL
underflow um that was a pretty that was
a pretty cool bug to solve cuz you
thought about it for a minute like why
would it be freezing up on some
machines and you went over and looked at
the code and when he fixed it it was
like that's been in the game since day
one when he put the timer interrupt in
there and you know there are related
bugs to that that I still see to this
day in programs where you see some games
where some of the Shader effects start
getting a little kitchy if the game's
been running for multiple days without a
reset just because floating Point winds
up starting to have issues when you keep
time in seconds and never reset it so
those let the game soak for multiple
days at a time bugs still bite people to
this
day y so I think the oh ROM I didn't
mean to interrupt you did you want to
continue no it was definitely it's a
very low-level bug and you you know the
whole game was was tied to
it but yeah it was it was amazing to
have the answer from a full yearlong
project that
quickly I think one of my favorite
stories from this time is you've all
talked about trying to upload the Doom
uh files to I believe it was the
University of Wisconsin's servers but
there were too many people in everybody
had to go out then they all came
flooding back in and they finally had to
leave so you could upload the game was
that your we'll start with John Romero
for this one was that the first time
you'd ever seen sort of a a live or live
is reaction to one of your games being
released that sort of
response we with Wolfenstein we were up
at 4 in the morning uploading it to a
BBS and and I think the only reaction we
saw was uh when we log into the BBS we
saw Wolfenstein 3D scroll up and ask you
text and and uh
and we're like all right it's it's
something that people are going to be
looking at we we uploaded it and was
like well it's time to go to sleep now
cuz we've been up all night but with
doom uh it was the first time that we
uploaded to the internet and uh and it
was Jay who did the uploading like we
started at 2: in the afternoon cuz you
know we had to get that last bug uh
fixed and tested and it and it was the
first time we had people waiting like
that in fact I think within the week uh
before we had uh people calling the
office randomly asking when it was going
to go up and we're like how do you guys
even get
through but it was it was the first time
we could actually like hear from people
and see that people are really excited
about something like
live yeah now the 90s really was an era
of uh technical scaling issues yet to be
addressed where everything was very
adhawk and it's not like you know you
really can't break YouTube or Facebook
today but a lot of these things things
were a specific machine sitting in a
specific office with a specific network
connection and it was a time where
everybody would find it's like oh you
know Doom blew this up or slash do blew
this other thing up and finding all of
those things you know we're in an era
standing on the shoulders of giants now
the fact that you can just drop
worldwide releases that literally a
billion people can get now but there was
a lot of learning along the way no
especially about networking because that
was when people first started getting
Network Hardware home and then learning
how it even worked you know um you know
and with doom supporting uh you know ipx
on a local area network you know that
made a lot of people learn a lot of
stuff pretty
quickly I'm glad you mention networking
because that brought me to a question I
wanted to ask we'll jump ahead here a
little bit um obviously Doom influenced
many players to learn how to network
their computers together to play
Deathmatch that was a very new thing but
you you couldn't have known at the time
that you were releasing not only one of
the greatest games ever one of the most
influential but there are a lot of
people who by playing doom and learning
how to network that encouraged them to
enter careers in game development and
other it Fields I was wondering we'll
start with John carac um when was the
first time you realized that Doom in
particular was influencing people Beyond
just hey I love this game and I love
playing this
game so yeah that like you say the
networking was something where Doom
encouraged a lot of people to figure out
the hardware things figure out how to
upgrade their Hardware get the extra
things installed and then especially the
networking where we had only had a
couple years of going through from the
earliest super janky networks you know
we had like parallel port network
adapter things and we were trying to do
things in the very earliest days and
then finally getting the the thin net
coax ethernet system set up it really
was early days and a lot of people did
wind up in sort of network
Administration posts and wiring up
became the network guy in their office
and many offices wound up having uh you
know a suspect business case put forward
for why they all needed Network shortly
after Doom came out and you know it was
interesting to contrast with I I think
Quake led a lot more people into
software development careers where that
that level of programmability kind of
launched a lot of Game Dev careers but
Doom launched a lot of kind of like it
professional
careers yeah I've heard I've heard that
so many times uh people saying I I got a
job because of Doom I had to learn how
to network the computers and install the
drivers and everything and uh yeah it
was it's it and I meet those people at
Tech conferences nowadays you know like
uh we are developers uh in Berlin you
know there's so many so many people
there and so many of them got their
start because they needed to play Doom
networked cuz it was cooler than a
modem so for this one I'll start with
John Romero uh as I understand it you
two had a conversation somewhat recently
where you realized there was something
that would have been possible I believe
in Wolfenstein 3D but you didn't realize
it until years later what was that oh
that was when we were talking about um
it it just had occurred to me that the
push wall hack into the Wolfstein engine
that was
inelegant actually could have been
solved if we had treated the the uh
secret doors as as regular door doors
you know secret walls is doors and just
had them open like a door uh instead of
having to like push push a block through
the Matrix and everything that would
have been a An Elegant design solution
for something like that like the way
that the engine already operated and
would not have caused
headaches although in the end I do look
back at that as one of those kind of
growth moments for me because I was like
this is going to be a mess to put this
in and I you know Romero and Tom were
leaning on me about it and I finally was
like oh all right and it was absolutely
the right thing to do the the game was
so limited and yes in hindsight it would
have been faster to just like have it be
a sliding door on the front thing but
the grinding push wall sound is pretty
iconic for Wolfenstein in that era and
you know I did have to go through this
learning process about I you know the
clean coat isn't the point the point is
you know creating something of value for
you know for all the users and sometimes
you really should just suck it up and do
something that's a little bit ugly
because it's going to be awesome and
it's going to be worth it there yep and
and it was funny because before that
everything went so smoothly because you
know the sides scrolling engines you
know you only needed so much
functionality that could enable so much
to happen so we didn't really need like
oh I need you to do this crazy thing in
in you know in uh in a in parallaxing or
or whatever we were doing in Keen um
because it there was plenty of
functionality there and then but when we
got to that point it was like we're
missing something and it's a secret and
this is probably the best way to
represent a secret in the world that we
have here yeah and that really was
something where Wolfenstein was done
under these you know extreme almost
extraordinary design constraints there
just wasn't that much you could do and
that was where it was a clear sense of
crossing a threshold with doom where you
went from something where there was just
this tiny puzzle box that you could mess
with in the tile based Wolfenstein I
Rise of the Triad those types of games
but just the extra things that were
enabled in Doom opened up and pretty
much unlimited creative box where again
we're still seeing levels out to this
day where people are doing novel and
interesting things with it and that's
that's kind of an interesting
theoretical thing to contemplate I talk
about kind of the Turing completeness of
a creative expression where once you've
got a certain set of tools then you can
build an unlimited number of things
versus just more stuff that looks
exactly the same
yep and Doom's still being pushed even
today even with the original the
original um data structure uh people are
still hacking that data structure to do
interesting things which is which is
pretty pretty cool I mean I even did
some new stuff with sigil that I hadn't
seen in any wads it's like it's just
it's up to it's it's like design can do
this you know and uh and there's so much
that the engine did already that uh
people are still that's I think that's
one of the reasons why people are still
making LEL because it's the easiest way
to make something that looks great like
if you want to get anything more complex
than this you're talking 10 times the
work usually yeah it really was a a
painful step function for the kind of
people approaching the creative
threshold with Quake where it really was
10 times harder just to make something
that looked decent versus Doom was at
this really sweet spot of everybody
could draw in this 2D view I mean maybe
we could have done a few more things
adding curves or something in uh in the
view but it was just this this bad step
function going to full General 3D uh it
just made it not so much something
everybody does just on a lark but
something you set out time to almost
trace a career arc when you want to
start building mods for the newer games
yep that means it takes a really long
time to use these engines
today yep well I have to say real quick
just as a player um I love that that
worked out whenever I would find a
secret in Wolfenstein 3D when I saw a
chunk of the wall sliding back and hear
that stone grinding on Stone I really
felt like almost Indiana Jones but with
an SMG like that sense of accomplishment
and Discovery was so strong because of
that so I think it worked out for the
best yeah and those are the core game
design development things where you want
to Envision what the player feels there
and that was one of the great things for
Wolfenstein that sense of you get up
there you're running around and then all
of a sudden there is that slight move
mov on the screen and the grinding sound
and that is just like directly punching
the reward button on the player
yep it was funny it was it was so funny
how badly we knew we needed that too cuz
making the levels for wolfen sign had to
be the most boring level design job ever
cuz it was so simple you know there was
some fun functionality with making the
characters you know move in P in paths
and stuff but um other than that you
know Keen was actually more rewarding to
make levels for but when we got the
secret walls that was more that that
became a little bit more interesting to
a designer yeah that was an interesting
thing actually where with doom we had
lost the kind of pathing enemies
functionality and there was some
interesting you know kind of emergent
properties about how the level would
play differently uh just based on how
long you took in one place or another
yep so uh quick plug for John Romero
real quick this Plucky upstart developer
uh
congratulations on the release of sigil
2 today I can't think of a more perfect
occasion do you want to tell people real
quick if they haven't found it or played
it yet where they can find out more
about sigil 2 yeah um so sigil we we
spell sigil 3 sixes in the middle but to
make it shorter it's si6
i.com um or if you just do a do a search
for Doom sigil you'll find the the page
and there's a midi version and it's free
and then Jimmy Paddock did the the mides
for it like he did for sigil one and
he's he's a really great musician and uh
and then there's a on the same page
there's a link to get the uh MP3 version
which is made by Thor uh sigil one was
buckee head sigil 2 was Thor who's A A
pretty new uh composer who's just like
you're hearing it in the background here
um and to me his his stuff is really
really great so you can go there and
just choose whichever version you want
we also have big boxes um so you can
actually buy a box again and for a game
and not just a little DVD you know
plastic case so um yeah so we still
funny mentioning mentioning boxes there
remember like back in the days of Doom
and everything we had all the
discussions about packaging and it was
so important how you sat on the game
store shelves and there was that whole
bit about there were these big boxes
that didn't store very well but you're
trying to push your competitors off the
shelves and do strange and things there
and I remember at the time again one of
the things I look back is not uh not
fully getting it and I was saying we
could just sell this in a brown paper
bag and it'll still sell and it'll be
fine I but of course there is this whole
optimization process to the marketing
and presentation and it's like something
of sufficient value can succeed without
it but you might as well do a good job
optimizing how your you know your
company and your business presents
everything and all that does matter and
that is kind of a lost era of some of
the displays and things where of course
now everybody gets it just online and
there's a lot to be said for it it's net
positive there's more positives than
negatives but there are little bits of
things that are lost from bygone
ages yeah um especially games that used
to have the cool old little uh plastic
pieces in it like little little glowing
Stones Maps were the the thing that
always stood out to me is the ultimate
pack I actually have ass signed ultimate
two map on the wall behind
me cuz those those cloth Maps were
awesome and so we're all they called
them fies or chachkies or trinkets or
whatever you want but those were the
coolest ones and uh and also just like
the books that were in there that made
those boxes really heavy it's like
there's a reason why there's a box and
then it just like everything became
digital um so now like when we put out a
box we actually try and put stuff back
into it like fill it up with more stuff
um just because it's for collectors how
that went where you know back in the old
days we would think about how nobody
reads the manuals but now that games are
super sophisticated and I look at things
like you know Diablo or Minecraft or
things like that and it's like how do
people learn everything about this game
they have to troll it off of YouTube and
figure out different things there where
in the old days we had these games that
were you know tens or hundreds of
kilobytes in some cases with like a fat
ELD instruction manual in it like the
Wizardry instruction manual or something
it's funny how that's gone
yeah yeah actually multiple manuals if
you look at Ultima like five or four
they had like four different books in
there for different things like the
magic spells and stuff it's pretty
cool so we uh we're chat we're seeing
your questions and I'm going to pluck a
really good one from there and I'll
direct this first at John carac uh
Graphics have come a very long way but
what do you think about enemy Ai and
where that will go in the next or where
it could go in the next 5 to 10 years
so that's something that we we did talk
about it a lot in the days where we
could have made enemies a lot smarter uh
even with the constraints that we had
back then but it it is not as good of an
idea as a lot of people might think
because everything the world has to feel
like it revolves around the player for
the types of games that we're doing I
mean there's something to be said for
games where you're exploring a world
that exists with or without you but the
enemies are most L there to have an
effect on the player not to efficiently
do something and not to go about their
lives and you know I mean Doom did get
knocked for the enemy closets and things
like that where you're basically just
throwing an enemy out at the player but
um for the types of games that we were
doing you don't really want particularly
smart enemies you don't want them to do
pathologically dumb looking things that
break that you know the players kind of
immersion in something but you do not
really want them taking a hiding spot
flanking the player and sniping them
from behind that's not the enjoyable
thing uh some people do you know do
enjoy that like okay I'm going to take
this hardest hardcore thing that you're
throwing at me but most people want to
go in and you know Rambo their way
through everything and that doesn't take
a whole lot of intelligence with the
enemies now we are approaching a new era
with the way the artificial intelligence
stuff is going right now where the world
of actual deep characters is going to be
very different than it's been in the
past years where you can create
something today that does have entire
deep backstories that uh that will for
certain types of games be very
transformative but I you know I did
always fight about uh fight against
doing a lot of depth to things because
we were so constrained on the resources
that we could put into this uh it was a
very small team and A lot of times this
option to do something more
sophisticated or deeper I nowadays you
look at something like Diablo or one of
the great things where they just have
enough resources and enough people they
can add death to lots of things but our
tiny little team if we went super deep
on something it would not have been the
best use of all of our time because we
had to be thinking about anything we do
we want to make sure that most of the
people playing the game actually get to
experience we don't want to just do
something that only a handful of people
would go through and like that was one
of the things that John and I did always
used to kind of argue about class-based
mechanics and obviously in the modern
world you've got the time to to do all
that it adds a lot to it but you know in
the early days I was always afraid that
well if you spend a lot of time building
four or six or eight different classes
then that's going to be a lot of work
that most of the people that play
through the games won't see it and can't
we just find something else to do that
everybody everybody's going to get some
value out of um and so yeah the AI stuff
is definitely it's the future but back
then I think we did the right calls yeah
in fact even games today having AI that
that easy is is totally preferable to
players you know there's there's some
games that will add drones in as a as a
Target and people hate that because they
move all over the place and it's it's
like it's hard to aim you know people
want to be able to aim at stuff having
more of something dumb is more
preferable to having one super smart AI
so um yeah I think you know people
people are still trying to push the
envelope on having smarter enemies and
it's always like well that's too smart
people want to turn it
off so I think we made the right
decision in Doom having having enemies
that moved at the speed that they did
which was typ typically pretty slow um
but we just had huge numbers of them and
that was more interesting because he had
to be more strategic and uh and that was
something that we had to struggle back
and forth as technology improved where
we the enemy count went down a lot in
quake and the game was you know Less Fun
in some ways because of that we had to
try to crutch up for it there because of
course what you really wanted was that
same walking into a room and mowing down
complete hordes of
enemies
y so you two are often referred to as
the the Lenin and McCartney of video
games um John Romero I'll start with you
what do you think that
is um well let him and McCartney were a
really great creative team that made
really popular music that everybody
liked and I think you know a lot of our
early games uh were very well liked
because I think that we had you know
there was push and pull on the creative
side and the tech side um you know we
don't want to take forever writing
something that that you know writing
Tech that would have been not optimal
for what what we were going for and I
think that a lot of our games focused on
speed as as like the goal when we
started getting into um 3D you know we
started focusing on what is what is the
thing that we can do really well that
other people can't and it was uh just
John's technical Mastery over VG's chain
4 mode and uh and just you know taking
writing a design making a game design
around that speed and making something
that was just increasingly more fun with
each game and so I think you know we
both we both did what we did uh in the
service of making a really great game
and and uh I think we also spoke the
same language because I you know I'm
also programmed so it's like when you
have a designer that can speak code it
it is a lot easier to know what what you
need to compromise on instead of some
coming up with a a very unrealistic idea
for a design thing that you know you
know a lot of times the designers don't
know what can be done or even a simple
like a simple feature could be hugely
complex but change a couple words and
it's like oh we can do that right now
you know it's like unless you know we
you know so I think it's just that we we
both you know we both worked really well
because we we we knew we knew how to do
our jobs pretty well and and work
together and make the right
decisions yeah and so I I'm not really a
music guy so forgive me if I butcher
this but I did smile I read some about
the early history of The Beatles about
how they might have looked like a blowup
success but they went through this long
grinding period of mastering their craft
uh you know playing live and that was I
think some of the most valuable part of
our early time where you know we cranked
out all these games at soft disk the
monthly subscription software we went
through so many iterations and this idea
of you know you don't start out just
with the perfect world changing breakout
thing there you grind through a whole
lot of process and you learn a whole lot
uh while you're doing it now of course
there the you know the Beatles analogy
there uh we were probably the first sort
of Rockstar game developers thing and it
was like this novel new thing and you
know Romero leaned into it a bit and it
was I you know it was a thing that the
world was fascinated with this video
games were no longer just this uh the
Atari 2600 that you plugged into your
your TV it was something that all of a
sudden actually looked cool enough for
mainstream press to be talking about and
you know anytime the mainstream press is
GNA kind of turn the eye of Sauron on
you there's going to be the the focus on
the the interpersonal drama and figuring
out everything else that they can do to
kind of make an interesting or exciting
story about it and I think that just it
was almost inevitable and we were there
at the right
time
yeah yeah well I I just you know
anecdotal um for me as a as a player I
remember you know reading magazines like
Nintendo Power which is obviously very
insell but they would always talk about
like companies like konami's Ninja
Turtles or Nintendo's Mario but I
remember it was you two and maybe Ed
Boon and John Tobias were the first time
I kind of realized oh the people
associated with the games you hadn't
really seen links like that before
especially on magazines your names on
the magazines rather than just the
studio this kind of amorphous entity
almost well I do still remember that
classic Electronic Arts advertisement in
the the late 80s that was even you know
kind of before our time when they first
put the developers front and center and
I and yeah Japan probably lagged you
know the rest of the World by quite a
bit with being company focused over kind
of Creator designer or developer it's
even a weirder thing the developer Focus
where the natural course of the world
would have been to settle in on the
designers like the film directors and uh
and the performers and so on but I the
fact that we were independent and we
were bootstrapped gave us a lot of
freedom I me we made a lot of mistakes
on things but it did allow us to to kind
of evolve differently than coming up
inside one of the big
corporations yeah yeah it was treated
kind of like books you know and in music
it's like oh this is another creative
thing and and we you know talk about the
artist trip Hawkins was all about
putting artists FR in center and and
even their marketing was like an album
you know make an album covers of of
games and you know we um I think you
know our team was so small you know we
shipped Doom with six people at the very
end but it was five people most of of
its development and uh and we did have a
really small team Quake was like 10
people so uh so you could actually get
somebody's name but you know teams are
so big nowadays that uh there's so many
people involved that you can't just say
it's like one person you know because so
many people make massive impacts on the
game in lots of different
ways so you had both made roughly 20
games or so before Doom but what was the
impetus to to change your entire
development process for the game that
would come to be known as Doom John
karmac I'll start with you can you just
talk about what that change was and and
why it was
implemented so there were a few things
kind of pushing us along the way where
we had just moved from dos development
to our next step workstations which was
significant win for us we had like real
software development uh
capabilities and then we knew that the
next step in the graphics was going to
be getting us away from this Block Level
I mean like John said the I you know
Wolfenstein was not a great thing from A
Creative Design standpoint uh we we
learned the flow of a game and what we
could do there but it was very very
limiting and uh this pitch and we had
even seen like the Intermediate half
step with shadowcaster about even if you
add floors and ceilings and some other
things to it that the tile grid is just
not really where you want to go so this
next step was going towards this kind of
cad-like line development and that
followed you know reasonably naturally
out of just what we needed to do we knew
the blocks were the Tyranny that we
needed to get away from so we needed
something that was going to to have this
uh more analog like nature and so that
pretty much decided what the the of
development flow was going to look like
there we needed a fancy Custom Tool and
then what we were doing with the
workstations and cross development I
decided how much the flow went although
it was very interesting to see that once
the open source stuff got out the rest
of the world did do just fine developing
a lot of things with more conventional
Doss tools than we
used yeah and we not only changed the
the system that we coded on which was
next step um you know dos just became
the Target machine we just ran the game
on we didn't really even do anything
else on it all of the art was done uh
obviously Deluxe paint 2 but but it was
rotoscoped and we'd never done that
before it was like let's do another
let's try another way to get Graphics
into the computer because we're going to
have even more than we had with
Wolfenstein so it's like what if we put
a weapon up in front of a video camera
and you know so he changed even that
method that that workflow was totally
changed from I'm just going to pixelart
this from nothing
and uh at one point we even just hired
somebody to clean up pixels from the
grabbing of of stuff because there was a
wall and we didn't have a green screen
or anything so we just grabbed the wall
and the and everything and just had
somebody come in and start killing the
pixel you know transparenting the P
pixels um that was really different um
and even making levels in the way that
we would you know having to write a tool
uh on next up for level design that was
that was much easier to deal with than
uh doing it in Doss and uh and what was
useful about that workflow was was being
able to have the editor open on on next
St and having Doss running the game and
if I see that there's a problem I just
leave it running and I just fix it on
next step and I just keep going through
a level and just fixing as as I'm going
through it's like both of them are
running and that was just like such a
like iterative speed you know if you can
increase iteration while you're
developing in any in any way especially
in a core Loop you know you're you're
making you can get through with stuff so
much faster you can find the the the
problems and and just solve things much
much quicker so I'm always focused on
like how long does it take yeah that
really hurt us in Quake the fact that
you know taking that next step in
graphics Fidelity for the freedom for
the six degree of Freedom stuff the
iteration times just sucked you know it
was really bad with the offline
processing I mean yes we got the
Glorious looking lighting and we had our
freedom to have relatively high
performance six degree of freedom but uh
the in developers were at least
reasonably um responsible in keeping
them to like a half hour development but
a half hour processing times but I know
many of our lies they built what they
wanted and didn't pay attention and they
had things that were running overnight
for their processes which just meant
that tuning the levels was just
ridiculously less efficient yeah bsp and
maps and lighting Maps was was super
painful we even bought like Alpha
machines to just grind on these things I
think it the lighting in his that was
the the thing that Doom of course had
bsp and that part only took a minute or
two even on the the Quake levels and
yeah there was one period where I it was
kind of neat where I thought if we just
doubled the size of our at that point in
SGI origin server we would have squeaked
into the top 500 supercomputers as a
game development company but we were
yeah we were kind of leaders in being
able to throw some of the hardware at a
problem yep yeah and the um and it's
interesting because we were talking
about the fact that you know that big
jump into 3D was was one of the what was
one of the things that kind of took its
toll on the on the um on the team just
because of how long it took and that we
could have actually done two games and
taken two steps in Tech instead of
putting it all into one and uh yeah that
would that actually would have been
pretty interesting we could have been
doing like um you know internet gameplay
uh with a with the you know the Doom 2
engine you know plus plus a little bit
more techken that before going full 3d
with a game right after that you know
yeah so there's I I like kind of this
retrospective Tech speculation about
what we could have done where we could
have taken like the networking aspects
Andor the um the modding the quaky
aspects and basically done that in a
doom generation engine or you could have
added things like uh arbitrary 3D models
still inside the do maps version of
things keeping the map development
faster and not doing the kind of uh
light map lighting and there's a couple
different steps that we could have taken
there and I think we probably did not
pick the optimal Direction but we kept
wanting to make this just throw
everything at it and the idea that if
you can think about something that's
going to be better we should just strive
our hardest to do that and it was it was
pretty rough where Doom came together it
was kind of a perfect storm of pretty
much everything went right with doom yep
yeah and I I when you look at the
mountain the Everest of Quake I don't
think people really appreciate the
insane amount of technology that you
took on with that I mean even adding
quak C on top of Internet client server
on top of full 3d I mean it was so much
Tech you know uh it it was it was a
whole new engine you know it wasn't Doom
at all it none of it you know it was all
brand
new yeah and that's one of the things
that while I do look back and say how
how I could have made Doom more
efficient or made Quake like the real
question was Quake technically ran on a
486 but nobody could really play it well
on a 486 and you could have we could
have had a different Tech stack that was
more doomlike that could have played
fluidly there but I have found over the
years that as much as I might want to
have made something more efficient every
time we really went out of our way with
like the CGA versions of keen or
whatever it turned out that the market
didn't really reward you for making
things work better on less capable
hardware and you were usually rewarded
by going ahead and pushing in let's go
ahead and do the require an FPU require
a GPU something like that and I still
wonder in technical situations today
where I kind of struggle with that about
do you ignore a giant user base uh and
just concentrate on the cool fun Cutting
Edge stuff or are you doing yourself or
your user base a disservice and I'm
honestly still not at peace with exactly
what the right call for that is yeah but
you know I think at least between your
engines and and my designs that we did
that we did okay we did the best that we
could certainly did okay
yeah um I'll start with John carac on
this one uh of course one of the big
advancements from Wolfenstein 3D to Doom
was that rooms could be of variable
height there were lifts there were
stairs um and that of course led to
Doom's famous abstract level design uh
i' would love to hear from both of you
and again starting with karmac how did
the
engine make that design style possible
what was the flow
there so in terms of what we got out of
it I'm you know I do every few years
I'll go back and play Doom for some
reason most recently in virtual reality
on one of the quest ports and and I do
always come back as going that episode
one of Doom still holds up really well
it's still like really feels great and
and it looks good for what it's doing
but I did feel that like the second and
third episode when we got more abstract
and like going into hell and trying to
it felt more like Wolfenstein or
catacombs 3D trying to uh say that this
block is a tree when it's you know it's
just a block it's it's really not a tree
so that that sort of industrial um
industrial military complex stuff played
very very well to what the engine could
do and I I am happy still just seeing
screenshots of the old stuff with good
crisp Graphics uh rendered out well and
yeah why you would have this weird
zigzaggy passage in a you know in a
military base it doesn't actually make
sense but somehow the design aesthetic I
thought for the the installation side
still feels good and it's still uh still
held up and I don't know if I can kind
of decompress and analize that anymore
but we found something that worked well
with the lighting the combination of the
geometry and the lighting and those were
really the two aspects that balanced off
against each other and then the dynamism
the fact that I you know we could just
be moving these things continuously all
around doing sort of crazy things like
that kind of it I you know it found
clearly a sweet spot that still feels
pretty decent 30 years
later yeah the
um the we did not think about the the
problem that we had to solve with the uh
the the theill that you gave us in the
engine with the non-orthogonal walls and
the Heights and lighting control we
didn't know that what we were trying
what we could make was something that no
one had ever seen before because there
was no game that was an example of what
we could do all the way back to the 70s
every every time you saw a 3D World it
was 90° walls in hallways they were all
maze games just like Wolfenstein was a
maze game you know um in in m you know
Wolfenstein was so great because you
know you could actually move around
smoothly in real time in most games that
were 3D like that were in chunk steps
they you moved you to the next Matrix
block so that was like the big
breakthrough but with doom it was like
we got to make something that no one's
ever seen before and it was really
mentally it was difficult because we
never had an example and that if you
just you know just looking at the data
structure of the line defs and sector
defs that is all the ability that that
engine had but had massive amounts of
ability in that and and it and it took
time that all of our earliest concepts
of Doom was 90° walls and like you know
the first levels were the same height as
Wolfenstein and they were bright and
they just had better looking wall you
know floors and ceilings but you know it
took time to solve that problem and I
remember when I was doing that on E1 M2
and I was just like okay I'm done with
doom it and I need to make levels and we
don't have anything that takes advantage
at the engine yet it's just like reusing
it but it's not like it's not next level
it's not nextg so I made this room in E1
M2 since that was kind of like the test
bed level and uh and it and it wasn't it
wasn't even great looking like like it
looks much better on release but when I
made it it was just like we knew what it
meant but like I think anyone else
looking in would go like how's how how's
that really different from Wolfenstein
it's like little subtle ways make you
can see the potentials there you know
and um yeah so it was it was it was uh
you know that's how like basically all
the games that came out after that could
could try and mimic worlds better than
these 90° wall uh engines had had done
before that um but yeah it was it was uh
and and also E1 M2 was the one that had
the uh the um recursive stairway that uh
that killed the sector list that you had
and then he had to like come up with
vsps yeah Al then it was interesting how
the structure of the limitations of the
system there did really turn out to be a
sweet spot where lots of people could
make levels in that and we really did
see kind of painfully getting into quake
and beyond that there were a lot of
potentially great game designers that
just hit their limit in terms of
compositional aesthetic I in terms of
like what something's going to look like
when you've got the ability to do full
six deegree Freedom modeling you not
only need to be a game designer you need
to be an architect or a photog rer
working through your composition and the
structure of Doom was again right at
that sweet spot where it helped you
along by keeping you from wasting time
doing some crazy things that you would
have had to be a master of a different
craft to actually make pay off yeah
which is basically games that came after
us had teams that had different phases
of level development because they all
recognized that that would make better
levels like dark Forces had a lighting
artist and they had artists that
actually made made the the you know the
level designers made the shapes and then
the artist came in and textured the
walls and then somebody else lit the
areas it was like a proper
workflow I'll I'll aim this next one at
John Romero um a lot of people ask me
you know I've been doing narrative
design as well as other types of writing
kind of off and on for the last 15 years
and they ask me what do I need to know
about writing to get a job in video
games and I tell them well you need to
know a lot about telling a story through
environmental design because no one just
wants to read a book in the middle of a
video game and the example I always give
them is the very first screen of Doom
where you start in this empty room it's
quiet and there's a corpse of a marine
whom you probably knew about a few
seconds earlier and he's dead and that's
a great story so John Maro what went
into designing the story of that one
room that first screen
specifically uh so that that level got
done last you know it was it was it was
important to you know after you learn
everything about
the game that you're making it's the
smartest thing to do is to make sure
that that first level has everything
packed into it that you know the player
needs to understand about getting
through the rest of the game so E1 had
gone through a lot of revision the you
know there were rooms like the um the
computer room after the first door was
completely different than than the room
that you see now like 100% different and
uh and it just needed more revision and
at the very end it was like this is the
last room
uh originally we had a story where four
Marines are around a poker table when
pandemonium breaks out and it was going
to be multiplayer and all that stuff
instead um I basically needed to what I
wanted to show the player was you're
you're in a base you're in you know this
Tech base that you can look outside and
see that you're you know not on Earth
you can see that there's a sky which was
new tech you know for us like we never
had a sky in anything before so that was
exciting to people um it was it was for
me it was like important to show that
you can you have a destination you can
see out the window where you're going to
go and where you want to go and that you
can actually get attacked by an a by an
imp from all the way across the level as
well it's like oh that's what those
things do or there's something over
there that's doing something towards me
um and then having that up up you know
up the stairs on the left hand side into
that room where you can see outside
again and uh it gives you just a good
feeling for a space and it's not very
big but at that time people were just
learning how to navigate 3D spaces so it
couldn't really be too complex like that
first door was a big deal to a lot of
people like how do I what do it looks
like a door what do I do you know um and
then you open it up and there's two
characters like firing at you and uh you
know just two puny humans but still it
was like okay now you now you're going
to press the button to to shoot things
so it was like I'm trying to tell a
story without like narrative we had no
no no text popping up on the screen
saying you're in the hanger you know
like none of that um but it was uh you
know it's like you got some blue carpet
which is not something you see mostly in
Doom as that blue carpet like you see in
that first room and maybe a few other
ones um but yeah it was about it was
about teaching the player a bunch of the
mechanics and the environment that
they're going to be spending the time in
and uh and it was a really good just you
know it was a good training Wheels kind
of room that first room and that first
level making it easy like here here's
only two enemies really it's just those
the soldiers and the Imp and the Imp was
like the big scary thing so I put him up
on a on a Ledge so he couldn't come and
get you um but yeah the whole thing was
baby steps through that first the first
uh the whole first level and kind of
established my idea for a horseshoe
design where you start here and you end
you know rout basically just look to the
right you're going to be ending up over
there so it's not far
yeah Gamers did not have I you know the
rich history of what's expected in games
that they have today I mean it is that
thing about opening the door was a big
problem and challenge for a lot of
people I remember Tim Willet one of the
later designers had commented about how
he walked around that first room for a
long time until finally you know he hit
the right thing and that door opened up
and His World changed and that just all
we had was that one basic use action and
it's still took some education to get
people on and then when we went to in
Quake with the full looking up and down
there were huge questions and debates
about what people would be able to to
handle because we would see people that
would just get stuck looking at the
floor of the ceiling and it would be
horrible but now everybody does it it's
as natural as walking yeah it was mouse
mouse look was turned off because uh I
remember we spent almost the whole
almost the whole development of of Quake
not having look up and and down be
controlled by the mouse that way we had
some automatic looking up and down we
went upstairs and downstairs and we used
the the page up and page down Keys like
heretic to kind of look up and down and
we're just trying to figure out how do
we how do we do this until finally it
was like default with it springloaded
you know where you Mouse look look up
and then have it Snap Back Down When You
released we were so worried about that
people stuck looking to at the ceiling
or the floor we had seen it with our own
eyes and it was bad for a user when that
happened yep yeah I remember um whenever
you were looking up and down when you
had that control as soon as you start
moving it started to move the camera
back back up back to Center because it
was such a problem with people not
understanding that they like this is how
you control your whole head you know um
but you know it was it was really like
the funny thing is it's not the very
first Mouse look game I thought it was
but uh Terminator Rampage actually had
Mouse Lick in it and uh and I was I
remember we had seen that game at some
point it was a solid field polygon
game might have been the same
year yes I remember critiquing all of
the pixel cracks between everything and
not having sub pixel accuracy on all the
vertices and all this laundry list of
stuff that I was going through that that
we do right in Doom T
Junctions
yeah so just not oh go ahead I was just
gonna say that was one of the one of the
things about our engine um and I don't
even think that John and I had long
discussions about it cuz I think we both
just understood that the engine is the
you know that's our that's our world
that's a player's world and you want it
to feel as solid as possible like it's
there's no texture Shimmer in our game
you don't walk up to a texture and watch
it pixels stretch and you don't watch
them shift around like there's some bad
math happening and uh and that made it
made it feel more solid and more
immersive and uh and it to us I think it
was just common sense like yeah you just
don't want technical problems in the
engine at all like to be able to tell
that you know that there's anything
wrong and I'm still making levels in my
spare time for Doom and it's just super
super solid it was such a solid engine
and also Quake like when the grenade
bounces off a wall it it feels like it's
a real solid world you know it's it's
not like just some little stick that's
bouncing around somewhere with bad
physic you know it actually feels really
good yeah that was always a great deal
of Pride for me and this the solidity of
the worlds the ID games had a feel to
them I mean even in Wolfenstein where
there's not many things going on but
that carried through from Wolfenstein to
doomed to Quake where maybe there would
be some more kind of flashy things you
might do but if they didn't feel solid I
didn't want to do them and in hindsight
you know I I was probably pushed a
little bit further on that than I if I
could go back I would bend a little bit
more for in the name of kind of cool
flashy flash stuff I that might not be
quite as solid but it was it was my look
and my vibe for things and uh and it it
stood us
well yep so we're just about we're we're
creeping up to the five minute marker
before we have to wind down this hour
obviously has been flying by so I'll try
to get in a couple more questions um I
think the biggest one is you know Doom
means so much to many people you both
made so many foundational foundational
games from Kean Wolfenstein Doom Quake
but um Doom seems to be maybe extra
special I don't want to make you choose
between your children or anything but
the the community even today is still so
active I wonder what is it about Doom
that is that is so special to you or
maybe the first memory of Doom's
development that comes from to mind and
John carel start with
you so I mean I would agree I think that
Doom is probably the most cultural
iconic thing that we did where it did
seem like this perfect storm of
everything Landing right and there's
everything can be improved I mean I
could have made everything better the
graphics the networking and the gameplay
and all of it could have been better but
we talk about like S curves where you've
got a senoidal Improvement and doom is
like way up on this curve where you
could push a lot harder and not make
much absolute difference in it it was
you know as close to the perfect game
you know anything that I think that we
made where Quake was much more ambitious
and it did not reach all of its goals
and it probably did like I said earlier
lead to more careers and software
development there's more software
developers and game developers that
would look back on quake as the thing
that um that kind of pushed them into
the their life path but Doom landed
broader for you know for almost everyone
just like recently I was talking to a
musician he was like oh you made doom
and that was something that had had
stuck with him and you know at this age
now 30 years on everybody's aged up and
of course for the kids now they've got
their new generations of games but you
know now you run into the the CEOs of
the major corporations that are like oh
that was formative in my college Years
so it was something where it's rare to
have things come together and probably
exceed even your initial views for we
didn't get all the things that we
thought we wanted at the beginning but
the Su total impact of it really was
greater than you know certainly I I had
high expectations for it and I think
Doom as the full holistic release and
culture around it exceeded anything that
I
imagined yeah I totally agree with that
you know one of one of I think one of
the interesting differences with the
Doom development or with Doom's
development than any other game that we
had made together was the earlier games
were like training Wheel games like we
were really making them fast like these
are games were being done in two months
sometimes one month and you know so we
learned a lot there and with Wolfenstein
we finally had the time to just spend as
much time as we wanted on a game and for
us four months to a shareware release
was crazy time you know like it was
twice as long as we ever spent before um
and with doom because I think just
because of our ambitious um start with
this uh cross development Next Step uh
systems and the the the scanning that
we're going to do with the with all of
the models and and everything we for the
only time really said this game has to
be the best thing that we can imagine
playing and that was you know
multiplayer was one of those things that
was like I've never made played a
multiplayer game ever like doom and and
that was one of those things that we
didn't we didn't even put that in until
late until October and I remember when
it was was in your office and I was like
oh man we don't have multiplayer yet and
it was like oh  that's right I got
to get that book out and learn ipx and
uh that was so fast like nowadays if
you're going to build a multiplayer game
you're doing it on day one like you
don't do it at the end of shipping a
game but I we had demos earlier and you
know the multiplayer if you could do
Demos in some ways you could do the
peer-to-peer networking so it's not as
crazy uh you know as it would sound
really starting in some massive
established game engine just hacking it
in because yes that's the that's the
classic fan request for game developers
it's like oh can't you add multiplayer
now and that's completely unfair thing
to ever say to a game developer yep and
the and the funny thing about the demos
which is like I don't know if you've
read uh like speedr running has been a
thing for a long time since doom and the
the the the speedrunning history books
are like Doom is what started speedr
running because you can now save and
load your demos and I looked back at
that I'm like we could have just speedr
running could have started 1990 with
Kean because we' had all
that yeah that whole looking back and
saying when things that later became
important could have been started like
so many of the multiplayer things we
could have wound up doing in Doom if we
had just kind of pushed on that but
things that seem obvious decades later
after somebody else has gone and made
something a phenomena I are not as
obvious when you're in the thick of it
but yeah we we went above and beyond
what we had originally kind of hoped and
targeted for for that but there is a lot
more that could have been done I think
that's what's what's made it feel like
it's got legs all of this time because
we there was still untapped potential
and things that that could still be done
on top of it yeah and I think um even
though the game was modable which was
critical to it staying alive for so long
and people loving it because we embraced
people uh people's creativity to make
the game what they wanted that when the
source code was released that really
made the game live until today still uh
because it can be kept current on
everything and as a side product as a as
a a side effect it's it can now run on
everything like posan and toasters and
even CPU coolers you name it yeah I wish
I wish we had more time to talk about
things like that because that it was
interesting where that was a significant
debate about releasing the tools and I
know once you know once we had the
things that was sort of everyone's worst
nightmare like dzone making more money
than Doom 2 I basically off mods of our
games and the struggles in there but
clearly it helped so much through all of
this but it's still far from a standard
you know you do not see game companies
nowadays releasing the releasing the
source code or even releasing most of
the modding stuff the modders have
better tools to reverse engineer
everything but it's really not with the
help and support of the studios and
that's still kind of a
shame yep yep I do remember
um that getting you know getting the
game running and seen the 3D World in
Doom and how uh it was going to look
better than Wolfenstein like it was it
was going to be
amazing the impact of seeing multiplayer
running on your computer for the first
time when you got the two computers
going remember that this day oh my God
and I'm and I like the funny thing is
like I went into my office and I was I
was making E1 M7 at the time and I was
just imagining this like I'm looking out
the window and I'm seeing two characters
fighting like rockets are flying up up
at a high window and someone else is
plasma gun and the other guy I'm just
like this is going to be the coolest
 game the planet has ever seen oh
my God I can't wait to play that you
know it was awesome
so um yeah I think uh what is it nine
did you uh well yeah I just want to say
a quick word as we wind down here these
guys have graciously uh graciously
allowed me to insert a quick plug for a
project I have coming out and it's uh in
the vein of what we've been talking
about I'm partnering with boss fight
books to release a book called but does
it run Doom uh I'll be I'll be writing
about some of the conventional Port such
as Super Nintendo Port PlayStation but
also some of the more outlift field
porch uh such as on pregnancy tests on
the sheep and Minecraft so um look for
that uh at bus fight at bossfight books
on Twitter bossfight books.com we'll
have information coming out and finally
I just want to thank you both for
letting me be a part of this I'm right
with chat I've just been having a great
time just listening to these stories um
thank you both for your time thank you
everyone for joining us and was there
anything you two wanted to say as we uh
close up shop here yeah uh first oh yeah
go ahead John you go you go and then
I'll go so it's been uh it's been kind
of a happy year for me with the the
Legacy stuff here where you know I had a
few tense years within software over
corporate stuff and we've made up now
and I was at quak con this year bringing
back some good memories and then being
able to do this I I've said before that
I'm not a very sentimental person that I
don't spend a lot of time kind of uh
reminiscing about the the good old days
but but they were really quite good and
I am very proud of the things that we
built back then and that they have this
Legacy that has lasted to this day so
I'm super happy we're able to put pull
this together yeah yeah thanks for
coming on uh and thanks just thanks a
lot John we really gave a lot of people
a lot of fun for a long time and it was
really great to to talk to you and and
it was really great to work together
with you and I'm really glad that we did
all the things that we did it would have
been awesome if you could have made it
out to quake this year with us we we
should do that some point in the future
totally I I I I will absolutely do that
because I really love Quon and uh you
know it's it's community and I really
want to thank everybody in the Doom
Community you know for for keeping this
game alive and uh and really just thanks
for playing our games
everybody
right all right we will see you all
later it's been a fun time Dooms
30th take it easy all right bye-bye
bye
n
oh
a
a
he
oh
oh
a
a
the
a
