hello how are you nice to see you thank
you to Defcon thank you especially to
the goons and the other volunteers who
are out here busting their humps so we
can have such a great time uh and thank
you all for coming uh I thought I had 50
minutes I have 45 I'm going to talk fast
and instead of Q&amp;A there's a book seller
in the book signing areas bringing in
some of my books you don't have to buy a
book just come over and say hello I'm
going to sit there until everyone who's
got a question uh has had a chance to
ask it so that's uh opposite the vendor
area gates after this talk that's the
housekeeping here so I want to start by
asking an important question which is
what the  happened to the old good
internet I
mean our bosses were a little
surveillance happy and yeah they were
totally up for sharing their data with
the NSA and if there was ever a toss up
between our user security and growth
they always cashed out for YOLO but
Google search whatever else we could say
about it it worked and Facebook actually
used to give you a feed that shows you
the things that you asked to see Uber
used to be cheaper than a taxi and pay
the drivers more than a cab driver
Amazon used to actually sell products
not this shine grade self-destructing
drop ship garbage from Brands you've
never heard of whose names consist
entirely of
consonant Apple used to defend your
privacy rather other than spying on you
with a device you're not allowed to
modify to turn off the surveillance
there was a time where if you search for
an album on Spotify you'd find the album
not a playlist with the same uh image
and title as the album but which
consists of a bunch of things that
someone paid to put in that playlist
Microsoft used to sell you software yeah
it was very buggy software but now they
don't even do that they just let you
access apps in the cloud and they watch
how you use those apps figure out which
teachers you value the most pull them
out of the basic rate and sell them back
to you as an upsell what and I cannot
stress this enough what the 
happened so obviously I am talking about
inid ification and from the outside
here's what in shid ification looks like
first you see a business that's being
good to its end users you know Google
puts the best search results at the top
Facebook shows you a feet of posts from
people you ask to follow Uber charges
small dollars for a cab Amazon
subsidizes goods and returns and
shipping and puts the best match for
your product search at the top of the
search results and that's stage one
that's the part where they're good to
end users but there's a hidden part of
stage one call it like stage 1A and
that's the part where they're figuring
out how to lock in those users so if
you're Facebook the users just do it for
you you joined Facebook because there
were people on Facebook you wanted to
hang out with and other people they
joined Facebook because they wanted to
hang out with you that's those old
network of effects in action and with
network effects come a collective action
problem because you love your friends
but God damn are they a pain in the ass
sure you all agree that Facebook sucks
but can you agree on when it's time to
leave no way can you agree on where to
go if you're going to leave hell no
you're you're there because that's where
the support group for your rare disease
is hanging out and your bestie is there
because that's where they talk with the
people in the country that they moved
away from and then there's friend who
coordinates their kids little league car
pools on Facebook and the best dungeon
master you know is there and she's not
going to leave cuz that's where her
customers are so you're stuck because
even though Facebook use comes at a high
cost to you your privacy your dignity
your sanity it's still less than the
switching cost you'd have to endure if
you went somewhere else all those
friends who have taken you hostage and
who you are also holding hostage now
sometimes companies lock you in with
money Amazon gets you to prepay for a
Year's worth of shipping with Prime and
they want to sell you your audible audio
books on a monthly subscription which
virtually guarantees that every shopping
expedition starts on Amazon because
you've already paid for the shipping
sometimes they lock you in with digital
Rights Management like HP who will sell
you a printer with four in cartridges
with fluid inside it that retails for
more than $10,000 a gallon so and then
and using and they use DRM to stop you
from refilling any of those cartridges
use or using a third party cart so when
one cartridge runs dry you have to
refill it or you have to throw away the
other three cartridges which are full of
liquid that cost more than vintage v
Cleo sometimes the vendor uses a grab
bag of locked in techniques like you
can't run an IOS app unless you're using
Apple hardware and you can't run the
music the books and the videos you
bought from Apple except in an iOS
app that's a happy sound uh can you I
can we get this mic up oh here we are
great we have the
technology sometimes the vendor is doing
this gra grab bag stuff like apple does
so you need the Apple Hardware to run
the Apple apps you need the Apple apps
to play the Apple media and then the
phone itself it uses Parts pairing which
is DRM handshakes between subcomponents
and the main computer in the device so
you can't use third party part parts to
fix it and every part in that device in
your uh um uh iPhone has got a
microscopic Apple logo engraved on it so
that if it gets broken up for parts in
the Far East and shipped back to the us
they can ask US Customs in Border Patrol
to seize it at the border as a trademark
violation that's some real thinking
different so getting you locked in
completes phase one of the inchid
ification cycle cycle and Heralds the
beginning of stage two this is when
things are made worse for you as an end
user in order to make things better for
the business customers that they're
making money from so for example
platforms might poison their search
results like Google which sells more and
more of that results page to ads that
are identified with smaller and smaller
and grayer and grayer type next to it
that says ad or Amazon which sells off
its search results calling this an ad
business they make $38 billion a year
selling search placement for your
queries so that the first result when
you search Amazon on average is 29% more
expensive than the best result on Amazon
the first row is 25% more expensive than
the best result on Amazon and that best
result is on average 17 places down on
that search result page right or the
vendor they'll poison your feed uh like
uh uh like Facebook which started off
obviously showing you the things that
you asked to see but the Quantum of
content from the people that you asked
to hear from has dwindled and dwindled
to a kind of homeopathic residue leaving
behind a void that can be filled up with
things that people will pay to show you
so a lot of that is ADS but a lot of it
is boosted posts from Publishers that
you haven't subscribed to those
Publishers they have to pay because they
can't reach their own subscribers
without paying to boost now um at this
point you might be thinking sure if
you're not paying for the product you're
the product but that is  it is
absolute  the people who buy
Google ads they pay more every year for
Worse targeting and more odd fraud like
the Publishers who are paying to reach
you even though you subscribed to them
the Amazon sellers with the best match
for your query have to outbid everyone
else just to be in the first page of
results and it cost so much to sell on
Amazon 41 to 51 45 to 51% of the sale
price of everything that you buy on
Amazon is being scooped up by Don Bezos
and the Amazon crime family those those
sellers they do not have the margin to
kick up 45% to Amazon so they have to
raise prices in order to avoid losing
money on every sale but wait I hear you
say but wait I hear you
say things on Amazon aren't more
expensive than the things I buy at
Target or Walmart or my mom and pop
Store direct from the vendor how can
they be raising prices on Amazon if the
price on Amazon is the same as the price
everywhere else does anyone want to
guess how that
works they raise the prices everywhere
else because Amazon binds their sellers
to a policy called most favored nation
status which means that the cheapest
price they offer has to be matched on
Amazon so they sell more they charge
more everywhere now these sellers are
Amazon's best customers they are paying
for the product and they are still
getting screwed paying for the product
does not fill your vapid boss's
shriveled heart with so much joy that he
decides to stop trying to think of ways
to  you over look at Apple remember
when Apple offered every iOS user a
oneclick opt out for app based
surveillance and 96% of iOS users ticked
that box the other 4% being drunk
confused or Facebook
employees I mean this cost Apple 10
billion or it cost Facebook $10 billion
in the first year alone and we love to
see it but did you know that at the same
time Apple turned on iOS spying that
gathered exactly the same data on iOS
users for exactly the same purpose for
ad targeting for its own ad Network and
did not give them any way to opt out and
lied about it uh now your iPhone is not
an ad supported gimme you paid a th000
 dollars for that distraction
rectangle in your pocket and you are
still the product what's more Apple has
rigged iOS so that you can't mod the OS
to block that spying if you're not
paying for the product yeah you're the
product but if you are paying for the
product you are still the product just
ask farmers who shell out six figures
for Mission critical tractors but can't
actually use their tractors when they
swap parts into them after they break
down until the manufacturer charges them
200 bucks to send a guy to the end of a
lonely Country Road and type an unlock
code into the console John Deere is not
giving away tractors give John Deere
half million for a tractor and you will
be the product please I'm begging you my
brothers and sisters and Christ please
stop saying if you're not paying for the
product you're the product okay so that
is phase two of inchid ification phase
one be good to your users but lock them
in phase two screw those users a little
so you can be good to business customers
while locking them in because they need
those users then phase three screw
everybody and take all the value for
yourself leave behind the absolute bare
minimum of utility so that everyone
stays locked into this pile of  and
 ification a tragedy three acts so
that is what inchid ification looks like
from the outside but what is going on
inside the company what is the
pathological mechanism what sci-fi
entropy Ray are our bosses aiming at
these products to make them so bad so
quickly well I call that uh mechanism
twiddling twiddling is when someone is
altering the back end of a service to
change its business operations to change
its prices its costs its search ranking
its recommend criteria and other
foundational aspects of the system
digital platforms are a twiddler's
Utopia a grocer would need an army of
teenagers with pricing guns on roller
blades to reprice everything in the
store if someone comes in who looks like
they're feeling spendy but McDonald's
Investments has a portfolio company
called plexure and they advertise that
they can use surveillance data to figure
out when a customer has just been paid
and add three bucks to the price of the
breakfast sandwich
and and of course as the prophet William
Gibson told us cyberspace is Ting with
digital shelf tags Grocers can twiddle
prices in real time like the grocers in
Norway where they're adding these e in
uh grocery shelf tags and changing
prices up to 2,000 times a day now it's
not just grocery stores every Uber
driver gets offered a different wage for
every job if the driver's been picky
lately the job pays more but if the
driver's been desperate enough to grab
every app that the every uh job that the
app is offering the pay goes down and
down and down the law professor Vina
dubel calls this algorithmic wage
discrimination and it's a prime example
of twiddling and every YouTuber every
Tik tocker they know what it's like to
be twiddled you spend weeks or months
working on a video you spend thousands
of dollars and then the algorithm
decides that no one not even your
subscribers not Searchers who type in
the name of the video will actually see
that video why who knows the algorithm's
rules are not public because content
moderation is the only security
discipline in which we still say that
there is security through obscurity we
can't tell you how the Como algorithm
Works otherwise you might figure out how
to cheat YouTube in other words is the
kind of shitty boss who docks your
paycheck every week for violating rules
but won't tell you what those rules are
in case you figure out how to break them
next week without him docking your
paycheck now twiddling also works in
some users favor of course sometimes
platforms twiddle things to make things
better for some of their uh end users or
business customers so the best example I
know about this comes from the for of
journalist Emily Baker white who uh
broke a story about how Tik Tok has a
feature on its back end that its
strategic managers can use called the
heating tool when a manager applies the
heating tool to performers account that
performers videos are thrust into the
feeds of millons ions of users uh
without regard to whether or not the
recommendation algorithm would uh uh
organically recommend that to those uh
to those viewers now why would they do
that here's an analogy from my uh my uh
uh Dewey Boyhood growing up in Toronto
uh there was a traveling fair that used
to come to Toronto every summer called
the Canadian national exhibition and if
you've been to a fair like the X you
know that uh you always spot some guy on
the Midway lugging around a giant teddy
bear uh nominally you win those Teddy
teddy bears by getting five balls in a
peach basket but to a first
approximation no one has ever gotten
five balls in a peach basket that guy
won his teddy bear because a Carney
gestured at him and said fella I like
your face I tell you what you're what
I'm going to do you got just one ball on
that peach basket I'll give you a
keychain you got two keychains I'll let
you trade up to the teddy bear that is
how that guy got the teddy bear which he
is now doomed to drag up and down the
Midway all godamn day now why did the
Carney give away the teddy bear because
it turned that guy into a walking
billboard for the Midway games if that
Dopey looking Judas goat can win a giant
teddy bear then maybe you can too except
you can't Tik tok's heating tool is a
way to give away extremely tactical
giant teddy bears when someone at the
Tik Tock Brain Trust decides they need
more Sports Bros on the platform they
pick out one bro at random and they make
him King for the day they heat the 
out of his account that guy gets a
zillion views and he starts running
around in all the sports bro forums
trumpeting his success I am the Louis
pastor of online Sports bro
content the other sports Bros Pile in
and they start retooling to make video
that complies with the idiosyncratic
requirements of Tik Tok and when they
fail to get giant teddy bears of their
own they assume it's because they're
doing Tik Tok wrong because they don't
know about the heating tool but then
comes the day when the Tik Tok Star
Chamber decides that they've got enough
sports Bros on the platform so they take
the heat off that one lucky sports bro
and maybe they start heating up some
lucky astrologer giant teddy bears are
all over the place those Uber drivers
who the New York Times lavish so much
ink on who are making $100,000 a year
driving for Uber or the sub stackers who
are rolling in D or Joe Rogan's $100
million Spotify playout those are all
people who are the unwitting recipients
of giant teddy bears and those giant
teddy bears are a godamn bar
because every dollar you spend on a
giant teddy bear turns into five or $10
worth of Free Labor from people who
think that they have a shot of earning
one of their own now platforms can play
games with every part of their business
logic in highly automated ways that
allows them to quickly and efficiently
siphon value from end users and give it
to business customers from business
customers back to end users and then
back and back again hiding the PE in the
Shell game uh at machine speeds until
they've got everyone so turned around
that they can take all the value excuse
me they can take all the value for
themselves that's the how how the
platforms do that trick where they are
good to users then they lock those users
in then they take something away from
those users and give it to business
customers and lock them in and then they
take the value for themselves so now we
know what is happening we know how it's
happening all that's left is why is it
happening now on the one hand there's an
answer to this question that's pretty
godamn obvious the less value that a
business gives to its suppliers its
customers its workers the more value
there is to left left to divide among
the executives and the shareholders
companies uh but but uh that why doesn't
tell you why now after all companies
could have done this  any time over
the last 20 years but by and large they
didn't and when they did uh they turned
themselves into piles of  and they
got treated like piles of  we
avoided them and then they died remember
Myspace or you um Yahoo search or live
Journal I mean yeah you can go to those
domains today and find a bunch of AI
slop and programmatic ads but those
sites are gone and there's the clue it
used to be that if you inhu ified your
product bad things happened to your
company now there are no consequences
for inchid ification which is why
everyone is doing it right now so I'll
break that down there are four forces
that discipline technology companies the
first one is obviously competition if
your customers find it easy to leave
then you have to worry about them
leaving now many factors can contribute
to how hard or easy it is to depart a
platform uh uh think of the network
effects that Facebook has going for it
and the intrinsic cost of going
somewhere else and leaving behind the
people that you love there but the most
important factor on whether you can
leave a platform is whether there's
somewhere else to go now remember in
2012 Facebook bought Instagram for a
billion dollar now that might seem like
chump change in these days of 11 digigit
big Tech Acquisitions but that was a big
sum in those innocent days and it was an
especially big sum to pay for insta the
company had 13 employees a mere 25
million registered users but What
mattered to Zach wasn't how many users
insta had it's where those users came
from does anyone know where those insta
users were coming from Facebook they
were leaving Facebook and joining insta
they were sick of Facebook even though
they like the people there they hated
creepy Zu they hated the platform and so
they left and they didn't come back so
Zuck spent a billion dollars to
recapture them a fact that he put in
writing in a midnight email to his CFO
uh David evman explaining that he was
paying over the odds because his users
hated him and they loved insta so even
if they quit Facebook the platform they
would still be captured by Facebook the
company now on paper that acquisition is
illegal normally be hard to prove
because you'd have to prove that Zuck
bought them for an anti-competitive
purpose but in this case Zuck just
tripped over his own deck he actually
put it in
writing but Obama's doj and Federal
Trade Commission they let it slide they
were following the pr Monopoly policies
of Reagan Bush one Clinton and Bush two
set an example that Trump would follow
greenlighting gig emergers like the
catastrophic incestuous Warner discover
merger that as of this week restated its
value down by $10 billion over one year
indeed for 40 years starting with Carter
and accelerating through Reagan the US
has encouraged Monopoly formation as an
official policy on the grounds that
monopolies are efficient if everyone is
using Google search that's something we
should celebrate it means they've got
the very best search and wouldn't it be
perverse to spend public funds to punish
them for making the best product but as
we all know Google search did not
maintain dominance by being best they
did it by paying bribes they spend more
than $20 billion doll a year on Apple to
be the default iOS search they spend
billions more to be defaults at Samsung
Mozilla and anyone else making a product
or a service with a search box ensuring
that you never stumble on a search
engine that's any better than theirs
even if they are which in turn ensures
that no one will ever invest in a
superior search engine even if they are
visibly obviously Superior because why
bother making something better if
Google's buying up all the market oxygen
before it can Kindle a product to life
Facebook Google Microsoft Amazon they
are not making things companies they are
buying things companies they take
advantage of official tolerance for
anti-competitive Acquisitions predatory
pricing Market distorting exclusivity
deals and other acts specifically
prohibited by our antitrust laws they
become too big to fail because that
makes them too big to jail and then they
become too big to care which is why
Google search is a pile of  and
everything on Amazon is drop Shi garbage
that instantly disintegrates into a
cloud of off Gast volatile organic
compounds when you open the
box once companies no longer fear losing
your business to a competitor it is much
easier for them to treat you badly cuz
what are you going to do remember when
Lily Tomlin would be the AT&amp;T operator
on those SNL sketches where she do ads
for the Bell System and they'd end with
we don't care we don't have to we're the
phone
company competition is the first force
that serves to discipline companies and
the unificatory impulses of their
leadership and 40 years ago we stopped
enforcing competition law now it takes
an an especially smooth brain type of
 that is an establishment
Economist to insist that the collapse of
every single industry from eyeglasses to
vitamin C into a cartel of five or fewer
companies has nothing to do with the
policies that we embraced that
deliberately encourag Monopoly formation
it's like we used to put down rat poison
and we didn't have a rat problem and
then these  convinced us to
stop putting rats down because R poison
down because rats are good for us we
stopped putting the poison down and now
rats are eating our faces and they're
all running around saying who's to say
where all the rats are coming from maybe
it's because we sto putting down rat
poison but but maybe it's just the time
of the rats the great forces of History
are bearing down on this moment to
multiply rats beyond all measure and
nothing we can do uh would stop that
antitrust did not slip down a staircase
and fall uh back first onto a stiletto
they stabbed it in the back and then
they pushed it and when they killed
antitrust they killed all hope of
Regulation regulation is the second
force that disciplines companies
regulation is possible but only when the
regulator is more powerful than the
entities that it regulates when a
company is bigger than the government it
gets damned hard to credibly threaten
them uh uh no matter what crimes they're
committing that's what protected IBM for
all those years when it had its boot on
the throat of the American tech industry
do you know that the doj fought an
antitrust case against IBM from 1970 to
1982 they called it antitrust Vietnam
and that every year for 12 consecutive
years IBM spent more on lawyers to fight
the US Department of Justice antitrust
division than all the lawyers the US
Department of Justice antitrust division
paid to fight all the cases in America
12 consecutive years and that paid off
because by 19982 the president was
Ronald Reagan a man whose official
policy was that monopolies were
efficient and he dropped the case and
big blue wriggled off the hook it's hard
to regulate a monopolist it's hard to
regulate a cartel when a sector is
composed of hundreds of competing
companies well they compete they
genuinely fight with one another they
are trying to poach each other's
customers suppliers and uh key employees
they are at each other's throats it's
hard enough to get a couple hundred of
exe hundred 100 Executives to agree on
anything but when they're legitimately
competing with one another really
obsessing about how to eat each other's
lunches they can't agree on anything the
second one of them goes to a regulator
with some  story about how it's
impossible to build a decent search
engine without fine grain surveillance
or impossible to have a secure and
easyto ous operating system without
giving it a a a veto to the vendor about
which apps you run or how it's
impossible to administer an ISP unless
you slow down connections to servers
that haven't paid for premium Carriage
there's going to be some other company
saying no that's  we managed it
here's our logs here's our quarterly
cash books and here's our customer
testimonials and they prove that these
guys are lying
100 companies are rabble they are a mob
they can't agree on a lobbying position
they're too busy eating each other's
lunch to figure out how to cater a
meeting where they would discuss a
common lobbying position but let those
100 companies uh merge to Monopoly let
them absorb one another in an incestuous
orgy turn into five giant companies so
inbred they get corporate hburg jaws and
they will become a cartel and it's easy
for a cartel to agree on what 
they're going to tell their regulators
and to mobilize some of those excess
billions that they've reaped through
consolidation which freed them from
wasteful competition so that they can
capture their Regulators completely you
know Congress used to pass consumer
Federal privacy laws whenever we got a
new technology not anymore the last time
Congress managed to sit down and pass a
federal consumer Privacy Law in this
country was
1988 the video privacy protection act it
bans video store clerks from telling
newspapers which VHS cassettes you took
home in other words it regulates three
things that no longer
exist the threat of having your video
rental history out there in the public
eye was not the last or the most
important privacy threat we have faced
since 1988 and yet Congress has
completely failed to pass a Privacy Law
tech companies uh regulatory capture
involves a risible and transparent
Gambit that is so stupid it's an insult
to all those risible transparent gambits
working so hard out there in the world
every day that Gambit is that they claim
that when they violate your consumer
your privacy or your labor rights that
it's not a crime because they did it
with an app algorithmic wage
discrimination is not wage theft we did
it with an app um spying on you from
 to appetite not a privacy
violation we did it with an app an
Amazon scam that tricks people into
paying 29% more than the best match for
their search they did it with an app
once we killed competition once we
stopped putting down rat poison we got
cartels the rats came and ate our faces
and the cartels captured their
Regulators the rats bought out the
poison Factory and they shut it down so
companies are not constrained by
competition or regulation but you know
what this is Tech and Tech is different
it is different because it's flexible
because our computers are these
marvelous things called touring complete
Universal Von nyman machines and that
means that any intific alteration to a
program can be disin ified with another
program every time HP jacks up the price
of ink they invite a competitor to make
a refill kit or a compatible cartridge
when Tesla installs code that only lets
you use half the charge in your battery
they invite a modder to start selling
kits to jailbreak your Tesla so you can
charge your whole battery let me take
you through a little example of how this
works imagine that instead of being here
at Defcon we're at a product design
meeting for our company's website and
the guy leading the meeting puts his
hand up and he says all right folks here
it is our kpi is Topline ad Revenue I
figured out if we make the ads 20% more
invasive and obnoxious we're going to
get 2% more ad Revenue we're all going
to get a ski holiday in Switzerland this
year and one guy sticks his hand up and
he says I love how you think Elon but
has but has it occurred to you that if
we make the ads 20% more obnoxious then
40% of our users will go to a search
engine and type how do I stop seeing ads
I mean what a nightmare because once a
user does that the revenue from that
user doesn't rise to the projected 102%
it doesn't stay static at 100% it goes
to zero it stays there forever and he
guesses why it never comes
back no one ever went back to the search
engine and typed how do I start seeing
ads
again once the user jailbreaks their
phone or discovers third party or
develops a relationship with an
independent Tesla mechanic who unlock
all the DLC in their car that user is
gone forever interoperability that
latent proper property bequeathed to us
courtesy of haris touring and Von nyman
and their infinitely flexible Universal
machines is a is a very serious check on
inchid ification the fact that Congress
hasn't passed a Privacy Law since 1988
in part you can counter that by uh uh
with the Maj with the that the majority
of web users are now running ad blockers
which are also privacy blockers but no
one's ever installed a Tracker blocker
for an app because reverse engineering
an app puts you in Jeopardy of criminal
and civil prosecution under section 121
of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
with penalties of a 5-year prison
sentence and a $500,000 fine for a First
Defense and violating those terms of
service puts you in Jeopardy under the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act a 1986 law
that Ronald Reagan was stampeded into
passing after watching war games and
freaking out
seriously helping others violate the
terms of service by giving them a mod
that makes you a Tor feaser engaged in
torous interference with contract and
then there's trademark copyright patent
all the nonsense we call IP but which
Jay Freeman from the city of project
calls felony contempt of business model
so we're back at that product planning
meeting and now it's time to talk about
our app and the guy leading the meeting
he says all right we're going to make
the ads in the app 20% more obnoxious
and everyone turns to the loudmouth who
shot it down last time and he says no no
that's fine but look why are we stopping
at 20% why don't we make the ads 100%
more obnoxious and get 10% more Revenue
because we don't care if the user goes
and types how do I stop seeing ads into
a search engine because you can't so
YOLO just in  ay way IP is a
euphemism for any law that lets an
executive reach outside of the walls of
their business and exert control over
customers critics and competitors and an
app is just a web page skinned with the
right kind of Ip to make it a felony to
put an ad blocker in
it thank
you interrupt used to stop companies
from in
shtifanov out a feature and wanted to
sell it back to us as a monthly
subscription someone would make a
compatible plugin that worked for a
onetime fee or you know for free to help
people flee Myspace Facebook gave them a
bot you gave that bot your login and
password for Myspace it would log in as
you several times a day scrape your
waiting messages put them in your
Facebook inbox and autopilot them back
out onto Facebook so you didn't have to
choose between the people you loved who
are on MySpace and Facebook which had
promised that it would never spy on you
do you remember that now thanks to the
metastasis of Ip all of that is off the
table today Apple owes it very existence
to the eyework suite Pages numbers
keynote which are file compatible with
Microsoft Office Word uh Excel and
PowerPoint but make an iOS runtime that
plays back the files you bought from
Apple stores on other platforms and they
will nuke you till you
glow Facebook wouldn't have had a hope
of breaking myspace's grip on social
media without that scraper but scrape
Facebook today in support of an
alternative client and their lawyers
will bomb you until the rubble bounces
Google scrap every website in the world
to create a search index try and scrape
Google and your head will be on a pike
when they did it that was progress when
you do it that is piracy every pirate
wants to be an admiral and because this
handful of companies has so thoroughly
captured their regulator they can wield
the power of the State against you when
you try to break their grip on power
even as their own flagrant violations of
our rights go unpunished because they do
them with an app Tech lost it fear of
competition it neutralized the threat
from its regulators and then it put
those Regulators in harness to attack
new startups who might do onto them as
they did unto everyone who dominated
before them but even then there was one
force that still kept our bosses in
check and that was us that was Tech
workers Tech workers have historically
been in very short supply and that gave
us power and our bosses knew it they to
get us to work crazy hours they came up
with a trick they appealed to our love
of Technology they told us we were
Heroes of the digital transformation
that we would organize the world's
information and make it useful what we
would bring the world closer together
they brought in expert set dressers to
turn our workplaces into Whimsical
campuses with free laundry Gourmet
cafeterias massages kombucha and a
surgeon onand who would freeze your eggs
so you could work through your fertile
years they convinced us that we were
being pampered rather than being tricked
into working like government mules now
that trick it has a name fiar the
librarian she calls it vocational awe
but Elon Musk just calls it being
extremely hardcore and it and it worked
well we did put in some long ass hours
but for our bosses this trick failed
badly because if you miss your mother's
funeral in order to hit some deadline
and then your boss orders you to entify
the product you missed the funeral for
you are going to experience a profound
moral injury which you are absolutely
going to make your boss very aware of
because what are they going to do fire
you they can't hire someone else to do
your job and the guy across the street
will pay you just as much so workers we
held the line when competition
regulation and interoperability failed
but Supply caught up with demand last
year they fired 260,000 Tech sector
workers first six months of this year
was another 100,000 you can't tell your
bosses to go  themselves because
they'll fire your ass and give your job
to someone else who will be happy to
entify the product you sweated blood to
ship that's why all this is happening
right now our bosses are not different
they did not catch a mind virus that
turn them into greedy  who don't
care about our users's well-being or the
quality of our products as far as our
bosses are concerned they have uh the
point of that business was to charge the
most deliver the least and share as
little as possible with suppliers
workers and customers in order to retain
money for shareholders and Executives
they are not running Charities since day
one our bosses have reported for work
every morning grabbed the giant lever
behind their desk labeled in 
ification and pulled on it as hard as
they could but the lever didn't move
much it was gummed up by competition by
regulation by interoperability by the
tech Workforce and as those sources of
friction melted away that inchid
ification lever started moving pretty
freely now that sucks I know but think
about this for a sec our bosses despite
being wildly imperfect vessels capable
of rationalizing endless greed and
cheating nevertheless made a series of
actually great products and services not
because they were better people then but
because they were subject to discipline
so it follows that if we want to end the
inene if we want to dismantle the in
shitet if we want to build a new good
internet that our bosses can't wreck we
need to make sure that those constraints
are durably installed on our new
internet wound around its roots and
nerves and we have to stand guard over
those forces so that they can't be
dismantled again a new good internet is
one that has the positive aspects of the
old good internet the ethic of
technological self-determination where
users of technology and the hackers the
tinkerers the startups and the others
who serve as their proxies can
reconfigure the technology to make it
work so that it does what they needed to
do and cannot be used against them but
the new good internet has to fix the
defect of the old good internet the part
that made it hard for anyone who wasn't
us to figure out how to use it and hell
yeah we can do that Tech bosses swear
that this is impossible you can't have a
conversation with a friend without Zuck
being present you can't search the web
without letting Google scrape you down
to your viscera you can't have a phone
that works reliable uh reliably without
Apple getting a veto over your software
they claim that it's nonsense to even
Ponder this proposition it's like making
water that's not wet but that is
 we can have nice things we can
build for the people we love and give
them a place worthy of their time and
attention to do that we have to install
constraints the first constraint
remember it's competition we are living
through an epocal shift in competition
policy after 40 Years of antitrust
enforcement in an induced coma a wave of
antitrust Vigor has swept through
governments all over the world
regulators stepping up to ban
monopolistic practices to open up wild
Gardens to block anti-competitive
mergers and even unwind the corrupt
mergers that were undertaken on false
pretenses now normally this is the part
in this speech where I'd listed all the
amazing things that have happened over
the past four years the enforcement
actions that block companies from
becoming too big to care and that scared
companies away from even trying like
whiz which just kned out of the largest
acquisition offer in world history
turning down Google's $23 billion buyout
and deciding to you know just be a
 business that makes money by
making a product that people want that
is sold at a competitive price normally
I'd be listing out FTC rule makings here
or the ban n that ban Nong competes
worldwide uh or the new merger
guidelines that the FTC and the doj
cooked up which among other things make
privacy something that has to be
considered in mergers I had a whole
section of this stuff in my notes an
absolute Victory lap but I deleted it
this week does anyone anyone know why I
deleted it this week anyone want to
guess all right this week judge Amit
meta ruling for the DC Circuit of these
United States of America in the docket
20-30 one0 in a case known as United
States versus Google LLC found that
Google is a monopolist and it has acted
as a monopolist to maintain its Monopoly
and ordered that Google and the doj
propose a schedule for a remedy like
break the company
up so yeah that was pretty  epic
now this antitrust stuff is esoteric and
I'm not going to shame you if you want
to keep a little distance on the subject
nearly everyone is an antitrust Normie
and that's fine but if you're a normie
you're probably only catching little
bits and pieces of this narrative and
let me tell you the monopolists know
that and they are flooding The Zone with
 the Wall Street Journal has
published 100 editorials condemning con
the chair of the Federal Trade
Commission for doing nothing and getting
nothing done with public funds anyone
out there who know who owns The Wall
Street
Journal no rert Murdoch rert Murdoch do
you really think Rupert Murdoch Pays His
editorial board to write 100 op EDS
about someone who's not getting anything
done the reality is that in the United
States in the UK in the EU in Australia
and Canada and China in Japan and South
Korea we are seeing more antitrust
action over the past 4 years than over
the preceding 40 and remember the
competition law is pretty robust the
problem is not the law it's the
enforcement priorities Reagan put them
in mothballs 40 years ago but that is an
elegant weapon from a more civilized age
and it has found its way into the hands
of people who sure know how to use it
and they are swinging for the fences so
next up is regulation as the seemingly
inescapable power of the tech Giants is
revealed as the Sham that we always
suspected it was governments and
Regulators are finally going to kill the
one weird trick of violating the law but
saying it's okay cuz we did it with an
app in the EU they've got the new
digital markets app that requires
dominant platforms to open up API so
that you can move easily between
services and that's a very cool rule but
what's even cooler is how it's going to
be enforced previous EU rules they were
called regulations which meant that they
had to be turned into law in each EU
member State um and for big Tech that
meant that all uh enforcement of laws
like the general data privacy protection
regulation started in Ireland where they
all pretend to be headquartered and they
pretend to be headquartered in Ireland
because Ireland is a tax Haven and so
they fly Irish flags of convenience but
here's the thing if every tax Haven has
to be a crime Haven because any company
that is foot loose enough to pretend to
be Irish this week could pretend to be
maltes or or uh luxembourgian or uh
cypret next week so to keep those Foot
Loose criminal Enterprises happy that
they they have to stop enforcing their
laws that's why the gdpr is such a
godamn joke in practice because the only
way to get these companies held to
account for their gdpr policies is to go
after them in Ireland where the Irish
data commissioner barely gets out of bed
and when they do they usually spend most
of the the day in their pajamas eating
breakfast cereal in front of the
television now all of this is hardly a
secret the European commission knows
that it's going on so with the dma the
commission starts all of the reg all of
the enforcement in the federal courts
which have no uh way in which they are
beholden to these big uh tech companies
in other words the we vote priv we
violate privacy excuse me we violate
Privacy Law uh that work but it's okay
because we did it with an app that
worked for so many years it's now a dead
letter and here in the US the uh dam is
finally breaking on getting a federal
Privacy Law for us it's been a minute
and the thing is there are a lot of
people who are very angry about how poor
Privacy Law is in America not because
they're worried about privacy but
because they worried about other stuff
maybe Grampy uh was on Facebook and you
think that's how he became a q andon or
you think maybe insta made your teen
anorexic or you're worried that cops
rolled up all the demonstrators at that
black lives matter demonstration using
Google location data or you're worried
that they did it to the January 6 riers
or that you're worried that red State
Attorneys General follow teenagers
across state lines into abortion clinics
or you're worried that black people are
being discriminated against in lending
and job applications or that someone
made AI uh deep fake porn of you a
Federal Privacy Law with a private right
of action would do something about all
of those problems that makes a very big
Coalition for Privacy Law which is why
we're seeing a procession of imperfect
but steadily improving privacy laws
working their way through Congress so I
work for the electronic froner
Foundation if you sign up for our list
at eff.org we're going to send you
emails when those laws come up and you
can call up your Congress jerk or your
Senator and you can talk to them about
it you can make an appointment to drop
by their offices when they're in their
home district and expl to them that
you're not just a registered voter from
their districts that you're the kind of
tech person who goes to Defcon and then
you can explain the bill to them that
stuff makes a difference so how about
self-help how are we doing on making
interoperability legal again I'm I'm
nearly done two minutes sorry my mic
stopped working for a minute
uh how how are we doing on making I'm
seriously almost done stop clapping so I
can finish uh how are we doing on making
interoperability Al again when we got
these state right right to repair bills
that ban Parts pairing that ban using
DRM for parts uh these bills are pushed
by a fantastic group of organizations
called the repair Coalition at rep.org
and they'll email you one one of these
bills are going through your state house
and you can meet with your state reps
and explain to the JV Squad what you
just explained to your federal reps and
the prime mover behind rep.org is I fix
it and I fix its founder Kyle wans is
here at Defcon so when you see him shake
his hand thank for a service but tell
him you've signed up for the mailing
list as well now on to that last uh
Workforce and my last page I promise uh
uh the the thing that used to stop Tech
bosses from going bad and that's you the
tech Workforce for years your bosses
tricked you into thinking you are
founders and waiting temporarily
embarrassed entrepreneurs momentarily
drawing a salary not workers your power
came from intrinsic virtue not those La
not like those lazy slobs in their
unions now that was a trick and you got
scammed the power you had came from
scarcity so when scarcity ended your
indust the industry when the industry
started ringing in six-figure layoffs
your power went away the only durable
source of power for Tech workers is as
workers in unions think about
Amazon think hold I got to finish stop
clapping uh think about Amazon warehouse
workers have to piss in bottles and have
the highest rate of on the job industry
uh injuries of any uh comparable company
in the industry whereas Amazon coders
get to show up for work with facial
piercings green Mohawks and black
t-shirts that say things their bosses
don't understand they can piss whenever
they want to that's not because Jeff
Bezos loves Tech workers it's because
they're scared you'll quit and they
won't be able to replace you another
willing Gibson quote the future is here
it's just not evenly distributed you
know who lives in the future Amazon
warehouse workers they are living in
your future drivers whose eyeballs are
monitored by AI cameras that do
phenology on their faces to figure out
when went to dock their pay and
warehouse workers whose bodies are
ruined in a matter of months as Tech
bosses beef up this Reserve Army of un
unemployed skilled Tech workers those
Tech workers you folks will arrive at
the same future as them look I know you
spent your careers explaining in words
so small your boss could understand them
that you refuse to entify your company's
products and I thank you for your
service but if you want to go on
fighting for the user you need power
that's better than scarcity you need a
union want to learn how check out the
tech workers Coalition and Tech
solidarity and get organized and 
ification is not here because our bosses
changed they were always that guy they
were always yanking the lever what
changed was the environment everything
that kept the inch ification switch from
moving and that is good news because it
means that we can have good products
with imperfect people a new good
internet is in our grasp an internet
with the technological
self-determination of the old good
internet and the grease skid Simplicity
of Web 2.0 that let Normie friends get
in on the fun Tech bosses want you to
think that ux and in shid ification
can't be separated and that is
self-serving  we know it because
we built the old good internet and we've
been fighting a rear guard action to
preserve it over the past two decades
and it's time to stop playing defense
and go on the offense to restore
competition to restore regulation
interoperability and Tech worker power
so that we can create a new good
internet that we're going to need to
fight fascism the climate emergency and
genocide to build a digital nervous
system for for the 21st century in which
our children will Thrive and prosper
thank
you all
right I'm going I'm going to the signing
area it's it's uh outside the husters
room come and say hello
