uh welcome thank you all for coming to
the track uh the next speaker up is
Daniel misser and the talk is a shadow
librarian in broad daylight uh please
give Daniel a warm
welcome
than how youall
doing okay so good afternoon thank you
for coming there's a whole lot of you
here to see a librarian talk at deathcon
so um it's nice to have you so uh to
start off with quick disclaimer you know
big disclaimer uh hi I'm not a hacker I
am not a cyber security expert I will
not be talking about how I crack some
passwords that I found on the dark web
and use that to infiltrate some system I
won't be talking about that cuz that's
nothing I have ever
done um but I think that you and I and
all of you and maybe I uh we share kind
of a kindred
relationship um because though I am not
a I'm not a hacker I think we can both
uh we can come together on a
relationship based in fear because
people fear hackers you know this some
of you Revel in this and people are
starting to fear others like me too in
red States from City councils to state
capitals uh I am a threat and so are
people like me more legislation has been
passed in the last few months to uh
curtail my activities than have been
passed to curtail yours because I am
 dangerous I am a public
librarian in the 3dr century before the
Common Era there was a great library in
the city of Alexandria Egypt many tales
have been told about this library and
some of them
are even true one thing that isn't
talked about as often as I think it
should be is the alexandrian
Acquisitions Department yeah I know I
know thrilling stuff mesami but Hang on
we're going to go someplace Beyond an
ancient Library okay see there was a
decree by Tommy II philadelphus that
among other things ordered agents of the
library
to to search the ships and take any
books that they found borrow them now
we're talking about the city of
Alexandria this is one of the biggest
centers of trade in human history we're
talking about a lot of ships these
agents would snag any books and then
bring them back to the library where
they would be copied and added to the
collection and it was often the case
that the ships would sail away with the
copies and while the library kept the
originals um this was the first large
scale version of a modern adage and that
information should be free and it should
belong to
me in the year of our goddess
20124 can you imagine a library doing
anything like that
today that Library would have more
lawyers at their front door than they
have children attending the
herpetologist event at a summer reading
program so okay yeah maybe uh maybe some
introductions before I really get into
this hi I'm Dan
uh I've been working libraries for
almost 30 years now uh from the front
desk to systems Administration and a few
stops in between yeah as a systems
librarian I specialize in integrated
Library systems which is the daytoday
operating system of a modern library
checking the things out checking the
things in managing the catalog all that
stuff
um so what I'm called is a systems
librarian by most people if you um
I'm also into things like uh SQL hacking
I say that I'm a SQL hacker because uh
the way I typically get SQL to work is
that I write a query I swear because it
doesn't work then I rewrite the query
and I'm closer but they're still
swearing and finally the query works so
I yeah that's how I hack
SQL I'm also into Data analysis and
storytelling libraries love data the
sort of running joke is is that
Librarians are into stats and cats um so
yeah I'm in I'm one of the data guys
where I work no surprise I'm into
Library technology self checkout
machines self checkin machines
everything from the barcode on the front
desk to the RFID tags within the
items and this probably doesn't matter
to anyone I'm circulation methodologist
in other words I can help libraries
better circulate their
materials
but one one thing um one thing that you
might also know me for is if you listen
to library related podcast I am known as
your little free cyberpunk librarian and
with a name like that it shouldn't
become shouldn't be a real big surprise
that I am into Shadow libraries um I
have been researching Shadow libraries
for about 10 years I can't be uh I can't
be uh specific on that cuz I don't
remember exactly when I started
approaching it as a topic of research
rather than as a topic of
usage um so yeah I've done this for
about 10 years I've worked in Shadow
libraries as a cataloger in other words
if I am presented with an ebook of
questionable sources um and that ebook
is lacking metadata I can help provide
that
metadata I've also worked in inter
Library loan which uh in this case
usually involves someone on the internet
needs a PDF and I can provide that
PDF but I've also done work in
Acquisitions AKA book scanning
digitization things like that and I've
also done some systems uh systems
Administration and development so okay
here's the deal
as a public librarian and a shadow
librarian I work in two sides of the
library world the public library which
I'm sure many of you are familiar with
and Shadow
libraries which I'm sure many of you are
familiar with
um so that might come as a surprise to
you because why would why would a legit
librarian go to the dark side you know
why why would I do that well you can
Encompass a lot of that under a heading
of you do what you got to
do I'm here to serve the public in
matters of information and media and to
a librarian everything is Media this
Podium this Podium I'm speaking from
Librarians can totally catalog and
circulate this thing uh we we actually
have a word for it it's called realia
This is a realistic thing it's not a
book it's not a you know a piece of like
a Blu-ray or anything like that this is
realia we can circulate this
stuff see if you haven't been to your
local public library recently I strongly
encourage you to go the reasons for that
are stuff that you probably already know
but I'll drop the two biggest ones just
in case you need a reminder number one
we lend you stuff for free and uh with
that that could include stuff that uh
you didn't you may not associate with
public libraries which is the number two
reason you should go to the library and
see see what they have if you think
we're just a stronghold of books and
Blu-rays you might give it another look
just in case so um for instance I work
with libraries all across the country
and some of them have tool Collections
and I'm not talking about the band um if
you're uh if you're putting something
together and maybe you need a hammer or
a cordless drill or something like that
but you're not a handy person you're not
Norm Abram so you don't want to just buy
this you're just assembling something
that you bought at Ikea check check with
your local library they uh they might
have a tool collection for you um do you
want to learn how to play the guitar
some libraries have musical instrument
collections so this is great because you
can go lend they can that you can borrow
that guitar and you don't have to buy
one because later on if you find out
well playing the guitar isn't for me or
I'm just not good at that well if you
bought a guitar now you have a symbol of
your failure laying around your house
with the with the borrowed guitar you
just take it back to the
library
so I work with the library that has a
massive collection of cake pans
literally lots of cake pans and you
might think cake pans well how often do
you need to make a Hello Kitty birthday
cake maybe once a year so why should you
buy a Hello Kitty shaped cake pan for
the other 364 days just go borrow the
thing so podiums right I'm just saying
sometimes people need to talk in front
of a
crowd and uh you know what they might
not have Podium it's not something you
got laying around your house most of the
time a library could buy catalog and
circulate one of these things I would
not be surprised if that's something
that's already happening in a library
somewhere so as I said I am here to
serve the public about information in
media and sometimes that stuff doesn't
come easy at one point in your life you
may have gone to a library for a story
time um so you have your very own
librarian right here so let's have a
story time sit back relax I'm going to
tell you a couple of stories because
it's the War Stories track right um I
was going to bring puppets but when I
explained to the Defcon organizers what
I wanted to do with them they shot that
idea down for ethical reasons
so once upon a time there was a law
it's a pretty good law as laws go and
its name was title 17 United States code
subsection
109a thank you big fans
anyway uh this little bit of legislation
does us the small service of providing
only the entire Foundation of how
libraries operate in the United States
but please title 17 United States code
subsection 109a that's a very long name
very complicated so it's got a nickname
it's called the first sale
Doctrine simply stated this law allows
libraries to buy physical items and lend
them we can lend books Blu-rays and
banjos uh because when we buy them we
own them and because we own them we can
decide to lend them to
others so more than one person has said
that if a a library didn't exist today
it would probably be illegal to create
one and that's because media publishers
would never let a law like this pass if
this was something that came forward
today so this law is great though when
it comes to physical
items what about the digital stuff so
hey you might not have known this either
if you haven't been to the library for a
little while uh did you know you can
check out stuff at the library and never
leave your home you can get things from
ebooks and digital Comics you can stream
music and movies uh you can download
magazines and read the news you don't
even have to put on pants just get your
tablet get your phone log into your
library account and get stuff for
free legally for a
change and that dear
Hearts that's the
problem digital items are not sold
they're licensed and Licensing does not
equal
ownership and libraries all across the
country are seeing a steep rise in their
Public's desire for digital items okay
well so what well how much do you pay
for an ebook on Amazon maybe about 15
bucks or so give or take you know if
it's new or it's big or whatever say
about 15 bucks and keep in mind you are
licensing it too you don't own that
um but you are just a single licensee
reading the book on your devices fine
libraries on the other hand we want to
lend ebooks to multiple people so they
can read it on multiple devices and
Publishers they don't like that they
absolutely see that as lost sales do you
know how much a library will pay for the
same ebook that you bought on Amazon for
15
bucks 60 they will pay about four times
the cost so that you can have access to
an
ebook and that's for a single user
license well what the hell is a single
user license a single user license
basically says that one person can check
out that ebook at a time just like a
physical
book it's an ebook and it's not like we
have a problem making copies of it but
the licensing is that one person can
have that book at a
time so more than that Publishers will
also literally withhold sales to to
libraries um because they want to hit
that buyer Market first the new you know
James Patterson pulls a lever and
publishes a novel and the the publisher
might not offer that as a eBook to
libraries because they want to hit that
buyer's market first those freeloading
Librarians can just wait to pay four
times the amount for that
ebook because you know the publishing
industry got to get paid
son oh and by the way that license is
good for anywhere from a few months to
maybe a couple years and then the
library has to license the book
again why did it wear
out actually that's the story The
Publishers uh and the sellers will tell
you that a physical book will wear out
over time so you're going to need to
replace it so that's all we're doing
we're just emulating what's happening in
the physical book that's okay right
beloved there are books in libraries
that are over 200 years
old travel to Europe there are books in
libraries that are centuries
old um yeah you might not be able to
check them out and take them home
granted but I bet they're still somehow
available for use
there's not an ebook around right now
that is even half as old as some of the
oldest books in in a library in other
words this is just good oldfashioned bog
standard capitalism at work you you've
heard of forced scarcity I'm sure this
is enforced scarcity we live in a time
where nothing nothing ever needs to go
out of print and even things that have
gone out of print they could be
digitized resurrected and brought
forward and you know Google did that and
they got away with it because they're
Google and then the internet archive did
that got sued and had to remove 500,000
books from their
collection um because of course of
course that represents a loss of sales
as a Counterpoint according to
Publishers Weekly and the association of
American Publishers the United States
publishing industry made over 12.5
billion dollars last year we should all
have some of those lost
sales how did they
survive and with the growing demand for
ebooks Library budgets are feeling that
pinch more than ever because ebook
licenses are more or less twice the
price of a physical book a new dead tree
book might cost 20 25 bucks a library
could buy two books for 50 bucks or they
can buy one single ebook license for $10
more more I mean fiscally those physical
items make more sense but that's not
what people are
after and beyond that though what do you
do when you're faced with a patron who
needs an item but that item is almost
unobtainable because ay my God we
haven't even talked about things like
the price of journals like academic
journals any students here today anyone
working on a bachelor's a master's maybe
even a doctorate I got I got a few hands
awesome okay so do you know how much
money your College library spends per
year for access to academic articles and
Publications I want you to think of a
number a price that sounds reasonable
let's not get you know cosmically
stratospheric here but a price that
sounds reasonable what do you think your
University is paying for access to those
academic journals got that number no
you're wrong it's
higher the the cost of academic journals
and access to those Publications is
insane and it's obscene and never mind
that many of the articles that these
students are after were written by
researchers and scientists working with
public
funds so if you're a student browsing a
database of Publications at your uni
library and you find what you need I
holy crap here it is this this is what
I'm looking for I know this author
they're working in my Arena this will go
a long way to help helping me finish my
Master's thesis or my doctoral
dissertation
fantastic
and they don't have it this is the
Heartbreak of the abstract where all
they have is the abstract your library
for some reason just does not have
access to that
article
so imagine yourself now as a librarian
you've got that Patron looking for a
book that's had one print run and hasn't
been published again since the 1970s
you've got a patron who needs an indie
film that was made in 1990 and can't be
found anywhere or you've got this
student who needs the article but you
don't have
it when I was in high school never mind
how many years ago a friend of mine
taught me something that literally stuck
with me ever since I could put this on a
business card and it would make some
sense for me and that thing is is when
what you need don't meet your eyes you
must learn to impr
improvise so time to
improvise due to Patron confidentiality
I will not divulge the title of this
book except to say it was a work of
fiction written in the 1970s by some
author I had never heard of the patron
read this book back in their younger
days and like a fever dream it popped
into their head again and they just they
needed to read it again and hey I get it
I don't know about you but as a
librarian there's certain books that I
always go back to I can cannot tell you
how many times I've read Neuromancer and
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy it's like comfort
food now libraries have various networks
that they can go through to do something
magical and that magical thing is
interlibrary loan and if you're not
familiar with it no shame today you are
one of today's lucky
10,000 so let me tell you about inter
life Library loan see if you go to a
library and they don't have the thing
you need you can talk to someone there
and they can try to get it from another
Library maybe even in a completely
different state sometimes in a
completely different country you may
have to pay for shipping but they can
help you get that weird and wonderful
thing that cannot be found anywhere else
and that's exactly what I did I you know
worked with this Patron I looked it up
in the computer we placed a request
through an inter Library loan Network
and we waited for the item to arrive
which it did it just the next week in
pieces it's a
paperback from the 1970s do you know
what they used to make binding glue out
of in the 1970s lysergic acid
diethylamide and the dreams of small
children I called this Patron and I said
hey um I got your thing but there's this
problem and they were heartbroken it's
one of my favorite patrons they were
afraid to check it out because they
didn't want to further damage that I
don't know how they would have done that
other than sticking it in a blender with
some protein powder um but damn it I
hated to disappoint this person and the
lending library that responded was the
only lending library that responded it
was either this copy or nothing time for
the
lie this Patron I'll call him Joe I'm
talking to him on the phone I said Hey
Joe do you have an e-reader you do
that's awesome hey what kind of e-reader
you got uhhuh that new Kindle yeah right
how do you like it nice okay so here's
what we're going to do I'm going to I'm
going to check in a different IL system
real quick this one deals in digital
copies and no no Joe I know you already
look but I'm a librarian let me do my
job and oh my God Joe check it out I
found it it's right here no this one
Library they've got it um I need to
contact them to see uh See what I need
to do to borrow it but I'll give you a
call back in a couple days okay talk to
you later Joe bye beloved did you know
you can scan a paperback in about 30
minutes uh I took the book
home and this was before I got a proper
book scanner I have tools now but I just
had at the time a you know regular
run-of-the-mill pretty decent flatbed
scanner and it was great cuz you could
easily fit the pages on the glass uh you
know the glass part of the scanner and
push what was left of the binding up
against the uh you know up against the
thing got some good pages and you know I
throw on a podcast and about half an
hour later I had a bunch of images of
pages which I could feed to scant Taylor
a bit of software that I think the
internet archive still uses for um
ingesting ocing and converting images of
pages into actual ebooks um it's not
pretty but it works uh well and then
then after done while this Patron has a
Kindle so obviously I needed to use
caliber to convert it to Mobi format and
two days later I gave him a copy of a
favorite book that he had not read in 30
years
okay thank you thank you you're far too
kind all right this is one of my
favorite stories of all time I'll be
telling this until I die uh and this
worked because of people like what I'm
looking at at here at
Devcon in the 1990s a bunch of punks
made a movie and I mean that literally I
want to tell you a story about terminal
City
Ricochet this is the one this is one of
the most independent of indie films it's
a punk Croc counterculture cyber Punk
cult
Masterpiece starring well featuring
Jello Biafra of the dead kennedies and
Joe Keithley of
DOA so uh there was this uh there was
this person I mean well let me back up
so why is this why is this thing hard to
find um so this this uh this movie was
made in Sunny British Columbia which is
not
Hollywood um it has a soundtrack with
some raging Canadian punk bands and as I
said in 2023 late 2023 was almost
entirely unobtainable I mean they
probably printed you know just a few
DVDs and VHS cassettes and probably sold
them through their friends and
independent shops and stuff like that so
they're just strewn to the Four Winds
you could not even find it on eBay and
you can't pirate it because if you want
to Pirate something you need to kind of
have a copy of it so one day on Mastadon
someone started asking around about this
movie and they wanted to get a copy of
it and that was proven to be difficult
if not impossible so by the way I don't
know if he's here but big shout out to
the Gibson for hosting and putting up
with all the insanity that is the
hackers. toown Mastadon server um you
know awesome awesome work there and
that's what facilitated this whole thing
this user had checked out some libraries
and they couldn't find it and someone
just popped up I didn't even know who
this person was popped up and said hey
if you asked cyberpunk librarian he
might know a way to get it so they
checked a bunch of libraries they had
not however checked World Cat now now if
you don't know worldcat is a massive
catalog of Library materials and
libraries all over the globe and it's
run by a company called
oclc now I'm not going to get into the
problems inherent with occl in modern
libraries because we don't have the time
and they only allowed me a shot and not
the entire
bottle I but I will tell you that if you
want to see if you can find something in
a library somewhere your first stop is
worldcat.org so start there
and using worldcat I found a copy one
single copy and do you know where it was
no surprises Greater Victoria Public
Library in beautiful British
Columbia
so uh yeah we were able to uh you know
on mdon we were able to work with each
other and uh you know a little back and
forth we found a Victorian local who
literally lived down the street from
this library now this is a rare piece of
media but you could check it out and
they did and they ripped us a beautiful
digital copy including the
soundtrack um so you know and they
provided for this person who was doing
everything they could to obtain it
legally so there was this guy I'm sure
you've not heard of him because there's
Librarians that might never heard of him
his name was ranganath
I'm probably pronouncing that wrong he
wrote down the Five Laws of Library
science these are still pretty good
today and as you can see the third law
is every book its reader or in this case
every DVD its viewer So within a few
days a long lost movie had been
reobtained and nowadays strangely enough
you can view it on the internet archive
funny how that
happened okay circling back let's go
back to that student who needed the
article that their Library didn't have
access to now there's something that you
need to understand about libraries and
Librarians and that it's kind of an
insular world we know lots of other
Librarians and you know what Librarians
love to do they love to talk to other
Librarians um so okay fine but what does
that mean for the student well we've got
a stat request for this article they
need this the paper's due next week and
oh my God okay well even back in the day
before you know all the cool internet
stuff and things a good inter a good
inter Library loan librarian which is
hard to say could turn this request
around in hours if not minutes cuz yes
there is a formal process that you have
to go through to request an interner
Library loan which you can totally do
after you've made a phone call to your
friend at the other Library way over
there and said hey I got a student that
needs this thing can you give a copy of
it and send it yeah I'll check my email
later I'll send you over the request
later this afternoon thanks
bye now while I'm not an inter Library
loan coordinator anymore um I have
worked as an intern Library loan
coordinator over the course of my career
I've been I've actually done it for
three separate times I've been on both
sides of that
conversation
so these days like I said I work inter
Library loan as a shadow librarian what
that means is literally I'll I'll watch
Reddit I'll watch Discord or you know
chat room whatever and someone needs a
PDF they don't have access to that PDF
and maybe I do and suddenly they have
access to that PDF it's very
simple
um but to uh kind of kind of move Beyond
even that if you listen to podcasts or
uh watch YouTube videos which I bet some
of you do um you will hear someone
occasionally say something along the
lines of I'm a lawyer but I'm not your
lawyer or I'm a therapist but I'm not
your
therapist Librarians are different in a
capitalistic Society the public library
remains one of the few places where you
can go and be there and exist in a
location and no one expects you to pay
for
it I am I take pride in being part of a
rare organization that can literally say
hi I'm from the government and I'm here
to help and people don't laugh at
me I said people don't laugh at
me but uh the funny thing about
Librarians we'll teach you how to do our
job we'll show you how to do what we do
and in essence we kind of cut ourselves
out of the uh out of the process and
it's not that we don't want to lose you
as a patron uh but because we believe in
education okay um
and even then we'll we'll always be
there to back you up we don't expect you
to be experts um so if you're having
trouble using the library you can't find
something well hey we are still there
and it doesn't matter if you're standing
in a brick-and mortar Library it doesn't
matter if you're chatting to a librarian
online or trying to find something on
Mastadon Discord Reddit whatever so let
present me help future
you like Liam niss have a particular set
of
skills because I can offer guidance and
assistance from a public librarian's
point of view and from a shadow
librarian standpoint as well so just a
few things to consider if you ever need
to go researching
something and you need in-depth
information beyond what a search engine
can
provide first don't discount your public
library and I'm not saying that because
I want you to support your library folks
your tax is paid for the library you're
supporting the library you may as well
go use it it's one of the few places
where you can go use the things you paid
for you paid for the cop cars go drive
one see how it
works but there is one thing that shadow
libraries suck at they're just not good
at it at all and I love Shadow libraries
um and that thing is
browsing Serendipity is is a hell of a
discovery Tool uh for example I write
ghost stories I have a podcast called
am800 wrth and it's like a Night Gallery
thing in that this fictional AM radio
station provides a delivery mechanism
for the ghost story um so yeah just the
same way that the gallery did for the
spooky TV story so I popped into the uh
Warren County Public Library in Bowling
Green Kentucky because I wanted to find
some ghost stories that I could you know
have as maybe some something you know
I'm not plagiarizing I just need ideas
damn it and my father's side of the
family is from Appalachia which now that
you've heard me talk for a little while
might not surprise you and that is a
culture with a wonderful richness of
ghost stories and I figured hey I could
find something along those lines and I
sure did that was easy I mean
133 That's The Dewy Decimal number for
specific topics in the Paranormal
parapsychological and occultism
uh I didn't even use the libraries
catalog because I'm a professional damn
it so I go straight to the shelf and I'm
standing there with a couple of you know
couple of shelves of you know ghost
stories and that's when I noticed
something wow this one guy uh William
lywood Montel okay um he's got a hell of
a lot of books here um right here in
this section uh most all of them are
about paranormal stories and incidents
in the state of Kentucky what's that
about well you know what else is in
Bowling Green Kentucky Western Kentucky
University and if you know anything
about the Paranormal you might know that
John Carpenter went to Western Kentucky
University his father was a professor at
Western Kentucky University and so was
Dr William Lynwood
Montel um this was a man that was
involved in editing writing publishing
about 28 books he was a folklorist he
studied what he called the history of
the common people um I had never heard
of this guy until I'm standing in a
library looking at a couple shelves of
books and then suddenly I'm a big
fan browsing a well ordered collection
of information in media might not help
you find exactly what you want but you
could find what you
need um libraries are great for that and
yeah so are bookstores but in a library
you can borrow the thing and pay nothing
gather your sources yeah yeah sometimes
the shortest distance between two points
is a search on Anna's archive and
suddenly you have an ebook that you
didn't have before but you remember
worldcat you can uh you can set up an
account on worldcat totally free and you
can give it your zip code and now if you
want to see if you can find that weird
and wonderful thing that you need to
read right now you can check worldcat
and it will tell you if it's any
libraries that are close to you
sometimes within driving
distance um
so not only do you want to you know
worry about that but you can also uh
check out your libraries uh collection
of
databases um yeah libraries have got
great collections but depending on your
library they're going to have things
like magazine and newspaper databases
they're going to have business databases
medical databases legal databases you
need forms they probably got your forms
hell lots of libraries have an online
language learning system where you can
learn a foreign language and you won't
have to put up with a guilt trip from a
little green
owl so you may not need any of this
stuff today you might not need it
tomorrow but next week next month who
knows check out other libraries online
or in person this is not meant to be an
exclusive relationship we are not
monogamous here least not when it comes
to the libraries what you do on your own
time is up to you um but is there
something your library is
lacking okay check
another back in the co days a library
set up a thing where you could uh sign
up online for a digital library card
that allowed you access to the ebook and
you know econtent collections in the
databases and stuff there was no charge
for it and in most cases there's still
isn't and that card might only be good
for maybe 6 months or so but hey 6
months might be all you need if you want
to get something that's you know more
permanent almost any Library will offer
you a library card with full borrowing
privileges for some kind of
fee back in the shadows for a moment
remember that there is a thriving ebook
community in other places besides Zed
library and Anna's archive and stuff
check out IRC remember IRC Good Times
those were there's a couple channels
there on Undernet called ebooks and
books that's a books with a zed on the
end of it um you know check that out
easy to use especially if you know how
to use
IRC but outside of all of that today I
would like to offer you a fantastic
opportunity I have a time share no
um I would like to offer you a fantastic
opportunity to be someone else's
librarian listen all of you you're
you're here at Defcon right I think so I
haven't huc inated this bad in ages um
that means oops I think I just got out
of
that there we go that means that you too
have a particular set of
skills you know things and you know how
to find things and you know how to do
things with what you have
learned you know about Torrance you know
about Anna's archive you know how to
break DRM I could have totally put in a
talk topic Where I Stood here talked
about how DRM works on digital library
materials how you could strip that
off and then make those files available
for someone else to get a hold of you
know that may not have access to it I
didn't do that because I think it'd be
boring because I bet I bet many of you
already know how to do that already
and if you don't you can learn it in an
afternoon believe
me but across the United States right
now right-wing legislators and fascists
sorry but I repeat my self there are
effectively Banning books and materials
in libraries and schools is it related
to sex ban it anything to do with the
gtq community that's got to go uh does
it involve a non-Christian deity that
can't have that um but it goes beyond
that some states namely let's see if I
can do this Arkansas Idaho Indiana
Missouri Montana North Carolina Oklahoma
and Tennessee have tried to pass laws
that make multiple aspects of public
librarianship a criminal offense and in
some states they
succeeded in uh in Oklahoma school and
public Librarians are looking at up to
$20,000 in fines or 10 years in prison
for exposing children to obscene
materials whatever the hell that
is in a in a Montana School library and
Museum uh employees face prosecution for
dealing in obscene materials have you
got a Renaissance exhibit coming through
town does it have pictures of naked
people you might go to jail if a kid
comes to the
museum sounds great doesn't
it
so what can you do to help it's very
easy share your skills share the
media now you can take that however you
like you might be thinking oh I I see
what he's saying he's encouraging me to
liberate DRM encumbered materials and
make sure that others can access those
materials uh regardless of the
capitalist unconstitutional
laws and oppressive
governments and you'd be
right
you
or you might think hey he's suggesting I
know what he's saying I he's suggesting
that I should scan and copy and digitize
materials that aren't even available
online and then put them
online and you'd be correct
um
or you might be thinking hey I
uh I know a
kid and they really need to read Ginder
queer cuz they're going through some
 right now man and uh maybe I should
get them a copy of their own because
their state banned that book in public
and school
libraries that's good
too I'm going to close this out with a
uh with a dirty little secret about me
that's not really a dirty little secret
if uh if you know anything about
me I never finished my library degree
I started working in libraries uh 30
years ago I've never been able to finish
my library degree because I'm too busy
doing Library work I've Shel books work
the front desk reference desk children's
desk built curriculum talk classes
install Tech fix Tech fix problems
started problems migrated systems
abandoned systems created workflows
Created databases wrote SQL wrote PHP
wrote documentation and wrote an entire
God damn book on how to use a very
specific database in a very specific
Library System I did all that
without a
degree I started working in libraries 30
years ago you can start today you can be
someone else's librarian even if they're
even if they're your only Patron all you
need to do is help and
share anything you don't know you're
allowed to look it up thank you for
listening thank you to Dereck br
for brow beating me into being here rise
above my friends enjoy the rest of
Devcon they got a thing coming up I'm
sure in a few minutes I'm going to head
out into the hallway if you want to ask
me questions well hi I'm a librarian um
and uh yeah I'll meet youall out there
thank you all for coming there's a hell
of a lot more of you than I thought
there would be
and thank you for having me
