on Monday Donald Trump is going to take
the oath of office for the second time
during his first Administration there
was a question of how he wields policy
in the
government the question of how he wields
and uses and raises money we're used to
talking about that with politicians but
there was also the separate question of
how he wields and uses attention and
Trump whatever else he is he's a master
at using and wielding attention Donald
Trump has met the media moment conflict
is attention and attention is influence
Donald Trump is a marketing genius he
understands stagecraft he understands
the power of the visual image in some
ways the defining feature of the last
decade of public discourse has been
Donald Trump as the center of attention
my friend Chris Hayes is best known as
the host of msnbc's 8m show all in but
he just wrote a great book called the
sirens call how attention became the
world's most endangered resource I've
read most of the books on attention out
there this one is I think the best one
at understanding the value of attention
today because it isn't just in danger it
is the world's most valuable resource
and the people who are on top of the
world right now understand its value and
understand how to wield it that's what
this conversation is about it's a
curtain Riser on the intentional regime
we're about to enter as always my email
as re kinow NY times.com
Chris Hayes welcome to the show it's
really great to be here so you've got a
cable news show you're you're an
attention Merchant I am what is
different about the way attention felt
and worked in the early 2000s when you
were starting out when I was starting
out and the way it feels and works for
you now that's a great question um one
is just there's more competition so much
more competition the notion now that at
every single moment moment when you are
competing for someone's attention you
are competing against literally every
piece of content ever
produced like I love this you know this
thing that happened a few years ago
where like suits which was a network
show you know that had became like the
most watched show on Netflix and it's
like it never would have occurred to me
back in 2013 that like I might be
fighting for eyeballs with someone
watching Suits at every single moment
that you are trying to get someone's
attention now
the totality of human content is the
library of your competition and that is
that was not true and I think that was
not true in 2000 I mean it was
definitely not true in 2000 it's weird
going in a lifetime from the problem of
too little content to to Too Much I I
remember being a kid and I would read
the serial box absolutely I would read
anything around me and there was never
enough there were all kinds of times in
my life when I was was caught without
anything to read and now it never
happens there's so many there's so much
of my life that would be better if I was
caught without anything to read but in
my pocket is this portal to you know
what is pretty close to everything ever
written pretty close I mean I I remember
a version of the Elias Sports bureau's
like sports baseball compendium of stats
and I would sit I just read you know who
the top 40 erra pictures when I was a
kid I knew the manufacturer suggested
retail price of every single car on the
road by year like I could tell you not
just not just what what a Camry cost but
what a 93 Camry cost right cuz you must
have had some book I had like the blue
book BL right yeah yeah and that and you
would in some ways right the the lack of
choice forced to kind of focus and I
think you and I you know were roughly
the same cohort I was at the sort of
front end of like RSS Google Readers and
blogs and this idea that you could
synthesize an insane amount of
information very quickly if you kind of
curated it and you created processes to
feed it into you and those processes
have gotten much harder and they've been
totally
overwhelmed by the evolution such that I
now have a very hard time even figuring
out what the funnel I'm trying to
construct is is so you're it is hard
sometimes I think when you've lived
through attention and information
changing as much as we have to take the
Long View yes one of the things I liked
about your book a lot is it takes the
Long View and I would say the core
argument is it what is happening to
attention now is akin to what happened
to human labor in the industrial
revolution spin that out for me so if
you think about Labor right
labor long predates labor as a wage
commodity in the industrial revolution
right human beings did stuff with their
effort and toil from the time that they
essentially evolved right like if you're
hunting Gathering picking berries that's
work and labor evolved into an agrarian
feudal systems and all kinds of
different ways of small shopkeepers that
did they did work
recognizably but what happens in the
industrial revolution is that that human
effort gets embedded in a set of
Institutions legal institutions Market
institutions that commodify it so that
every hour of wage labor is equal to
every other hour of wage labor and then
sold on a market for a price and that's
an enormous transformation in The Human
Experience this is total
transformation in all social relations
political relations economic relations
and also crucially the subjective
experience of being alive in the world I
think something similar is happening
with attention and it started a while
ago the same way that the Industrial
Revolution actually starts sort of
earlier than we think of it its peak but
we're reaching a crescendo where this
thing attention which is predates it
being commodified people have always
paid attention to stuff is now this
Market commodity that's extracted and
sold but but go deeper what do you mean
what makes a tension priceable and
tradable now differently than it than it
was before or is that not the the ground
of the analogy like they go into the
specifics of this so there's a preh here
which is that from the birth of what we
would call recognizably Modern media and
the penny press and magazines are
probably the first place that you would
call it that um particularly Benjamin
day's New York son which has the idea
that you charge people a penny for
newspaper you lose money on each
newspaper but you sell the advertising
right so the thing you're selling is the
audience modern media has had this model
for a long time and basically it's all
been selling attention Billboards
newspapers magazines radios TV there's a
few things that make it a difference in
kind now I would say one is the
sophistication of how minutely you could
capture people's attention and how
quickly and sophisticatedly you could
bring it to Market so you've now got
these nanc auctions that are auctioning
off your eyeballs in the moment you're
loading a web page or in the moment that
Instagram reals is going through so
that's one change the other is just the
ubiquity the TV can't travel with you
magazines can but eventually you read
everything in the New Yorker and that's
it the birth of the smartphone produces
a
ubiquity of attention to be captured and
sold that just is represents a kind of
break like it just wasn't like that
before one of the things happening in
this era the reason I think people are
so interested in books about attention
concern about
attention is that the supply of
attention is being changed and
transformed by this process it is being
My ATT has been trained to want more it
used to to be uh moreing when it can't
get it but also I mean the internet in a
way with a just a much higher level of
sophistication turned into a massive
experimentation for what works
attentionally MH it's just as like this
endless gain of function biolab for
attention like I like I really think of
like a lot of social media as gain of
function research for takes yeah right
like if you tweak the take and tweak it
and tweak it at what point does it go
viral at what point does it go too viral
and it like destroys your career right
like you can you it can escape the lab
in a way but there's something about not
I think just seeing attention as a
commodity but seeing it as something
that is manipulable shapable changeable
such that our Collective attention as a
resource is changing that feels
important in this I agree and I think
you know when you you had gr Bernett on
the show who's great on this and
attention researcher you know he talks
about fracking right and and the point
of the metaphor of fracking right is
that you need more Supply so you know
there used to be a certain category of
oil you could get and then market demand
said you had to go get more of it and
they figured out a away and there is
something very similar happening
obviously here right the expanded Supply
so like eating into your sleep hours
that's more Supply getting children
that's more Supply looking at two or
three things at once which would have
seemed totally like antisocial and
borderline
deranged two or three years ago five
years ago 10 years ago watching a movie
while staring at another screen like if
someone did that 10 years ago you would
have been like what are you it's so it
would be so weird the qualitative or
subjective experience of what attention
is is
Shifting you you talk in the book about
attention now being the most valuable
commodity the most important commodity
that commodity that so many of the Great
modern businesses among other things are
built on like Google and meta and I
still think we're realizing it was
undervalued or maybe that its most
important value isn't selling it off to
to advertisers so I've been thinking a
lot about Elon Musk who emerges in your
book as a as a slightly pathetic figure
right trying to yes the book was written
before I think he kind of got a second
chapter yeah trying to figure fill this
like howling void he has for attention
Elon Musk overpaid for Twitter at $44
billion it is not a business as he has
said himself worth $44 billion on the
other hand the amount of attention that
he is capable of
controlling and amassing and
manipulating through Twitter cannot be
traded directly for $44 billion but is
clearly worth I think more than 44
billion MTI multiples of it so how do
you think about this translation that
we're seeing happen right now now
between attention as a like a financial
commodity and attention as having more
worth frankly than the money it would
fetch on the uh on the open market
that's a great Point yes I think he
backed into the sale the he backed into
the purchase of Twitter based on a kind
of howling personal void but in the same
way that Donald Trump backed into the
same Insight born of his personality and
his upbringing in New York tabloid world
he figured something out that has been
obviously tremendously valuable in
dollar terms one of the really important
ironies here which I think does map onto
labor is that the aggregate of attention
like lots of attention or the collective
public attention is wildly valuable
right vlodimir zalinsky is a great
example of this right the president of
Ukraine like he understands that
attention on Ukraine's plight is
essentially the engine for securing the
weaponry and resources his country needs
to defend itself and yet even though the
aggregate of attention is very valuable
in Market terms each one of our
individual attention to second to second
is like pennies fractions yeah not even
pennies not even pennies fractions of
pennies and that was exactly what it was
like with labor you know when when when
marxists would say labor is a source of
all value they were right in the
aggregate take away all the workers and
the Industrial Revolution doesn't happen
but to the individual worker in the
sweat shop the The Little slice of labor
that you're producing is both everything
you have as a person and worth nothing
in the market almost nothing and I think
we have the same thing with attention
where it's like it's really valuable
pulled and
aggregated like the most valuable each
individual part of it that we contribute
is essentially worthless is pennies and
then subjectively to us it's all we have
I think attention is now to politics
what people think think money is to
politics totally certainly at the high
levels right there there are places
where money is very powerful but it's
usually where people are not looking
money is very powerful when there's not
much attention but Donald Trump doesn't
control Republican primaries with money
controls them with attention and I keep
having to write about musk and I keep
saying he's the richest man in the world
but that's actually not what matters
about him right now it's just how he
managed to get the attention and become
the character and the wielder of all
this attention and that's a change over
I think trumpist Republicans have made
and Democrats haven't Democrats are
still thinking about money as the
fundamental substance of politics and
the the Trump Republican party thinks
about attention as a fundamental
substance of politics I really like this
Theory I think you're totally right to
identify that they they kind of it's
sort of a sliding scale between the two
which is to say polit politics that have
the least attention money matters the
most right so in a State Rep race yes
right money really matters a State Rep
race partly because paying attention to
who the State Rep is local media's been
got money can buy their attention money
can buy their attention so like you
could put out glossy mailers you could
there's a lot you can do that you know
the further up you go from that to
Senate to president the more attention
there is already the less the money
counts and you saw this with the Harris
campaign they raised a ton of money and
they spent it the way that most
campaigns spend it which is on trying to
get people's attention whether that's
through advertising or door knocking
right but largely attention and then
persuasion right
I'm running for president here's what I
want to do here's why you should vote
for me now you can do that at billions
of dollars worth and everything is just
like drops of rain in a in a river
because there is so much competition for
attention and so what they what they
figured out I think was that they being
Harris or they being Trump they being
Trump and I think musk is that what
matters is the total attentional
atmosphere that in some ways it's kind
of a sucker game to try to like pop in
and be like I got an ad hey hey do you
like tax cuts you like what do you like
like all that's just going to whiz past
people that the the sort of attentional
atmosphere that's where the fight is and
that's what musk's Twitter purchase
ended up being an enormous almost like
archimedian lever on the electorate I
think this is right I think there's
another distinction between Democrats
and Republicans here which is that I
think Democrats still believe that the
type of attention you get is the most
important thing if your choice is
between a lot of negative attention and
no attention go for no attention and at
least the Trump side of the Republican
Party believes the volume the sum total
of attention is the most important thing
and a lot of negative attention not only
fine maybe great right because there's
so much attentional energy and conflict
and so you really see this like KLA
Harris and and once he became part of
the ticket Tim Walls and behind them Joe
Biden you know before the the change
over they were just terrified of an
interview going badly yes Trump and
Vance and I mean they were all over the
place including in places very hostile
to them yeah and Vance had a ton of
interviews that went badly yeah but they
were everywhere yeah because they cared
about the volume of attention and were
completely fine with the uh energy that
negative attention could unlock I I
think this is the key Insight the key
transformational Insight of Donald Trump
to politics so generally in politics you
want to get people's attention for the
project of persuading them friends Roman
countrymen lend me your ears Mark
Anthony says before he proceeds to
attempt to persuade them right what
Trump figured out is that in the
attention age in this sort of War of all
against all actually just getting
attention matters more than whatever
comes after it and one way reliably to
get people's attention is negative
attention like if you insult people act
outrageously I mean this is literally
there was a commercial model for this
which is shock jocks of the 1980s 90s
that we grew up with right like they
were in a competitive intentional
Marketplace in local places shock jocks
said outrageous things they weren't
trying to get someone to vote for them
they just wanted you to know that they
were on the running the morning Zoo you
know I I don't know how to insert into
the discourse a strong enough point that
Joe Rogan is much better than Howard
Stern was yes it's true like no no quite
wants to admit this because now Howard
Stern has become this lovable Uncle who
you know for liberals who has Hillary
Clinton on his show and I think K Harris
went on a show but I think Rogan is the
inheritor of stern
basically and you know we're Rogan has
become much more rightwing in the past
couple of years but compared to what
stern was Rogan is just smarter and
preferable I think that's probably true
but what I find Crazy is the shock jock
model has now become a successful model
in politics okay but now I think think
we need to have like a moment of caution
because there's a tendency right now
because Donald Trump won the popular
vote by like 1.5 percentage points which
is a terrible win in like the the an of
American politics right and yet there's
just like no doubt that Trump and his
broad cultural side have won some kind
of cultural and attentional victory that
is much bigger yes in its feeling than
the actual Coral Victory they so some of
these things both feel like I'm not sure
this works as well in politics but in
terms of changing the culture like his
win has changed the culture immediately
in a way that I would not have foreseen
and does not reflect like if you just
told somebody the election results I
don't think they would feel the vibe
shift so I I I agree with that and I
want to sort of take those in two parts
because I think the politics is actually
worth taking a second with Mark Robinson
ran for governor of North Carolina he
was already elected as Statewide as a
lieutenant governor said lots of
outrageous things all the time uh he had
he was discovered to be almost certainly
I think he denies it but it seems to me
pretty plausible uh a commenter on the
nude Africa site where he said all sorts
of wildly offensive things including I
am a black Nazi Robinson lost that race
in North Carolina a state Trump carried
it's probably like a plus one or two
Republican state at National level it
didn't work for him like there was a lot
of attention Mark car Lake courted
negative attention lost two successive
Statewide races Doug mastriano I could
go down the list so there's something
really F underperformed in Ohio his
considerably so there is something
happening where it's not a great is not
proven to be a replicable strategy that
the old logic that we were just talking
about the Democrats having and being
outdated still does hold in a lot of
races that said in terms of
influence I think negative attention is
incredibly effective mhm and I think
you're seeing this shock shock you can
call it shock do you can just call it
trolling politics I mean it is trolling
Politics the idea of trolling and the
reason that trolling exists is it's
easier to get negative attention than
positive attention it creates a
conundrum for the other side which is do
you ignore them while they say horrible
stuff or do you engage them and give
them what they want and I think this
kind of trolling politic which was
really Donald Trump's Insight is the
most transformational part of politics
now and you're 100% correct the media
management around Democrats is so much
risk aversion we don't if the choic is
negative attention or no attention we
take no attention every time and that is
the wrong choice you can frame this as a
strategy and clearly people who are not
temperamentally suited to the strategy
like Vance and Rubio and others have
have tried it on with varying degrees of
fit at different times but I think it's
better to frame it in a way as a
temperament I mean you write in the book
compliments roll off your back criticism
stays with you for days but it's not
true for everybody right there's a
certain personality type that is okay
with that negative charge it is okay
being hated by many to be loved by some
a lot of people would not have been
willing to absorb yes person polariz
musk has decied to ABS to become as
signicant as he is Trump is very similar
right I think most people would take the
trait of being thought fairly well of by
a larger number of people even if not
thought that much of by them yeah you
know in general rather than absolutely
hated by half the country to be quite
loved by the other half in order to
really dominate the the attentional
sphere and and I think that's something
in people and I guess what I'm asking
you is does politics now
uh s for a kind of attentional sociopath
I think it does I mean I think it does
select for of attentional sociopath I
would I would push back a little bit in
this respect though I'm not I don't know
how much of the negative feedback gets
to Donald Trump and musk like I do think
they have probably created but he's
sitting there watching MSNBC and getting
mad at it or CNN that's he's a guy who
actually seeks out stuff to make him
angry yes but I guess what I'm trying to
say is like I think it I think it
bothers him and musk too I just like I
don't I guess I just don't buy that they
don't that it rolls off their back I
mean they're kind of obsessed with it
also MH um so that that fixation is
Manifest differently it at least doesn't
turn them back right theyed from the the
idea that they're sort of zen-like like
well you know people are just going to
hate like that's not what's going on
psychologically fair enough so yes I do
I worry actually that it now selects for
a kind of sociopathic disposition
um or or just a very like broken and
compulsive one because like I know just
speaking for myself
like you know I have the showof demon in
myself and I I've from the time I was
very young wanted people to pay
attention to me I don't love that part
of me I don't think that's like the best
part of me I think that my relationship
to it is is a little fraught and
intentionally intentionally
managed and I don't think that like I
would a better person if I let that
Beast run
loose and I worry that the incentives
are to basically do that both both for
everyone individually in politics and
culture
everywhere and also in the kind of
collective public sphere let me say the
the thing that I think is the deepest
problem here I think fundamentally the
most competitive attentional
regimes select for the parts of people
that are in the Aggregate and overtime
kind of the most reactionary
H that's the deeper problem I worry
about tabloid coverage of
crime tabloid coverage from crime which
literally goes back to Benjamin day's
New York
son he he was the first New York
newspaper to have a court reporter who
went to the court and said you know
wrote down what he what he heard right
Tablo coverage of crime 100% has a
ideological veillance that is
conservative
reactionary so I think generally
competitive attention markets select for
negativity they select for all kinds of
things that are generally lead people
towards their their sort of most
reactionary selves and then the
negativity bias of a competitive
attentional markets also means it's
really hard for incumbents we've been I
think talking about attention mostly in
terms of social media here and I want to
talk about another way that uh
attentions and the way we think about
stories like changed in this period
which is reality television which is the
other side of this that Trump comes out
of I mean I understand Trump is sort of
made by Twitter at that time cable news
at that time and and and reality
television Joe Rogan weirdly also comes
out of reality television but one thing
that has felt true to me about Trump's
second term much more than the first is
it feels like reality television it is
all these secondary characters with
their own subplots and their own arcs
and what's going to happen with Pete heg
and over here as RFK Jr and and and and
musk Trump is playing much more than he
did in the first in the first term Trump
was the only character of the Trump
Administration yep now he's playing a
role that feels to me much more like the
host like sometimes he comes out and
somebody actually is voted off the
island it's like well Matt Gates is gone
now you know or so and so has gotten
people get fired or he settles like the
big plot of that week right he's going
to side with mus and and ramas Swami on
H1B Vis say you know or he comes in to
announce a new plot like Greenland right
he's not the only week we're running a
new competition yeah he's not the only
figure he's the yeah the the host the
deci the something there compared to
other administrations even compared to
his first this one is feeling programmed
in a very different way I mean you're
somebody obviously has to follow the
plots and report on them night after
night in in the Eternal Purgatory that
that you are
in there are worst Fates does that
resonate for you it does resonate I mean
yeah you know if you've ever talked to
people in reality television like they
selected for people with very flawed
personalities borderline personality
disorder narcissism because that
produced conflict and conflict produced
drama and drama is you know conflict is
what keeps attention and those people
like attention not all them but the ones
they pick right you pick people on
reality shows who like attention are
willing to absorb negative attention to
be the star exactly right um and you
don't pick people who are just sort of
like shy and go along to get along
because what does that get you so that
model I think explains a lot about the
personalities that are selected for in
context of intense attentional
competition in terms of the programming
I totally agree although I do think it's
totally like instinctual for him like I
don't think it's that plotted out but I
do think fundamentally he thinks
that you need to keep the attent he
needs the attention at all times and he
just has an intuitive sense of that the
Greenland thing's a perfect example and
there's been a thousand of them in the
first Trump Administration there'll be a
thousand more which is like what do you
do with it like is it attention getting
to be like the incoming president wants
to take over Greenland like yeah it
is is he serious I don't know is it a
good idea no it's not should we debate
it should we talk about
I don't know but we're all just now
inside the attentional vortex of the
Greenland conversation and he's done
that again and again and again but it's
a way in which his sense of it seems to
have changed it was a well remarked on
and reported
Dynamic of the appointments in the first
term yeah that he had a casting
orientation to them but it was visual he
wanted people who looked like a
secretary of state a general a Federal
Reserve chair
right you got people like Rex Tillerson
and J Powell in Trump
One He is building characters yeah and
selecting people who are good at going
on podcast for instance or being on TV
in Trump to yes I mean that latter point
I think he is selecting for people that
will keep attention and Comm communicate
for sure I mean I don't I still think
there's a certain amount of casting look
to it um with all of we should note like
all of the biases that come with that
right like if you're you're looking for
a general Central Casting you're looking
for a white man right which is part of I
think yeah but you're you're not looking
for Pete
Heth I guess although I also think
there's a certain amount of like who
does he see up on the TV no I think
there's that but I mean it's a different
story right I mean p Pete hexi is a
different kind of character I mean he's
an underdog in the
thing right he's you know the it's more
the sort of like a soldier who's going
to take over and disrupt the thing look
I'm not saying it's all planned out I'm
just saying that there has been a way
this feels different oh definitely I I
mean I also think I think there's also
an aams
razor well I don't know I also think the
man is the oldest man ever to be elected
to be president of the United States and
like maybe doesn't want to spend as much
time doing everything and kind of you
know if someone says in this season
we're going to let you like last season
of the show you had really long shooting
days this season we're going to front
some other characters to like we can cut
your shooting days in half like I think
there's a little bit of that happening
now I want to ask about the Democrats in
relationship to this and I guess one way
to do it is that since the election I I
mean any room with six Democrats is a
postmortem now whether so formally or
informally personally my favorite I'd
like to keep this going for years we
can there are parts of the postmortem
that are divisive in the party right did
they you know move too far left or
actually did they moderate too much and
what about Gaza and the one that every
room of this I'm in everybody agrees on
is and it's always said the same way is
that Democrats have a media problem yeah
I'm curious what you think that means
well I think there's two components to
that one I think you cannot avoid is
that whatever you think about Joe
Biden's ability is to be president in
the sense of doing the job day-to-day he
was very clearly and I think irrefutably
incapable of occupying The Bu bully
pulpit like I just don't think
there's any debate or argument on the
other side like empirically he gave few
interviews he gave you a press
conferences he he I mean compare go
watch Barack Obama be president and or
George W bush or all these people to Joe
but like it just was the case that I
think largely due to his age he was not
capable of focusing and occupying the
attentional space at the center of the
presidency so you got to start with that
would that have would it have worked I
don't know I believe Joe Biden at 67
wins re-election that he can tell a
story about his own record that if you
want my counterfactual on this that's
basically what I I think I kind of agree
with that and I'll say just I kind of
agree with that because this is arising
with like all the fury I felt about it
all all year going back a year I talk to
people I will say because of the way
this conversation's happened at the
absolute highest level of the Biden
Administration and one thing that they
were not shy about saying when I had was
making these AR arents before I even
made them publicly about can this guy
really run again is I I would hear
something like look Joe Biden can
perform the presidency but he can't
perform the presidency was a wake up put
to me and they still thought it was okay
to run him again you got to do which
shows an unbelievable devaluing at the
highest levels of democratic politics of
attention so okay so that they like it
was okay they could just make this
argument like this guy can't perform it
but you know I mean that's Entertainment
this is a presidency it's not about you
know who's the best celebrity or who can
go on on Jimmy Kimmel but of course it
partly is so that's the first layer
right but that connects to the next
layer which is the obsession with what
you know is called the mainstream media
the Legacy Media all of which is like
understands is understandable but is
increasingly a conversation that like a
a a relatively small part of the country
is part of and they're still laser
focused on that and again I get that and
they're laser focused on it in terms of
man not making news right like I think
about this phrase all the time like not
making news as opposed to making news
making news means getting people's
attention not making news means not
getting people's attention and the goal
of a lot of Democrats always in their
communication is to not make news and
Donald Trump's goal is always to make
news something that has been on my mind
is that in a way the fact that I keep
hearing Democrats call this IM media
problem rather than say an attention
problem reflect exactly the problem the
issue that I think there's still an
intuition I mean the media as a like a
like a linguistic construct sounds like
an Institutional thing that people
control like one way you might solve
your media problem is Chris Hayes
decides who goes on the Chris Hayes you
know all-in show on on on week nights on
MSNBC and you get him to book you and or
a Joe Rogan of the left a Joe Rogan of
the left right that's my favorite phrase
to come out of the election I I think it
reflects Democrats still thinking that
media is something that broadcasters and
Gatekeepers control and the the way to
win it over is to win them over as
opposed to something that you attract
right media is something you get booked
on attention is something you attract
liberal Joe Rogan discourse actually
drives me like insane like I want to
throw myself off of a bridge you can't
bill Joe Rogan if you're a political
you're trying to back it out as a
because a whole point of what is
Meaningful about him to the extent he's
meaningful and I'm I'm not sure I'm
using him a little bit as a like a
standin for a whole sort of world of
culture that I think Democrats have kind
of abandoned what's meaningful about him
is fundamentally he's not for people
interested in politics like Democrats
are obsessed with how New York Times
exactly words its headlines about Donald
Trump but Democrats win people who read
New York Times headlines about Donald
Trump they lose people who don't read
politics at all and you can't win them
by being more and more political and be
like we're going to create a Joe Rogan
but with perfect politics who likes
everything Democrats too like the whole
point is that you have to go and compete
in non-political spaces and you also
have to get attention you have to get
the attention of people at the periphery
of politics I mean how do you get
messages to people at the outer
periphery and part of the answer is you
need to draw a lot of attention
generally and they it's not like they
didn't know this I mean the idea of
Beyonce the idea like using celebrities
like wait well these are these are
attentional magnets they're they sort of
avatars but increasingly it just doesn't
work that way anymore I do think a
little bit I've been thinking about this
and I'm not sure I think what I'm about
to say is right but I think a bit that
the media attention uh cut I'm making
was actually there in who the two sides
treated as
celebrities because Democrats treated as
celebrities celebrities right Beyonce
and Taylor Swift and and there's kind of
mocking like well look they've got Kid
Rock over there at the RNC but the
actual celebrities that Republicans were
relying on were UFC influencers and
random podcasters and I I do think
there's a way in which this election in
a background fashion was testing this
question of well actually who are the
celebrities today or at least in a
persuasive level who are the celebrities
because there were these very buttoned
up celebrities where you would get one
post from Taylor Swift or maybe Bad
Bunny came in at the end and I'm not
saying that stuff didn't help Democrats
a bit and again you can overstate how
much any of it mattered but I do think
there's a way of not seeing that in this
world like there are a bunch of people
who are not named celebrities by the
media but they are influencers of
massive power now because they're just
like they're good at competing and
getting attention and building direct
relationships with their audience Steve
Jobs had this saying that it's not the
customer job to know what they
want and I do think there's a little bit
of like Democratic like obsession with
numbers and market research that's like
what do the numbers say and part of this
is just Innovation and improvisation and
trying new stuff that hasn't been tried
before as opposed to backing out what
you think the expectation is and that's
really true I think with attention
entrepreneurship which is not just to
like look what the what does best in the
algorithm and not just look at the data
but to try new things like I don't love
Joe Rogan's politics but I Rogan's a
really good podcast it's a really good
show I have listened intermittently for
years particularly I used to more than I
do
now I've listened to Rogan podcast where
he does two and a half hours with an
astrophysicist and they're totally
fascinating I mean part of the problem
too as I sort of think this through
right there is an asymmetry about risk
and I'm trying to figure out how like it
just is the case that like a gaff for a
democratic politician is going to kind
of stick out more and stick more partly
I think as a self- enforcing cycle which
is that if you do less media then the
Gaff stick more and partly
because well I'll I'll do this take and
then you can cut it
out I mean we're definitely not cutting
it out now well this take has nothing to
do with attention but here's my take
okay you're at you're at a
restaurant with your kids and the kid
over there the other table is just same
age just acting like crazy watching a
screen doesn't have an Afghan making Ms
and your kid says well they're they
don't have to do it and I'm like I don't
care about them it's not my kid I feel
like that's how the mainstream media
basically treats the Democratic
party and I think that's partly it's
partly the flip side of a correct
conservative critique which is that the
vast majority of people who work in the
mainstream media are products of a
cultural millu that is generally Center
left in Democratic voting but it it
means that they hold Democrats to higher
standards and like JD Vance and Donald
Trump are those other kids at the table
I don't care what they do they're not my
kids and I I truly believe this is true
this can get me in trouble I don't care
I I do I do think there's something to
it but I think there's one more Link in
in the chain which is that the issue is
that the people who vote for
Democrats are influ like to them the
main stream media is influences right
and I mean it isn't the case right or
rather it is the case that there are
things Republicans can do in the media
that are problems for them like in
certain ways not be anti-immigrant
enough yeah right there you know or say
Donald Trump did not win the 2020
election true they they have their own
gffs they have their own gaffs they're
just different and and they're because
the mainstream media for them is in the
role of enemy for the mainstream media
to be mad at them doesn't like that's
already the storyline so I I was wunning
these numbers because he's going to
write a column about this but I don't
think I am now so I'll say it to you
instead which is that by 2000 Fox News
is fairly it is a big enough force that
one can take it seriously uh conserv
talk radio is mature and is a a big deal
so look at the seven elections since
2000 presidential elections Republicans
win the popular vote in two y uh in the
seven before they win it in four yep now
we know that Fox News persuades people
to go right and we know that Fox News is
watched by people and yet we also know
that Republicans are performing worse as
Fox news and rightwing media become more
powerful and I always think the reason
for that is that Fox News has made
Republicans weirder oh yes and like
detached them from you know the center I
don't think Donald Trump is electorally
optimal himself and so there's this
weird way where you got to be very
careful with this idea of like I want
this propaganda machine because the
first person the propaganda machine is
going to convince is you that's exactly
right and we see this in race after race
after race I mean this has really been
one of the stories of the Maga era is
bad Republican candidates at all levels
losing winnable races that they probably
should have won because they were
adhering to the exact same attentional
incentives that produced Donald Trump up
at the top and this happens in all kinds
of races I mean you know even races that
they win that are way closer than they
should be so part of what's happening is
this Mal formation of of the public
right this Mal of of different publics
of of parties of different audiences is
producing real pathologies that are in
many cases again with among Republican
kets rejected by the people who are
outside of that particular audience
sphere that is being formed by that kind
of propaganda I mean there's been all
this post 2024 talk some of it by me
about the problem of the groups on the
Democratic side and the way they pull
Democrats not just left but into a
distance from the median voter they they
convince Democrats of things about the
public that are not true right the the
the group that is saying we represent
black voters we represent Hispanic
voters does not I think conservative
media is like that but much more
powerful for the right it has given the
right a very malform view of the public
oh I agree with that and enforces that
view in a like a VI way I I think this
is one place I think this is really true
is on trans issues I think people are
conflicted on questions of policy around
this but I think one thing that is
pretty clear both from electoral results
and from polling is that the public RIT
large is nowhere near as
obsessed I mean obsessed with this issue
and with the lives and bodies of these
fellow Americans of ours as the
propaganda machine and the
attentional the attention merchants on
the right are are finding and again
they're covering that because it rates
to be clear like there's a feedback loop
here they're not just like telling
people to care about this there's a
small group of people that do really
care about it but I think it has been
distorting for them and I think there's
all kinds of races where they have they
have like closed with this message well
I I think it I think that this issue is
somewhere where as you say people are
conflicted so if you can split the
elector
or make the elector think think about
the part where they side with the right
you know um sports teams right probably
best but the issue I think that and I've
said this a bunch that one reason I mean
just even just politically I think
democrats should be thoughtful about not
veering too far is it what's about to
come is cruelty and people don't like
cruelty yeah um and most people don't
like cruelty most people don't like
cruelty some people like cruelty but
when I think of the damage Twitter X did
to Democrats it came from 2020 not from
2024 it was this time when Democrats
actually dominated Twitter and used it
to do a lot of ingroup policing and
persuade themselves of a lot of
electorally ruinous or unpopular ideas
that then Republicans weaponized you
know in
2024 like the fact that Republicans now
have X and I guess true social and it's
run by you know musk and and and Trump
it's not obvious to me it's benefit it's
AET benefit I would agree with that I
mean I think that it's pretty clear to
me that musk's
takeover has produced a kind of vibe
shift and cultural influence for
reactionary ideas that I think broadly
benefits the right writ large even if it
sends a few Republican candidates over
the cliff you know what I mean like and
I think that so I think there's
sometimes there's trade-offs between
that honestly and I think that's
probably that's true for Democrats too
like sometimes there are trade-offs
between ideas moving public opinion in
One Direction or another or um
normalizing things that seem utra or
radical that may cost you know cost a
few candidates elections and I think
that those trade-offs go in both
directions the other thing is like
there's consequences here that are more
than political like literally tens of
thousands of people died that shouldn't
have died during the pandemic because
they didn't get vaccinated
and so there's like real tangible
results to all of this that transcend
politics and like I well to me that's
one of the ways though that this might
not play out well for the right yes that
for instance a good possible example of
this is that if the Embrace of crypto
culture leads to unwise levels of I
wouldn't call it deregulation but but
because these things aren't regulated
really now but structures of Regulation
that
are shadowy so you have huge amounts of
risk pooling in weird places you might
have contagion in the financial sector
because my Annie Lowry my my wife WR a
great piece about this in the Atlantic
you might have contagion the financial
sector because Financial firms begin
reconstructing themselves as blockchain
Assets in order to go into lighter
regulation and then you something that
somebody doesn't understand or The
Regulators don't understand and blow up
yep and now you're blamed for it in the
way that you know Bush and Republicans
were in '08 there's no guarantee that
that happens it might not but that's the
kind of thing where that's the risk
you're running I'm biased here and
people listening to this who don't share
my politics are free to you know write
this off or not but the center left
which still broadly consumes what we
would call the mainstream media Legacy
Media institutional media that there's
just more of
this Reality Checking happening there I
mean you know there was a big fight
about like is inflation happening or is
it not and then it was clear that
inflation was happening it was very high
and you didn't get you know there are
people who were talking about whether
the inflation was the cause of the
American Rescue plan or whether it was
really politically Salient but you
didn't get a bunch of inflation truthers
saying that the books were cooked or
they were wrong or like inflation was
high and that was a that Core Fact
suffused the coverage of all the people
in that media ecosystem and sphere but I
think if you saw 9% inflation under
Donald Trump I think you would have had
a kind of similar you know reaction to
the election election which is like it's
not happening like I think there's just
a mechanism of denial a mechanism of
like sheer sort of cleaving off from
reality in that attentional ecosystem
that is distinct so the political
scientist Henry frell had this good pce
uh on a substack in essay about
he was saying we misunderstand the
problem of social media and he had this
analogy to porn and he says the the way
he's working off somebody else's
argument about porn but he says internet
porn is tuned not towards people who
watch it but people who buy it what
internet porn is trying to do is not get
you to like consume it for free but to
pay you know 9.95 a month or whatever
and the people who will do that have
more extreme tastes and so you have this
ecosystem of pornography that is tilted
to be more extreme because it's trying
to get this actual
conversion but it then creates this Mass
sense among the porn watching public
that tastes are more extreme that
everybody else is into things that are
more extreme it arguably changes
people's tastes because you just get
used to things and in that way
pornography Mal forms the public and his
sort of argument is that social media is
doing the same thing it is making
everybody think that everybody else's
tastes politically are more extreme than
they are
you know everybody else is obsessed with
a you know UK gang rape scandal from
more than 10 years ago the the the
effect is not just what it does to the
public but the way
it warps you know pric the understanding
of you know politicians and media
figures who are looking at social media
as if it is the public and his key Point
here which which I think is just the the
Bedrock to for this analysis and so
often left behind and so important is
that we're talking about Collective
understanding and Collective
public as complicated organisms that are
greater than some of their parts because
as he writes in the piece like a lot of
this discourse is about individuals like
this a bunch of individuals hold these
wrong
beliefs but democracy is something we do
together it's not a bunch of aggregated
individual choices and I think this
argument is completely correct and
partly it's
because we're also being constant
pulled
towards things that are the most
attentionally Salient which is a just a
distinct category from like at a Bedrock
from what we think is important I I
cannot stress this enough attention is
not a moral faculty there's a Lipman
writing in
19s uh that I quote in the book it's
during Versailles and he says the
American people have a great deal of
interests in what happens at Versa but
they're not interested in it
he's like he's like in the same way that
like a child has a real interest in his
father's business he's going to inherit
but he's not interested in it he's like
what we're interested in is like the
gowns of the queen basically yeah and
it's pretty funny because it's bang on
um and the point is that we all
understand we have a category of
words going back to porn like titilating
puant
lurid that obscene obscene that describe
the category of things that we think
that we both know draw our attention but
are morally
dubious
and what happens in the sort of
collective malformation around attention
as the most signature value the only
thing that matters in this competitive
landscape is a kind of moral
degradation because it's pulling us
towards things that we know at some
level aren't that important or morally
defensible but do get our attention Okay
so I think this actually brings up a
good like very counter to this
conversation question which is maybe the
optimal
strategy if your vision your sense of
the public your politics maybe your
moral faculties are so warped by
competing for this volume of attention
is to not play so in 2020 Joe Biden is
the least online yes and the least
intentionally sophisticated or even
interested of any of the Democrats
running for president and I don't think
that is unrelated to him winning to why
he won in 2020 certainly won in the
primary and possibly even won in in the
general because he had lots of problems
as a candidate he was I think too old to
be running you know effectively even
then or at least very much on the edge
but and who's diminished from what he
once
was but his sense of the
electorate had not been like driven bed
that's a great point and so he didn't
get on board with a bunch of dumb things
other people were getting on board with
uh that's a great point you know we're
kind of implying that like the right
strategy here is a is an Embrace in the
way some some kind of alternative but
still Embrace like what we're seeing
from from Trump and musk maybe it's the
opposite and and think about this for
candidates I mean you know I
I after Bush won in 2004
when there was a version of the
discourse we're going through now the
idea is like you know what we need a
black guy with a foreign sounding name
who is a former professor and Community
organizer constitutional law professor
like that was ludicrous like what we
need is like a guy you can have a beer
with who also has a ranch and like
that's what we need and it was like no
we needed something totally different
two things one I think it is important
again to distinguish between like what
is this doing to people more broadly and
what is it doing to political
professionals yes you know and I think
it's extremely dangerous for political
PR professionals to read social media as
representative of the public I also
think you shouldn't just ignore it as
online or Twitter is not real life
because increasingly there is no
distinction between the two but there
are different selves that we have
there's a self that wants to read a
novel and the self that Scrolls
Instagram there's you know the self that
doesn't want to eat that third cookie
and the self that does eat the third
cookie there are different publics too
in that same way within the public
there's a public that feels very
compassionate towards immigrants feels
proud of America being a nation of
immigrants and there's a public that is
feels like they're being ripped off and
invaded and sometimes they the same
people often the same people but frell's
whole point is that these these publics
are formed collectively so I think it's
important a the political professionals
don't make this simple representational
mistake which I agree with you has led
to a lot of poor choices like people on
this social media platform are screaming
to me about this means there's some
constituency behind
them and
yet as the line between reality and
online breaks
down the Vanguard of people screaming
really do have cultural
significance that's true but here's one
of my big theories and we'll know in
four or eight years if I'm right I think
we are ready or very near ready and I
see it in the states and counties
Banning phones and schools and just like
the discourse for True
backlash and yes I think that the next
really successful Democrat although it
could be a republican is going to be
oppositional to it in the way that when
Barack Obama ran in 08 and I really
think people forget this part of his
appeal he ran against cable news against
24-hour news Cycles against political
Consultants right people didn't like the
structure and feeling of political
attention then and I don't think there
is anywhere near the level of disgust
and concern and feeling that we are
being corroded in our souls that there
is now and I think that at some point
you are going to see a candidate like
come up who is going to weaponize this
feeling right that they are going to run
not against Facebook as a or meta as a
big company that needs to be broken up
all of it they're going to run against
all of it that like society and
modernity and politics shouldn't feel
like this and some of that will be
Banning phones in schools right it'll
have a a dimension that is policy but
some of it is going to be just
absolutely like radiating a disgust for
what it is doing to us and to ourselves
I mean your book has a lot of this in
it I I think that political space is
weirdly open but it seems very clear to
me somebody's going to grab it I I I
could not agree more even not even
before we get to politics you know
thorough for president um but not
thorough really think this is important
right it's not somebody it's well you
can't drop out president it's not
somebody who is withdrawing and wants to
live on a lake there are people like
that right it's more like John height
yeah right it's more like what he is
channeling I mean but channeled into
politics which is an actual anger at it
a it is not supposed to feel this way
right and I don't think it's just going
to be like we're going to get rid of
tech talk but it is going to be
something about this culture and Society
Has Fallen
I I think it's a keen Insight I agree
and what I thought about is like
sometimes you read historical dispatches
from like Peak Industrial
London and people are just being like
this is the most disgusting place that
has ever been put on God's earth like
it's it's just sewage and coal ash in
the sky satanic Mills just satanic Mills
the just the the sheer stench and just
like what have we done how far from we
have fallen in this and they were right
like it's genuinely it was genuinely
disgusting and you know it did reach a
point with all of these things
particularly the worst depredations of
the Industrial Revolution where people
had enough and they they they they're
you know having enough rep was
represented in a million different
political Tendencies cultural movements
manifestations and we are at that I mean
it is in the course of writing this book
I mean literally from the
conceptualization of this book for that
I wrote in you know 2022 to this book
coming out
now we've already moved a tremendous
amount I mean when I first started
telling people about this book like H
attention huh and now it's like right
saying I've been obsessed with this for
years well you have for sure yes yes and
I think you and I are predisposed to be
obsessed with it because the universe in
which we operate is
like we're
constantly trying to sort of screen
information get the good information you
know protect our attention try to think
in a way that's
productive but I just think the ubiquity
of this I mean yes I think there is an
un there's an un Wellspring an untapped
Wellspring for a total Rebellion against
the way it feels to be inside your mind
at this particular moment with this
particular form of attention capitalism
and the way it feels to be inside like
the collective's mind yes even I I know
a good number of
supporters and they may like him but
they don't like how not how he feels but
how all this feels no no one likes it
right the nobody likes it and that like
that that is there right it's the thing
that Obama is very good at working with
right that that is there in its modern
version I think to to derive energy from
uh before any of that happens though
he's going to be president again you've
probably heard and I'm I'm just I'm just
hearing this now how do you think I'm
sure you're thinking about this how's
your coverage of trump in 202 5 and His
White House knowing everything we know
about the way attention Works under his
presidency going to be different than it
was in
2017 the one thing that I tried really
hard in the first term which I thought
was important and I think I mostly
succeeded it but certainly not always
was modulation that that that to me is a
central question of
modulation if you turn the dial on the
stereo to 10 and leave it there it will
sound like five eventually and then you
can't turn it up past
10 and this was something I I I was
intentional about the first time but I
think even more intentional now and I
think you see some of this like
literally no one's saying anything about
Marco robbio as Secretary of State fine
that's fine yeah that's a perfectly
that's fine I mean wouldn't be my choice
but I don't get to choose and wouldn't
be a democratic President's Choice but
and that's not to say that like no one
should raise any concern just terms of
cover me ask you something about the
negativity bias and the incentives it
sets up right obviously the future of
the Republican party is not highly
determined by what MSNBC hosts say about
different Trump appointees but there is
something about a world where Marco
Rubio gets no coverage for being a who
knows what kind of Secretary of State
he'll be but plausibly yes a more normal
thoughtful you know he's Mar R is a
politician works hard and like tries to
think about ideas also genuinely
qualified for the job yes um compared to
a Pete Heth or a RFK Jr or tulsy gabard
right in this world where we say that
that there is value to attention and we
give all this attentional resource to
the worst people making them more
valuable to Trump and squeezing up is
there actually like a bad incentive
system being set up by that like I I've
never know what to do with this thought
which I've had for a long time because
on the one hand you can't just ignore
the terrible things happen in government
that's a dereliction of what we're here
to do right and on the other hand if you
believe that just giving things
attention is to give them energy to only
cover the terrible things happening in
government is to um you know not Empower
like the Doug bergham and Marco Rubio in
the future like there feels like some
tension here that the media is never
known what to do with I think that's
interesting I mean I think that I don't
know I don't I don't have a worked out
theory for how to deal with that but I
think it's a good point I have a broader
thing been thinking about a lot this
phrase that has been is like on a
brainstorming notepad of mine and I've
I've thought about a million versions of
it the the phrase is the opposite of
Doom and I think about this a lot
because I think that we live in a doom
obsessed time Doom scrolling we do not
live in an age in which we have a
conception of the opposite of Doom we do
not live in an age where we have a lot
of conceptualizations of Utopias you
know there's different ages where all
sorts of different people are planning
the Utopias spiritual leaders Architects
political leaders they this is it this
is what it's going to look like when we
figure it all out no one does that
anymore I mean literally no one does
that like I can't think of a modern
contemporary version of Utopia maybe in
some some version the sort of trump I'll
fix everything personalist is the
closest we get personalist vision of
fixing everything and the and the reason
I think I think about this
is I think it's probably really
important to us in our Collective public
and individually to put our attention
towards a vision of what we
think something great would
be and it relates to this question about
the individual coverage decisions which
are absolutely affected by negativity
bias like 100% and conflict too like
there's a fight over eth as there should
be and there's not a fight over Rubio
and the conflict drives the news I mean
that's as old as
news but the reason I bring all this
because I sometimes think about it just
in terms of like putting attention on
things that have worked as opposed to
things that haven't worked so not so
much about individuals or members of the
cabinet but like I was thinking about
this the other day like 30 years ago
just was inconceivable we would cure HIV
AIDS and it was a it's amazing that we
essentially have and we've done it
through the labor and work of people
across all sectors of society over the
course of decades that took a thing that
just
felt horrible and
intractable and made it so much
better and there's just so much less
attention on those stories and I think
it is making it harder and harder for us
to conceptualize that it is possible
even to do good things and to solve
problems all right I have a lot of
thoughts on
this one is that I mean you and I both
know there have been a million efforts
in journalism to do Solutions based
journalism yes good news solution good
news journalism and they don't work in
part not that they don't work at all no
but they're it's and this is a as you
make the point of you know at the
beginning of this conversation and and
often in your book attention is a
business so when they don't
work you your cable news show gets
replaced right with somebody who will do
Doom
y on the other hand one of the things I
really believe about the podcasting
world one thing that makes me very
hopeful about it is these podcasts have
built you know huge unbelievably huge
audiences not being primarily about Doom
agreed right they don't actually have a
big negativity bias they're very hopeful
they're futuristic right the obvious
thing to say is the opposite of Doom is
hope but I think the opposite of Doom is
curiosity at least in this respect I
don't think it's Utopia I think it's
something about curiosity interest
Beauty
there is this way that Doom is a doom is
a belief that we know how things are
going to go mhm comforting in its own
way because of that comforting in its
own way because of that and mystery
feels to me like an opposite of Doom
that's and that there's a dimension here
where I think what has gone wrong in a
lot of this journalism is it feels hokey
and cliche and it has you know it is
actually too much the opposite of Doom
when the problem is like you want to be
on another dimension entirely that like
if the only question is things go good
things go bad things go bad is more
tension grabbing if the question is
things go bad or are there UFOs right
things go bad or like this novelist
speaks unbelievably be because I see in
you know the ratings of this show right
I can get very high downloads for Trump
episodes and very high PR over time
downloads for a novelist who describes
the world in a really beautiful way I
don't the opposite of Doom is Hope or
good things or Utopia I think for this
for attention it's curiosity it's
curiosity it's interest like it's like
oh have you ever thought about it this
way or isn't that
weird I want to make a point that I'm
afraid is like boringly technical after
what you just said which I am chewing
on I also think the back the
technological infrastructure of podcast
matters tremendously you've talked about
that that that line from I forget who
wrote wherever you get podcast is a
radical statement that the fact that
podcasts have built audiences largely
outside of algorithmic
feeds have built them through an open
protocol called
RSS that that technical backbone
actually matters for precisely what
you're talking about part of the reason
podcasts have flourished two three-hour
podcast podcast with novelists about
obscure topics long solo monologues
about history I mean all sorts of you
know all sorts of stuff
is because they're not embedded in the
same technical attentional
Marketplace and I think that really
matters a lot and I think it's actually
really hopeful because I think one of
the things to remember here and this is
really an important Point everyone has
wiped this from their memory but the
first version of the mass internet was a
entirely commercially engineered Mass
internet with Prodigy copy ser and AOL
AOL emerges the winner AOL acquired Time
Warner aell was the bell of the ball in
this huge company and it was a Walled
Garden and you dialed up and you were in
this little world that was curated by
these large commercial entities and that
was destroyed partly ironically because
of Mark Andre's development of a
graphical user interface to a
non-commercial open
Internet that rewarded curiosity that
rewarded people connecting about obscure
topics it rewarded hobbyism it rewarded
obsessive small little corners of
knowledge
it's already been the case once that an
open internet animated by curiosity
defeated a closed commercial internet it
doesn't have to be the case that the
version of the commercial internet we
have now is still the same one so that
to me is really hopeful though you know
because it's like it's we we have
divided sales we have divided desires
it's there's different parts of us that
different want different things and
different Market setups technical setups
institutional setups can cultivate
different parts of those selves it it's
not like we lose one part or another the
the other part is still there it's a
question about the systems around us
drawing forth those different parts of
us or not I think that is a good place
to end always our final question what
are three books You' recommend to the
audience so so first I'll start with a
classic which is Neil postman's amusing
ourselves to death the the goat The Goat
in this in this discourse I think it
still totally holds up the first
chapter which is somewhat predicts
Donald Trump yes totally in an explicit
yes way yes totally yes in an explicit
way also you know the first essay which
is just about the sort of different
versions of dystopian Future Between
1984 which is information constraint and
Brave New World which is Overflow of
entertainment and information about how
we ended up in the Brave New World great
um another book that has been mentioned
on your podcast a lot and relevant which
is again I I feel like I'm sort of
citing can Tex here and it's important
for me to do because I want to be clear
as we all are as authors you know lots
of people have been thinking about this
very well and very hard um but Jenny
Odell's how to do nothing um is a
fantastic book it's strange and distinct
and and and is much more I would say
like spiritually omnivorous than the
book that I've written um more sort of
interior interior in its focus too about
how you kind of do this work with
yourself
and with other people as a kind of like
Collective radical undertaking yeah the
form of that book is also the function
because I feel like so much of what
books about attention are about is how
it homogenizes all of us and that book I
I love that book so much it is a
completely distinct product completely
distinct mind like no other human being
would write that book no other human
being would write that book there's no
comp for that book it is its own thing
and it's also a book love book like that
I love books like that too and I also
think it's a rare thing to write a
non-fiction book where you where you
can't get 85% of the way there by just
like hearing the author on a podcast or
reading a review like you got to
actually read the book and then my final
is a work of fiction of short stories by
an author named Tony Tula Tudi called
rejection and it is the bleakest not not
not safe for work friends not safe for
work it is the bleakest and one of the
most unremittingly punishing pictures of
the hell that we've built for
ourselves and yet I say this that
doesn't sound like a book you want to
read I absolutely tore through it I read
the whole thing in basically a day and
it is stuck with me and I really
recommend it highly one of the most
intense reading experiences there is
there is a 10 to 12 page granular
description of a sexual fantasy in this
book that is that your full body will
basically you will la like hit a point
of
physical um paralysis as you read this
but also can't stop reading and also are
so amused it's so funny and it's so dark
and it it there's I've never read
anything like it Chris says your book is
great I recommend it to everybody thank
you thank you
