there's absolutely no reason why
attributing purpose to organisms is
nonscientific that's rubbish we are
effectively saying not only are
organisms purposive and evidently so but
very interestingly as physiologists we
know also that a purpose of explanation
actually predicts downwards towards the
molecular level as to what kinds of
mechanisms must exist for that purpose
to exist than the other way round what
is interesting here is that purposive
explanations actually lead to good
science what is this
doing why does it consume 20% of the
total energy that we use it's got
nothing to do with whether there's
something ghostly out there that as it
were is a goal that is Somewhere Out
There dragging us towards something that
sort of causation is not involved all is
postulating is that there is
anticipation of what might happen in the
future and that has nothing to do with
backward time uh causation or anything
ghostly like that all he got to have any
organism is the ability to anticipate
very many different reactions rapidly to
crisis situations and that can only be
done by having anti ipat process
occurring inside here Consciousness to
me is like um a Readiness if you like to
act and thereby anticipatory and it goes
back to what Dennis was saying earlier
that the key thing there is
anticipation it's it's a state of
Readiness and anticipating what it is
that's going on in the world regardless
of whether we're right about it uh we
cannot function without that and that is
consciousness you don't that is demon
isn't it there are what are called
Readiness Potentials in the nervous
system that have been recorded as
inevitably what happens when you are in
the process of making a decision it it's
fascinating it really is they are
Readiness potentials the system is
getting itself geared up and we feel
that consciously too it well that is the
feeling that is the Consciousness Dennis
that is the
conscious but you know I'll say
something I'll say something really
highly controversial now something you
Dennis and I have been discussing uh
more
recently Ray Dennis is there anything
particular you'd like me to touch on
while we go through this conversation
one of the things that I've been
thinking more about uh in recent times
as Dennis knows and Dennis and I've had
discussions about and of course you must
understand that we never have closed
minds uh Dennis and I on anything I mean
our whole approach is to try and be as
open to ideas as possible because it
seems to us that the only way you can
begin to understand particularly
problems like the Mind Body um issue uh
is is to to be open to
ideas what what we've been doing is sort
of focusing on I think it's fair to say
on one of two areas that I think are
somewhat mistaken in approach if you
like we may be wrong on that and
corrected but um one of those is that um
the uh the the the idea of Consciousness
as a an emergent
phenomenon that um it depends as it were
on higher order
functionality and our approach to that
is more as we've expressed in one of our
papers in terms of a title of one of our
papers amergent
just simply actually you can remove the
word a Al together it's
mergent and it's mergent through levels
and across levels if you see what I mean
in within levels it's mergent as well
there's a mergence going on and that
mergence we feel is something which is
true of all cells it's as true of
unicellular organisms as it is of um
higher level horrible word higher more
complex more um organized uh entities uh
multicellularity for example uh will
involve some kind of coming together of
what we would normally look at in
relation to individual organisms
unicellular organisms as what I believe
you could refer to as conscious in the
sense that is is to do with the state of
being of that organism in relation to
its readiness if you like to
respond uh and they are conditional
States so in a sense Consciousness is a
conditional State and conditional States
exist although with different levels of
Faculty um what is what has evolved as a
result in in large part of that
motivational Consciousness if you like
that that changing of States uh and
responsiveness are are the different
faculties that we see in all sorts of
forms of life and life has explored
different ways of being engaged with the
problem of maintaining its Integrity so
I I I think that sort of encapsulates I
think where our thoughts are I mean
Dennis might want to correct some points
but I think that really sums up where we
are but we're not closed if you see what
I mean I mean one of the things that
we're probably more closed about is the
idea that there is a a Mind Body um
separation as it were
yes that's another aspect that I think
we think is is is mistaken and it leads
to all sorts of problems of regarding
organisms as sort of mechanistic not
just material I don't think there's a
problem with regarding it as material
but uh that's different in regarding it
as mechanistic uh and and it was the
change to looking
at or life as mechanistic that I think
created all the problems back in the
western sense in terms of the
Enlightenment and so on that for some
reason we wanted humans to be
different uh and and uh and and started
to treat organisms other forms of life
as being um simply material in a
mechanistic sense and it led to another
kind of dualism I'm sorry I'm banging on
here but I just want to get you the feel
of where our thoughts I think lie um it
led to another kind of of dualism which
we've referred to which is a mechanistic
dualism in other words you look for the
bit within the system that is driving
the system and we don't think there is a
bit within the system that drives the
system the system drives the system
that's the whole essence of life it's
it's the distinctive feature of of
living
organisms um and I so I think that's I
think that's where we are and then of
course on top of that what we the idea
that we've we've we've kind of developed
over the years is this idea idea that
the system at its different nested
levels nested functionality from the
cells to the tissues to the organs to
the organ systems and so on and to the
body and to the social interactions and
the inter species interaction the
ecological uh leads to different levels
of intelligence if you like different
different ways of using information
about what's going on so cells will
influence cells and communicate with
each other it's absolutely vital to the
functionality uh and a lot of that has
got lost we feel in in medicine actually
that we've we've stopped looking for the
way the system controls itself and the
way that that control of itself can be a
fundamental in what goes wrong uh with
with health um and then of course you
reach the the sort of rather more outer
level if you like which we regard that
that is regarded as the psychological
self if you like um which creates all
the sort of problems of the Mind Body
which is of course how on Earth can this
apparently
immaterial aspect of Our Lives influence
the material and of course in a sense
it's not as immaterial as you as people
think it is and that's the key there I
think that there's no and it's an open
system of course it's exchanging what is
what is fundamental about that outer
layer that outer cultural level if you
like social psychosocial cultural level
MH that it is what what exists beyond
the materiality of us as
individuals uh and therefore has a kind
of
spiritualism if you see what I mean but
without a dualism it has a spiritualism
in the sense that there is something
some aspect of maintaining the Integrity
of the system that is not necessarily
the maintaining of us
personally and that is a I I I think a
crucial understand understanding and in
a sense we commune with that uh as part
of it some people ask me when I express
this that you know are you talking about
pan psychism I don't know whether I am
or not I don't think there's any need
necessarily to sort of label it uh but I
understand why they ask that question um
you know depending on how one defines a
psychological State there are certainly
social
States um and those social States are to
do with the way uh we
behave as
Ensemble uh as as groups uh as opposed
to as individuals and it's not just
simply an aggregate of individual
Behavior what happens when we behave as
group there's a that becomes a kind of a
communion a different way of
communicating we don't have to do what
we're doing now which is to explain
ourselves to each other when we're
behaving in that kind of way in fact the
vast majority of us you know we just
don't have time to do that
we we behave in that way we create uh
psychocultural Norms if you like in
terms of normative behavior and they
will differ from culture to culture
different kinds of cultures uh and and
and over time they will change in
responsiveness as a way of solving the
problems I'm going on far too much but I
that I think I I think that encapsulates
where we where we are I suppose sorry
sorry I I I went on a bit long with that
and you
didn't there are aspects to it um it's
not surprising therefore I think that
people can get so muddled over it all
including us and I think it's it's great
because it shows your passion towards
the topic Dennis anything about what Ray
just mentioned that you'd like to add on
or
clarify I don't think I I need to no I
the fact is that we can finish finish
each other's sentences I mean this is
ridiculous Comm
I it's true I ever since ages ago you
know we we know where the mind is going
of the other one we could easily finish
the I was waiting to finish any of those
sentences no well we've got this pins
down where we are and you might as well
begin whenever you want heavin look I
think the best place to start you guys
have both been in this field for such a
long time and over the last few years
I've noticed a a nice shift or
transition into the philosophical
aspects of it all sort of bringing this
and I appreciate that because it it fits
then perfectly within this podcast
because as a doctor someone who's deeply
engrained within biology physiology I'm
very fascinated personally by the
philosophical elements that our work
entails and I want to first start with
definitions guys so let's try and Define
your philosophical idea of the Mind Body
problem and obviously the problem of
this mind matter dichot to me already
and thereafter let's define life and
Consciousness anyone can start I I'll do
a beginning um I I think I come
from a long period of interacting with a
number of very good philosophers and
it's been a privilege to interact with
them and I think what I've come round to
are two things that matter
one is that many have felt that given
the way biology was developing in the
20th century under the influence of
Francis cric's central dogma and various
Gene Centric
interpretations that they somehow had
to position the mind in a completely
determinist world and I don't think it's
possible and you know I I I've discussed
this with for example Anthony Kenny many
times he did his best as a philosopher
to um to approach these questions
accepting that biology had shown that
it's a determinate World well it just
ain't that's the first thing there is
massive stochasticity There is almost
virtual impossibility computational
uh explosion and all of that to account
for things in determinate models so
that's the first B thing I would say and
the second thing they did was therefore
to become too captivated by the need to
either go with dayart or against him and
we don't see the need to bother with
that argument at all there that that was
that would be my gloss on the way Ray
began yes
Reay anything about that you'd like to
add
on uh yes just to continue on from that
um aspect of the um stochasticity the
variability the almost unpredictable
variability at at at that very basic
level uh is is that that um nothing can
work without that it is both a problem
for life and the reason for life in a
sense um and what the system does is we
express it is that it harnesses that
energy from that stochas and that
variability to create the things it
needs to create in order to solve the
problems it needs to solve in order to
maintain its Integrity the distinctive
feature of life I think is that that
there is this self maintenance of
Integrity it doesn't do that by
remaining the
same it does it by adaptation by change
at various stages and times so it can
have an adaptation which is
transgenerationally in response to
longer term changes and it can have
which unfortunately the sort of modern
view put aside um because it it it had
this inherent view of of inheritance of
required characteristics as it were in
other words the use of information in
one generation to solve the problems in
the future knowing in a sense that you
can't solve them immediately uh but if
if some of you can if there is
sufficient variability within the system
for the systems to explore different
ways of dealing with a problem and you
can develop faculty and that leads me to
another distinction which is the
distinction
between and it's not it's not an
absolute distinction I'll come back to
that in a moment but distinction between
the development of Faculty on the one
hand both in terms of development and
also in terms of uh Evolution the
ability to do
something and what one does with it
which I will call
facultative so the distinguish between
faculty on the one hand and
facultative uh and uh if you focus just
on the
faculty you end up with kind of just
looking at the anatomy and physiology if
you like I mean here is my it's
beautiful no doubt I mean look at it
these are my my fingers and my hands and
my arms and if you look at the fantastic
relationship between the muscles and the
skeleton and how it works or if you look
at an if you look at organisms that are
arthropods for example the extraordinary
beauty of the arrangements that they've
got to do similar kinds of thing which
is to move the reason why these are
there to move is not so much inherent in
The Faculty but in the facultative in
other words what you doing with them uh
and in a sense these are tools of the
system Society the scientist doesn't
don't seem to have much problem if I if
I point to a hammer and say you know
that hammer is used to knock Nails in
and hold things together or that
screwdriver is designed to unscrew
things or whatever an Implement that has
been made in order to do something
because it's created to do do something
then you can see reason in it and this
is important reason see reason is as it
were the non-material bit because it's
the situational
logic why has that been created it's
been created in order to solve the
particular problem of holding things
together or unscrewing things or doing
things that we need to do what's really
odd is the fact that if here I have this
pencil which I use to write down notes
I'm going to be doing it while we're
talking in case I need to make a note of
something and it's a curious kind of
thing that somehow or other they want us
to divorce the idea that this has
reason behind it but this hand that uses
it doesn't and it makes no sense to me
because this cannot do anything without
this and this can't do very much without
this
you see so I don't know what happens to
the to science when it's somehow or
other the more it gets into this the
more it becomes hard and says oh you
know you can't have reason you can't
have why you can't and of course one of
the difficulties of why is that you
can't measure it I mean the why is
certainly immaterial in that sense it's
not something that can be clearly
weighed on a scale um I mean what is
half a reason I don't know you see so
it's terribly difficult to partition and
sort of say what it is what it is is
course there the situational logic and
that situational logic is created in
large part by us by life life is both
problem solving and problem creating so
it creates the reason the reason we
don't have to create some reason from
somewhere else you know it's a Plato
kind of you know platonic kind of sense
of you know there's an ideal out there
if only we could find it and and and you
know the philosophers of course have the
skill of being able to tell us what it
is that the somehow or other the essence
of being Essences of being what we are
and if only we knew what they were we'd
know the real the real Ray Noble you see
is is the essence of me and and this
kind of concept of an essence of that
that really drives the system it either
leads you to the hard materialistic view
or mechanistic view of the you know it's
the genome I mean I've seen people refer
to Aristotle's view of the Soul as being
almost like the genome which I think is
Bonkers it's not like that at all uh and
in fact he he saw some of the
fundamental problems with dualism uh
which is again how do you partition it I
mean how do you if if you have a faculty
to act why are you creating a faculty
for the faculty to act why can't the
faculty Act without there being a
faculty for the faculty to act us you
see and and I mean you can find that in
Aristotle's writings as well you see uh
and and so why do we need a genome in
order to act in order to you know no
Gene is involved in this when I'm using
my pencil and no Gene certainly
determines what it is I'm thinking when
I'm writing on a piece of paper with it
I mean very important to clarify there R
just to interrupt a moment very
important to clarify there is that it
does take time to change gene expression
levels so there is inevitably uh a block
on being able if you're doing something
quickly like playing the piano um no
genes are varying during that and and
indeed you know the heartbeat which is
what I modeled many years ago there's no
time for gene expression to change
during each heartbeat that's something
that people seem to have missed largely
I think because Dawkins is so arly
convincing with his simplistic
explanations of a gene Centric view but
once you abandon that and realize that
there's massive stochasticity even at
the molecular level that of course comes
from the water-based um system which has
naturally got huge stochasticity we
will'll never model all the trillions of
water molecules there are even in a
single cell let alone doing it in a
whole body so I keep coming back to that
fact that we have to recognize that
organisms are operating within a an
effectively Infinite
Space a
possibility I I love the fact that I
know Dennis when you spoke when you
speak about this this whole issue you
talk about how if someone can create an
artificial intelligence it'll be more
impressive when they make one out of
water because then they've basically
exactly so think it would be necessary
because I can't otherwise you see their
answer would be look Dennis you've made
a huge fundamental mistake the software
is not dependent on the hardware and I
say wait a minute what are organisms
they're not softwar dependent on a
hardware they are integrative holes
there is no distinction like that what
is true is that what you sometimes refer
to as the hardware the genes and the
proteins they can create are immensely
fluid we know for example that the
proteins can
multitask you can have a protein that
goes into a membrane and act as a
channel and the same protein can be an
enzyme in a different
context and most proteins are like that
we we we know now about 70% have got
variable well what has happened is easy
to understand too too it was shown in
the first sequencing of the human genome
in 2001 if you compare the different
species for a particular type of protein
let's say it's a chromatin and you you
look at what's happened bits of being
added on there's been a cretion of
functional bits but that means that
sometimes in a complex protein there may
be seven or eight functional bits that
can be used for that purpose or this
purpose and they can be totally
different different between between um
controlling iron moving in and out of a
cell membrane in a red cell or enabling
a conas to do the enzymatic work that
he's doing it's as different as that you
know so we've got to recognize that
there's a much more fluid situation that
life encounters and that's true even in
a single cell if I represent a
nucleotide as the size of my fist and
here in Oxford it's the nucleus this is
the edge of the cell will be way up in
Scotland it's that
huge it it's it's quite astonishing when
you think about when you guys think
about the current state of biology where
do you think there's been a fundamental
misunderstanding with for you brought up
Dawkins and he's played a huge role with
the selfish Gene book and the way people
are able to absorb that book because the
content's quite accessible where do you
think there's been a fundamental
misunderstanding with how we perceive
Concepts like life or or
mind sad to say it's the um unfortunate
interpretations of molecular biology
there are several key facts that just
don't fit with the current theories
first DNA does not replicate like a
crystal it does not self-replicate it
relies on the organ ISM itself to be
able to correct many errors in the
replication process second there is no
vican
barrier there
is um a what's the word we use sometimes
Ry the boundary between the Soma and The
Germ line yes but it's a functional
boundary and we know that control rnas
can just pass across that uh in uh very
readily we know that many examples of
that I know a paper that I published
with a colleague uh just last year or
2023 we're now 2025 um 2023 I think
anyway it it simply shows the many
examples of little vesicles of rnas and
control proteins and so on Crossing that
boundary so vicman barrier I'm afraid is
gone inheritance of acquired
characteristics we now now then in then
into the epigenetic area and and here
again is a major fault what what Richard
I think would say is okay some of that
is is an honary Gene he uses that
expression actually in his debates with
people I I accept that as nonre Gene but
once you do that you're changing the
definition of a gene such that the whole
Theory becomes a torgy there is no way
you can tell test it experimentally and
that I'm afraid is true of the selfish
Gene Theory he's very clever he has
produced a um a a a structure that seems
to make extraordinary sense if you stay
within it but as soon as you realize DNA
does not replicate like a crystal that
there is no vican barrier and that
inheritance of acquired characteristics
can occur through epigenetics and uh we
can go into the detail of any of those
if we need to but those are the three
main things that are just
misinterpretations of the molecular
biology and believe you me over the last
20 years we fored in that area to such a
degree when I put all of those points to
Richard dorkins two years ago in a
debate at The Institute of Arts and
ideas Festival he didn't answer any of
those he simply repeated his Mantra Jean
aaal Jean a causal and Jean aaal because
we couldn't make measure an association
between the two to a physiologist
Association can be zero and it can still
be
causal that's that's right Dennis and I
I I think there's a there has also been
a fundamental um reaching out to your
philosophers now there's also being a
fundamental philosophical error made I I
think um and it goes back to what we
were saying a little bit earlier that
um that that if
you as there's a concept that if you
abandon
materialism that you're suggesting that
there is something which is
Supernatural yes exactly what what we've
tried to do is to show people that this
is not necessarily the case at all that
the reason is not super natural it is
natural um it's the only way nature can
work um because it all organisms we say
in our little book understanding living
systems all organisms have to assess
their
environment uh and they do so by sensing
it but also by anticipating it or
organisms are dynamically engaged in
their environment and continuously
assessing it uh now perhaps in the
simplest of organisms unicellular
organisms that assessment is relative
aely simple although actually when you
look at it it's rather
complex uh and it involves an enormous
amount of changing of State uh a and and
exploratory
behavior and um and you know as you
going back to this idea that
um as it were systems are nested uh
within each other uh organel are nested
within the cells and the cells
integrative function and each cell is
nested within in multicellular organisms
multicellular organisms may have come
together um in a sense through the same
kind of variabilities that exist within
the cells themselves that you know cells
will come together uh merge to create
new organisms and in the early period of
evolution that may have been a
fundamental in determining the way
different species were created uh and
until we what we see now are very much
more definitive uh species and groups uh
but the sort of symbiotic relationships
that can
exist but going back to this
philosophical
thing um I think another mistake that uh
the selfish Gene makes is
regarding the gene as an immutable
bit Richard makes a great deal of this
this in the selfish Gene itself in the
in the
book this always reminds me a little of
Plato's idea if you like of you know
that the what there has to be some pure
thing that maintains itself that isn't
and and of course the problem with being
is the fact that it's continually
changing the world is full of flux so
what on Earth should it be what is the
essence of being a horse or a dog or a
cat or a human being or a chair or what
ever um and of course it it isn't like
that there isn't a system that exists
outside determining what it is that it
should be and but but curiously I think
that Richard Dawkins and others have
made a similar kind of mistake but in a
mechanistic way of saying that what it
must be must be determined by something
which is pure and their whole
mathematics in a sense their whole kind
of Math's approach to it is to assume
that you know the the whole existence is
to maintain genes in a gene pool well je
genes don't exist in a gene pool it's
it's a figment of imagination in any
event there isn't a gene pool the genes
are in us uh and uh yes you can regard
us as a pool but once you decide that
they're in us and not in a gene pool the
idea of maintaining genes in a gene pool
evaporates I mean why on Earth would you
want to maintain genes in a gene pool
when in a gene pool they can do
absolutely nothing the only way that
genes can do anything at all is by being
used by systems that they exist in which
are organisms and The crucial thing is
here not to maintain the Integrity of
the gene the immutability of the gene it
is to change
it and when you look at how this works
in practice the genes are yes they're
right that genes are a problem because
the errors are occurring all the time uh
and those errors have to be corrected
and there's a whole Machinery that
exists to correct those changes if they
didn't didn't have that Machinery within
ourselves we would soon fall apart in
other words we will fail to do what
organisms do which is to maintain their
integrity and their integrative function
and um how they do that will change with
age because with age we do um maintain
our integrity in somewhat different ways
uh and uh so we have to adapt to the
fact that we're not doing it in the same
kind of way when you reach the age of 70
plus for example um you're no longer
doing it by generating more brain cells
or you're not generating it by altering
the synaptic sort of um Connections in
the system other than perhaps losing
more of them and so on so you're having
to adapt to the fact that
physically your faculties are not as uh
Supple or as as responsive as they were
before and you adapt to them but this is
not not about keeping everything the
same it's adapting and changing and
that's true at at all levels it's true
as a cultural level cultures have to
adapt otherwise they cease to
exist um and any system that seeks to
say what something should be is
problematic it creates a closed system
which is then unable to adapt and that
leads us to the sort of philosophical
Pro problem at the social level uh is
there a better way of being well
probably but I don't know what it would
be uh and I think that attempts to
define it
uh probably lead to more likely
breakdown of social existence than it
does enhancing it because we're
dependent on the variability not
maintaining things the same and I think
this is a major philosophical mistake
that the materialists made in a sense by
honing in on the gene as the immutable
bit and thus the moral that's
extraordinary Immortal The Immortal
Gene not Immortal at all yes that was
the name he was um when he was
considering to name it initially before
his Publishers told him to name it the
svish gene that's right yes yes I think
something and that in itself that in
itself created another philosophical
problem of a moral kind because see it
kind of I know that I know that Richard
wouldn't have intended this to be the
case but it led to the acceptance of the
notion that we are all born
selfish and this is fundamentally
philosophically uh flawed because you
can't be selfish unless you have a
choice not to
be uh and that is fundamental you see
and I don't understand you you can't be
regarded as as a baby a baby cannot be
regarded as selfish I mean all organisms
of course as I've said you know we're
definitively seeking to maintain our
integrity
but that in itself is not
selfish none of us could exist if we
didn't do that none of us could exist
without helping each other maintain our
integrity which leads to mutualism it
leads to symbiotic activity it leads to
communal activity it leads to social
activity it leads to give and take it
leads to um a a kind of morality if you
like that is certainly fundamentally
different to the concept that we're all
born selfish
uh and um it also leads to situations
like impacts of walls for example where
Equity
matters uh and uh you know individual
members of a group of a pack in wolves
can be punished uh if they don't behave
correctly in other words they don't
behave for the sake of the of the
group uh and um but at the same time as
that is the case you still got to have
the outriders for evolution to be able
to occur you've still got to have those
within the group that are going to
behave differently who are going to be
out slightly outside the
norm uh and that at the social level is
also fundamentally creative and if you
don't have that you're not going to be
able to um evolve culturally and uh and
and adapt readily as as groups so even
even that moral normativeness if you
like in wolves has variability at the
edges I mean it will allow certain kinds
of
um certain kinds of behavior which is is
is not conducive so conducive to
maintaining the organization of the
pack I think it's it's there's almost a
a beautiful mirroring here when you're
talking about that sticks putting
sticking out and doing something
creative because you guys are doing
something similar in that regard with
your thought processes and trying to
bring back some sort of a a holistic
view of everything do you guys find that
when you approach your work you're
attacked from two sides let's say um
there's one group let's say materialists
reductionists because in in a sense you
are not necessarily reducing us to our
parts but acknowledging the extreme
layers of reality and then bringing them
all back together which is beautiful but
then that means there's there are going
to be people out there who still call
you reductionists and don't like it and
then on on the flip side the
reductionists who are fundament Al
reduction is don't like the fact that
you guys are almost bringing this
holistic aspect so you're almost Stuck
in the Middle kind of like kind of like
politics when someone's either extreme
left extreme right your kind of ends
relational in the middle Zone do you
find that makes it a little bit harder
to get a point
across well you're putting your finger
on a very important divide so let let's
first of all get the Divide
clear just read page 18 of the biggest
textbook of evolutionary biology futuma
and Kirk Patrick's book just called
Evolution page 18 there there's a I
think it's page 18 I could be out by a
page two anyway it's quite near the
beginning it's the only page in the book
that is devoted to
philosophy and it is to dismiss it and
it ends with the statement there is no
room in science for purpose full stop
there's no justification
no argument as to why that statement is
necessarily
true that
needs Exposition it needs a
philosophical argument for why that
should be accepted there's
none now we are effectively saying not
only are organisms purposive and
evidently so we don't really need to
bother too much about um precisely what
that range of purpose is we can see the
purposiveness but very interestingly as
physiologists we know also that a
purpose of explanation actually predicts
downwards towards the molecular level as
to what kinds of mechanisms must exist
for that purpose to exist than the other
way round what is interesting here is
that purpose of explanations
actually lead to good science good
reductionist science if you want to call
it that that's the strange thing so with
by by making that blanket statement as
happens in fuma's and um and Kirk
Patrick's book we are actually closing
off a major scientific question what is
this
doing why does consum TW consume 20% of
the total energy that we use it's got
nothing to do with whether there's
something ghostly out there that as it
were is a goal that is Somewhere Out
There dragging us towards something that
sort of causation is not involved all
it's postulating is that there is
anticipation of what might happen in the
future and that has nothing to do with
backward time causation or anything
ghost ly like that all it's got to have
any organism is the ability to
anticipate very many different reactions
rapidly to crisis situations and that
can only be done by having an
anticipatory process occurring inside
here it's all good science there's
absolutely no reason why attributing
purpose to organisms is nonscientific
that's
rubbish and by
learning and by learning too I mean by
learning one The crucial things about
that that enhances anticipation is
learning to associate different levels
of activity now in the old days
behaviorists used to treat this as in a
reflexive kind of way Associated
reflexes and so on that if you you know
if you ring bells and things and then
stimulate the organism the organism
learns to do whatever it needs to do in
order to do you know prevent being
electrocuted or whatever this is excuse
me the behaviorist wanted to do to them
if they didn't press the button or press
the lever and then they started
measuring measuring the behavior the
intelligence of the organism how well it
responded in that kind of environment I
mean if I bung you in a chamber and then
give you a a lever to pull and you
accidentally pull it one day because
you're starving you haven't been fed for
a whole day and a half or two days or 3
days or even a week H and you
accidentally press this button or even
just simply sit there as a human being
citate a bit and say I wonder what will
happen if I press this button and you
press the button and lo and behold a
peanut arrives or something I mean and
you go on pressing the button to get the
peanut I mean is that really a
definition of human intelligence up to
some point it might be in the fact that
we learn we learn to press things and do
things to create and so on but what
we're doing there is is reasoning and is
it's a curious thing that people want to
leave the reasoning out oh it's all
reflexive well it isn't all reflexes I
mean if you look at the way a crow
solves the problem of getting um getting
uh food out of a a jar of water uh and
and and it starts doing it by doing all
sorts of creative things I mean was some
you know extraordinary imaginative
things like for example I mean was the
person Denis who was it um the the the
chapu weighed things by by by the
displacement of water um remind me again
who are we talking about avagadro I
don't know anyway he he he decided that
you could measure things by seeing
amount of water that was displaced who
was the chap that did the Eureka thing
in the bath Dennis wasn't it a
displacement of water I I may be wrong
but I think that's aardra well I can't
remember anyway whatever whoever he was
you see I mean is it is a bit like the
crow I mean the crow knew that if you
could displace the Water by putting
oh yes that was very clever of a grow
yes that's right I mean then the water
rises and the thing that's floating in
the water gets to the point where it can
put its beak in and collect it now
indeed that's a measure of intelligence
everybody and it's a reason for the
action why is the crow doing that uh why
what you're getting at Ray yes so I'm
just coming quickly on this I think what
you're getting is that the learning is
unlimited yes that's the point it's no
longer reflexive because it's
unlimited yes unlimited Associated
learning uh which is a crucial
ingredient of it um and uh the so I
don't understand why they have a such a
problem with reason that they would seek
to dismiss it as a fundamental of
causality um when you look at in what
we've termed in our little book
understanding living systems ecological
intellig
uh ecological intelligence is precisely
that understanding of what is happening
in the environment and why and the why
is as important to um all organisms as
it is to us uh if if Jack and Jill go up
the hill to fetch a pale of water and I
ask you why did Jack and Jill go up the
hill you might say CU you now know they
went up the hill to fetch a pale of
water
Jack fell down and broke his crown and I
ask you why did Jack fall down you don't
answer that simply by how did Jack fall
down although you might try you may say
well he slipped on a stone and and lost
his balance and I might say to you but
what if Jill pushed him they were
playing having fun flirting with each
other and she pushed him and he tripped
on a stone and fell down the hill broke
his crown the only way you can
understand that situation is by reason
the reason and this is the problem and
it's a philosophical problem no doubt
the reason may be
wrong and uh what we do with that in
practice as organisms is to try and work
out the probability of it being wrong
and even then we may not be right when
we see a chimpanzee pick up a stone
because we have learned that
chimpanzees use Stones sometimes not all
uh uh chimpanzees do this but groups of
chimpanzees use stones to crack nuts and
um it's good for them because they can
crack nuts that are harder to crack just
by their hands of own and so um they
find and repurpose uh Stones they even
reshape the stones in order to make them
better suited to cracking knuts they'll
even secrete a really good Stone so that
they can go back to it and use it again
when needed all these are
reasons how can you possibly understand
chimpanzee Behavior without knowing
those reasons you can't now you may be
wrong in your anticipation when you see
a chimpan pick up a stone and you think
ah he's going to crack nuts well I may
be wrong he may crack heads with it he
may throw it at you he may be fed up
with you a silly behaviorist trying to
understand his intelligence by not
taking into account the fact that he has
reasons for doing things and the
chimpanzee also will look at other
chimpanzees and when they when they see
them picking up Stones they might think
also ah we're going to crack
nuts but they may have already learned
too that sometimes some recalc
chimpanzees use it to throw at them and
do other things with
it and these are IM the problem is that
it's not easily measurable it's not easy
to know when you're right uh and
philosoph teaches us that that's true of
so many
problems um you know even the problem of
of understanding
reality uh in perception is is a
fundamental one and unless we understand
the difficulties inherent in it uh I
don't understand how we can be good
scientists as it were because science is
to some extent looking for better ways
of
measuring the reasons why something
happens or the purpose or the
uh uh the causes and if reasons are part
of the cause we need to find ways of uh
seeing how they can be um yes that I
think is part of what we were trying to
do in one of our articles Ray and our
tentative solution there is an alignment
issue how is it that the processes
occurring here can
align uh out of many behavioral options
which it's already got because it has a
huge behavioral repertoire there um how
does it align that best with what the
social
context as it were dictates but we use
the word dictate carefully doesn't mean
to say determined but rather encourages
certain ways of acting better than
others and I I think it's hard to deny
that we align our Behavior with our
moral and other social convictions
otherwise how does a a social group hang
together that is part of the social
hanging together and it will be
different in different cultures there
are some cultures that forbid kissing in
public there are others that accept it
it's as different as that and that of
course would be let's say say Paris at
one end and and Japan Tokyo at the other
end and you know they they will have
their own differences on what they
regard as it being desirable to align
yourself to but they are necessary
because they align allowing that
alignment and because then there is
cohesion yeah and also the other thing
that this leads to is which I think is
significant in what we've been trying to
to say to to people is that
um materialism is not
incompatible uh with free will it's it
periodism isn't the same as
deterministic exactly mechanical system
is
deterministic um if you look at clock
clock how clocks work and the Clock
workor Works as Clockwork and it and it
does it in ways that it's going to do it
once you've wound it up it'll do it um
and uh and it's readily predictable
because it does it in a deterministic
way but that is not the fundamental of
materialism as we made the point clear
earlier that um one of the fundamentals
in life is the extraordinary
stochasticity and much of Life uh
functions by harnessing that the very
nature of our functioning of our brains
for example is dependent upon harnessing
the stac of of ions different ions
within the nerve cells and Al the
synapses there's a huge amount of
variability which is
harnessed uh and you know when you look
at nerves one of the mean I was a
neuroscientist for many years I trained
as a neuros I trained as a zoologist and
a neuroscientist and um I tell you where
you know some people might think well
you know you you reductionist because
you were looking at what individual
cells were doing in the nervous system
because I did I quite proud of the fact
that I was able to record
intracellularly as if this was some
Grand like landing on the moon you know
great kind of achievement uh you land
inside the cell with an electrode and
you record the potential difference
across the membrane and I was doing with
particular kind of cells I was
interested in receptive fields in the
skin how do almet centry system how do
we sense the environment in terms of
touch and uh there were various ideas
that we had as a background to what we
were looking at and one of those was
that um how we locate a stimulus on the
skin depended on the
liability of the receptive fields of the
sensory
cells that they could be those sensory
um those sensory Fields those receptive
Fields uh Moment by moment could change
in their size in the area Moment by
Moment by using a combination of
excitatory and
inhibitory processes within the somat
sensory system and uh so when we when
you when you record the neurons you find
that this is exactly the case you know
you map out the receptive field under
certain conditions and then what we did
was to see what happens to those
receptive Fields if you do touch the
skin and if you touch the skin the
receptive Fields
shrink and what this does is to is to
enable the system to have greater
Acuity and by doing that it is more able
to locate the stimulus on the
skin now that doesn't mean that the
answer was self-evident in what we were
doing by recording the cells when you
record the cells you you you you pop
inside a cell and you hear this terrible
waffle going on all the time W WAFF wff
wff wff wff in sound we translate the
electrical activity and sound and what
all this waffling is are the electrical
potentials and what electrical
potentials are are the exchange of ions
of charged particles across the membrane
going waffle waffle waffle waffle waffle
sometimes the waffling waffle waffle
waffle waffle waffle get close gets
closer to what's called the um the uh
action potential if you like uh the
threshold for generating an action
potential and then the cell will
generate an action potential or more
likely a burst of action
potentials and you get a different kind
of sound you see it's full of sound in
terms of what we translate as but the
point here is that waffling is going on
all the time this is waffling all this
waffle and spurting and splashing is
going on in our brain all the time if
you were to monitor what's happening at
the sinaps is billions of them billions
of synapses going on here all the time
it's
waffling but that waffling is kind of
like it's like having a a lump of soggy
Clay on a potter's wheel that it can be
shaped and changed in response to
various
States
states and in in a sense this goes back
to this idea of States as
Consciousness what is consciousness
Consciousness is a state of
being uh it is no more than
that and in a sense it is far more than
that but because it it it gives us the
ability to sense our own sensing
uh to
be uh aware of our
integrity it it's Consciousness to me is
like um a Readiness if you like to act
and thereby anticipatory and it goes
back to what Dennis was saying earlier
that the key thing there is
anticipation it's it's the state of
Readiness and anticipating what it is
that's going on in the world regardless
of whether we're right about it uh we
cannot function without that and that is
consciousness
you that is demonstr isn't it just
briefly there are what are called
Readiness Potentials in the nervous
system that have been recorded as
inevitably what happens when you are in
the process of making a decision it's
it's fascinating it really is they are
Readiness potentials the system is
getting itself geared up and we feel
that consciously too it is well that is
the feeling that is the Consciousness
Denis that is the
conscious you know I say I'll say
something really highly controversial
now something with Dennis and I have
been discussing uh more recently and
also with other colleagues I have to say
and a lot of this comes from discussions
with a group that we interact with in
Edinburgh uh that or based in Edinburgh
that um looks at choices uh and the
biology of choices choices in in systems
and organisms and uh and obviously
anticipation is a vital aspect of choice
because um uh you you can't really make
it without some anticipation of what the
result will be of any decision or action
that you take so there's an enormous
amount of of anticipation involved in
how organisms make
choices but all organisms make
choices and all all organisms have
states of Readiness to make
choices and all organisms to varying
degrees
indeed have an ability to identify self
in some kind of functional
way uh they they don't all eat their own
backsides for example because they
recognize the fact that it is self as it
were now they don't do don't do it in a
linguistic way like I've just done uh
they don't use the word self that's me
uh and I am who I am they don't do it
linguistically um but we do and that is
another level of doing it um but it
doesn't mean that Consciousness as it
were has simply emerged out of that
process of doing uh you know one can
just as readily see things like
Readiness and uh and and a sense of
integrity at very very lowlevel forms of
life I don't like the word lowlevel
they're extraordinarily complex and and
you know um and and have an
enormous range of Capac functional
capacity uh and what we tend to do with
the lower forms is to just simply regard
them in a
robotic excuse me in a robotic kind of
way that they just an algorithm could
explain their
behavior in large part yes indeed I mean
if you look at a parami it sort of moves
forward and bumps into something and
then comes back changes its angle of
approach and moves forward and
eventually it gets around the
object um that's a kind of intelligence
in a way but they'll say oh well that's
just simply an
algorithm uh when you get very very
complex algorithms that involve a choice
between
algorithms how do you choose which
algorithm to insert if you like uh we
don't like the the idea of inserting an
algorithm variability isn't just
inserted within a various system to
create decision
making the variability is existent all
all the time throughout everywhere in
the system it's variability it's
stochastic um the the the the problem is
not so much that the problem is how does
the system constrain
it and it it it leads to what we've
called boundary conditions and the way
the boundaries
function as molding this stochasticity
into um reasoned
function objective functionality
uh and uh but not only do we say that it
does that but we actually say that that
definitively is what reason is if if
that makes any kind of sense um what you
have to do here Ray just to come in
briefly on this what you have to do is
distinguish between the different forms
of causation yeah much of it social
context is causation by Form not by
mechanism and that was a fundamental
distinction introduced by AR tole in his
DEA 2,000 OD years ago and that's again
to come back to Dear Richard I call him
Dear Richard because I've known him for
so long but you know he he he just
ignores this distinction he just simp
says well genes are are causes and but
he doesn't clarify what he means by a
cause I say they are effectively as
sequences causes of form it is the form
of the sequence that is used to
translate into an RNA and then into uh
protein the DNA itself doesn't do
anything about that it gets red yes but
it doesn't actually it is not an active
process and this distinction between
active and passive causation is utterly
fundamental in physiology if I measure
for example
the association level between knocking
out a particular Gene that's responsible
for pacemaker Rhythm and observe a
change in Rhythm maybe
10% I also know as a physiologist has
worked out the
full Dynamic causation that the actual
contribution can be
80% the difference
between active
causation and associative
score which is what the GW was people
are measuring is fundamental you can
have a GW was score of zero and there
can still be a huge contribution to
causation it's just that the system is
very robust if one mechanism doesn't
work it uses another one and that is
fundamental here and it's the reason why
most of the gwo schooles are very low
the only ones that are high are the ones
that occur for the monogenetic diseases
where everybody would agree that if you
got cystic fibrosis the genes for that
you'll have cystic fibrosis not much you
can do about it but they affect only
roughly speaking 5% of the population
that's not to deny that that's important
to that 5% it is but for the great
majority 95% of The Association scores
are so low that they're almost useless
for medical purposes does anybody go and
take their genome to their doctor do I
go with a great big book of my CG's a
and T's and say to my doctor Joe could
you take a look at this he he would
laugh me out of
court you you're touching on something
quite important there um Dennis in the
sense that when we consider twin studies
and I think you guys also touched on
this on your paper can reasons and
values influence action or how might
intentional agency work physiologically
which we'll touch on because I do want
to focus on that macro level causation
versus micro level causation how you're
able to bring this up um with harnessing
stochasticity but the one thing you guys
touch on is the fact that in twin
studies you'll notice how the genome
there is fine prepped ready to go
however both twins are not actively
getting the same information from the
mother's womb so while one might be
receiving a little bit more blood flow
the other one might be receiving a
little bit more nutrients there's a
varying there's there's so much
complexity here and so many variables to
consider that it's imposs possible for
us to actually just say that you can
take a CTA and combine this to have
someone produce a certain outcome it's
not fixed it's very very variable do you
want to touch on that any of you
guys well briefly from my point of view
um the egg cell of course is critical in
determining which genes get activated
initially it isn't the DNA that
determines that it is the egg cell that
has
the Right Mix if you want to call it
right a mix let's put it that way be a
bit more neutral of controlled molecules
rnas and transcription factors which are
characteristic of that particular exgel
which is why I don't think anybody's
going to recreate the my mother's exgel
as it was in February
1936 it's as simple as that they're all
different and so um
the idea that somehow or another you can
get away from the
contextual um form of causation which
triggers the beginning of development I
think is just nonsense you need to know
the initial conditions for the
development AB we don't know that's
that's a big issue still it's an open
area of physiology that needs more more
experimentation it it is an area of
physiology that I was also in v
in as well as having been a sensory
physiologist um I I became uh joint
director of a fetal and the innatal
research group U at University College
and uh one of the things that the group
were looking at was the um way in which
the maternal system influences the
developmental choices of the fetal
system and uh the way the placenta
largely through epigenetic processing
can be changed in order to adapt to
different states of nutrition of
maternal
nutrition and uh the the outcome comes
can be uh extraordinarily different and
remember that we're dealing with in a
sense genomes that would be precisely
the same other than those uh early
developmental
conditions um and uh it the uh a group
in Southampton have looked at this in in
terms of human women and looked at this
transgenerationally and found that for
example liver function which is
determined uh within the womb the
metabolic strategy if you like of the um
uh of the developing fetus uh dictates
the um metabolic strategy
postnatally uh and through to add
adulthood and um that also can be passed
on further generationally depends very
much on the circumstances but they have
found transgenerational changes even
within humans and it to me this was the
key evidence to show that um there can
be acquired characteristics and many of
those acquired characteristics operate
when the system is much more open to
change so and there are certain periods
of development when that is the case one
is the developing embryo and the fetus
the other of course is during
adolescence and another curiously is
when we come to older age um like this
is why I refer to this earlier the fact
that um the system adapts differently uh
as an older system uh but it is
nonetheless a dynamic adaptation it's
not just simply a deterioration it's
taking account of the fact that one's
faculties are now as it were not as uh
um as adaptable and uh you know we know
that for example me I suffer
tremendously from
hypertension and uh and and that's not
going to go away but it can be treated
if we know about it if you see it I mean
what what's occurring there
physiologically and
functionally uh and we know also that
different different people will have
different uh degrees of that kind of
problem as they age and a lot of that is
epigenetically determined curiously
Enough by what happened to you in the
womb uh and and that is an extraordinary
so how working out what's cause and
effect depends on the time uh the way in
which the organism subsequently develops
uh the range of possible outcomes that
can uh be for example produced through
exercise uh and various other things and
all on the basis of the same
genome do you think that it's it's
quite it would be almost impossible for
someone who does consider this to be a
deterministic world that the
immeasurable amounts of variables to
consider I mean it's it's incalculable
so it's it's it's something that at no
point we're ever going to be able to do
this so there's almost an AR assuming
that it's
possible well uh we're never going to be
because it's not too difficult to
calculate that you'd need um for some of
these potential computations like
Computing the activity of all the water
molecules in a single cell that would
require computational power that would
probably require most of the material in
the solar system to build it I mean it's
not too difficult to see once
computation
explosion um is rampant as it is in uh
systems made of water you you simply
you're never going to be able to do
fully molecular level computations
people try and even Computing let's say
how an iron has its water molecules
surrounding it because they're all polar
and they will line up like magnets and
how far out this goes and how far you
have to go out and also what state is
the water in there are more than just
Frozen and fluid there are many states
as we know from the snow snowflake um
issue um in which water can as it were
form itself and again it's an
interaction between what is in the water
the proteins the rnas and and goodness
knows how many metabolites hormones and
and other things Each of which will in a
relativistic way determine partly what
the water is doing um the fact is that
it's it's incomputable at a molecular
level I think it's as simple as that
there's a very funny thing here that
comes about as well which you see you
see and obviously you know we are
physiologists I sorry another hat again
you keep wearing different hats um but
it's a very interesting thing that one
of the criticisms that we do receive
sometimes is the fact that we're not you
know well what do you know about
Evolution and they they also say to it
they say to us how mathematics Works how
computations work well only because you
decided what the end product should be
which is maintaining genes and a gene
pool but once you've done that yes you
can get a result and show that well they
behave like this in order to maintain
their genes and a gene pool by behaving
like that um but our answer to them is
well we're physiologists and our
computation work as well but they're
fundamentally different from your
computations exactly yes that's right
most of the population genetics
computations are not
Dynamic they're looking for to what will
the system tend to go which is a valid
way of looking at things I don't deny
that um but we as physiologists are
necessarily concerned with how does it
move from where it is to where it might
go and that requires Dynamic
differential equation models and also
we're concerned as as
behaviorists as well as physiologists
with why does it
happen and again you need different
kinds of computation to understand that
so this idea that there's one way of
calculating things and then having a
system that works because it works I
we've had this said to us at meetings
you know that why fix something that
isn't broken well we say it's fine it
does what you want it to do and it gives
you an explanation within a within
certain bounds um but it isn't
applicable to um either the physiology
as such and in terms of purpose for
something to occur I mean the function
of a cell for example um within a system
uh can be differential within the system
and so you could then say as a
physiologist the purpose of that cell is
to do whatever it's doing so some cells
might be filtering in say the the
relation to the kidney and functions of
the the renal system and other cells may
be concerned with creating osmotic
gradients and so on you see but you can
identify this is what's so wonderful
about physiology and Anatomy you can see
the most beautiful Arrangements in order
to generate these osmotic gradients
which how fenal system
functions and then the way it utilizes
pumps in order to create these
extraordinary gradients the ways nerve
cells generate electrical gradients
which they can then use to generate
signals the way the signals are used in
order to um generate the release of
chemicals held in Pockets membrane
pockets in Quant that are released at
synapses to cause these things and you
know we as physiologists see those
things happening as it were and um so we
understand reason within that context
too and then at the behavioral level we
understand reason in the same way as we
were referring to the chimpanzee using a
stone to crack nuts and you don't you
don't go into a different Realm by doing
that you're talking about the same
problem how do we understand behavior
and we can understand it at various
levels and those levels are interactive
in all
functionality they're not all one way
they're going backwards forwards
sideways some of them are just simply
conditional um the beauty I mean
plants if you touch them it can generate
this extraordinary calcium transient uh
within the cells of the leaves and so on
and this spreads through the system and
it what that does is to create a state
of Readiness of preparedness that
something is happening but if you look
again at plants you find that it's
actually extraordinary Exquisite because
plants respond in different ways
depending on what it is that has touched
it now that is amazing and so you can in
that context you see context you see say
that the plant responded in this way
because it was touched by that organism
and not by that kind of organism there
is reason you say and you cannot
understand that ecological context
without understanding the reason you
can't explain it without that and that's
in a sense it's all we are saying and
why it is that people get so cross about
it um it goes back I think the fact that
they want to either they want to have
this strange you know Duality that the
one never meets anywhere and can explain
the same thing we're explaining the same
thing actually goes deeper doesn't it
historically because um once they um
inserted the vicman barrier as an
absolute barrier that automatically
excluded any physiological influence on
the Next Generation it's as simple as
that once you know that that barrier
doesn't stop the control processes from
influencing the Next Generation
everything is open again and you cannot
exclude physiology from being part of
what determines the direction of
evolution and that's just straight
straightforward is again coming back to
the fundamental molecular biological
detail that I outlined earlier once you
admit that DNA is not a self-replicator
so it cannot replicate accurately
independently of the cell itself in
other words there's no replicator
separate from the vehicle and once
you've also abandoned the vicman barrier
you can no longer exclude physiological
processes from having a role in The
evolutionary process now I was told many
times by Richard in the debate with him
two years ago Dennis you're a
physiologist I'm an evolutionary
biologist and the two are not the same I
say you cannot exclude one from the
other it it doesn't unless you H hang
on as it were at all costs to the vicin
barrier and to self-replication and
neither of those are true it's a it's
beautiful Gap if you think about it a
physiologist and even so me as as a
medical doctor mean without physiology
bridging that Gap that biological Gap to
the psychological system physiology
plays the most fundamental role here it
it contains a holistic picture I mean as
you guys to quote you guys organisms do
not behave as rational calculators um
that's a fundamental process inde Darwin
spent the last 10 years of his life
collaborating with the physiologist
George romanis because he was determined
to see whether his idea of well he
didn't know about the supposed barrier
because that only came in 1883 when he
had passed away but he was clear that
there had to be processes that
communicate from the Soma to The Germ
line and he spent a lot of time um
interacting with George ranis to try to
prove that with various hybridizations
what was missing in the 19th century was
the knowledge of epigenetics once you've
got epigenetics you've got the
environment through physiological
processes of epigenetic nature
controlling the way the genome is
interpreted and it doesn't even need
that it should be transmitted by The
genome because culturally it can be
transmitted without any bothering with
the DNA and if an environmental change
lasts a long time which is the only
environmental change that's of Interest
evolutionary wise then so will the
epigenetic effects exist for a long time
even if there's no assimilation into the
genome these are fundamental facts which
I'm afraid uh neod darwinist Rivals have
just simply missed haven't seen the
significance of it what they will say is
oh it all dies out after a generation or
two but that's only true if you have a
point
influence from the environment if you
maintain the environment it will
maintain the epigenetic change it's so
obvious as to heartly need to be
expressed another thing I really enjoy
is the way you guys have Incorporated
music into this understanding of life
and this this beautiful synchronicity of
the both of them do you want to explore
that a
bit well I did that in the music of Life
deliberately of course but that was done
largely to produce a different metaphor
from Richard Dawkins metaphor of the
sish Gene and so that was its main
function but actually I've come to think
that there's more to it than just an
alternative
metaphor what is being synchronized when
respiration is synchronized with
heartbeat variation what is being
synchronized when the processes of um
circadian rhythm are are synchronized
with various hormonal changes this is
all
harmonization yeah to VAR degrees you
can argue about what kind of music this
might be and it may not be Bar Light it
may not even be be light it may be more
like Aon guard than either of those but
nevertheless there is there's a sense in
which
there almost has to be that kind of
resonance across different processes
within the body because he's continually
seeking for well you might call it the
best compromise because they will all
want to go off in different directions
you've always got to have a kind of
compromise on what is regulated this
much with the kidney function what is
regulated that much with the circulatory
system and with the hormonal system and
the immune system and so on and they're
all having to be regulated within
certain constraints but not in a
terribly deterministic fashion it's it's
a hunting process hun again got the idea
of a musical sequence so I I actually
come now to think what I used in the
music of Life Al those years ago nearly
20 years ago now um what I use there as
um as just an alternative metaphor to
selfish Gene uh has as as it were got
more mileage to it than I thought
initially absolutely Dennis and uh and
in fact um uh the harmonization if you
like of the
physiology with the
behavior is is significant in the way in
which organisms use music to do that
it's not it is in itself Harmony because
it's because organisms
harmonize uh and there an urious thing
um whales uh for example I mean we can
think of other kinds of organisms as
well but they sing to each
other uh across huge distances within a
pod I mean a pod doesn't have to be in
close proximity to act as a
pod and they communicate with each other
by sound and they will sing essentially
to each other they they make they phrase
they create phrases and it's creative
process this is what music does of
course they create these
phrases uh and I'm not going to try and
mimic one in any event but um what is
interesting is that they reply to each
other but
also add to the
phraseology bit like uh it happens when
uh you get um extemporization in music
there's an enormous extemporization
going on in Behavior Uh in
organisms and that that is significant
in maintaining the integrative function
of the group or the Pod or the family or
the
community uh or whatever and I think
resonance is a lovely term for it uh and
it's it's almost creating that kind of
Readiness if you like for the grouped
act as a group so that for example when
you get a hunting a pack of lions
hunting as a
pack uh it's
it's whatever is going on there is in
harmony each is anticipating the
behavior of the other within the
pack within the troop in their hunting
Behavior Uh there will be one that will
go for the jugular as it were another
that will go to the back another which
will hassle at the legs another that
will hassle at some other vital organ
system and so on and and it's it's
extraordinary looking at that harmonious
kind of structure within it and it's a
bit like you know a major piece of a
symphonic work it it's also the case
when you look at the opposite too which
is looking at the way the herd behaves
to the presence of a troop of lions
there is an alertness a iness a kind of
a communication going on between uh the
members of The Herd uh and the Lions
also are feeling for which of them is
not actually functioning sufficiently
well within that Harmony and they will
go if they can for that
stray because they don't want to risk
their lives going up against a massive
great big bull uh who could harm them uh
and and so first they'll prefer to hunt
as a pack if they can although they will
hunt singly um and uh but equally the
the the herd know that there is a way to
defend themselves as a heard um you you
know Birds create the most extraordinary
um shapes and patterns there's so much
that we still don't understand about
what is going shs of fish acting as a
SCH of
fish it's extraordinarily the case that
they are acting as
one um and we humans I think do
it as well uh sometimes to a
disadvantage in the sense that it's it's
so easy for us to act as a pack in a
sense uh it's very alluring um it
relieves you of an individual
responsibility of individual fear and
hate and so on and you act as a pack and
as a pack you can become extraordinarily
dangerous um one to each other as well
it seems to me worries me immensely I I
hate being part
of herds if you like I don't like that
herd Instinct but is there's something
to be learned from
it and I think it's also how how
politics can influence our behavior in a
way as well it we want to be part of a
her we want to be
accepted and so there's a psychologic
psychological element to the music as
well is that um is not not not always as
beautiful and I see that with within
this niche of this podcast when you see
the different thinkers the minds and you
can almost tell when once they get into
a philosophical mindset or a head space
regarding their Theory Of Consciousness
it's very difficult for them to get out
of it that sort of herd mentality gets
you and and then you fight for that
value or that belief throughout your
entire career perhaps uh without looking
back so it's very interesting to how
this even plays a role within Academia
because this is a it's a big part of our
Lives it is indeed and it's it's very
difficult uh as an
academic
um you you you know we're trained to to
be
critical but we're fearful of the
criticism it's a very strange Dynamic
there is so I mean people often say why
are you saying this now
and it's a damn good
question um and I think one of the
reasons is because we're free to do so
that freedom doesn't exist for many many
many academics in different parts of the
world that freedom can be
extraordinarily
restricted and as students coming
through they will experience
Dogma uh and uh and they will experience
also
um scientists and academics having to
operate within those dogmas and that is
extremely difficult we we find very
often that we are we can be profoundly
misunderstood and our position can be
misused
misapplied
um we worry about that quite a bit
um because for the reasons that I've
said which is that not all academics are
in a position of um of of Freedom if you
like to you know to to
critique um but it is all what we are
doing really we don't I don't think we
ever set out to create another
Dogma really I mean we suffered under
Dogma um you know
as when genetics gained hold as a
primary
causal um it was inevitable that money
started being diverted to looking for
those causes and looking for the golden
bullet if you like that was going to
help us understand disease in a way that
would
produce
inconceivable um solutions to the
problems of of human
health and um and and it was at the
expense of um systems
work uh and uh because if you if you do
believe that that um genes are primarily
causal then inevitably politicians in
particular are going to look for easy
solutions and they're going to look for
that's where they're going to be best
investing their money um and uh we're
trying to get across to people that what
you need to do in academic life is to
fund the
thinkers uh to
critique to ensure that you've always
got people at the edges that are showing
that variability that that are
challenging the the the the central
Dogma if you like uh that that is that
is that ISE prevalent so we never set
out to uh introduce another
Dogma um we don't have another Dogma I I
mean we have ideas that we hold precious
which is the fact that I mean you know I
don't know whether you can call Free
Will a Dogma maybe you can and but I
prefer that Dogma because without free
will you can't challenge Dogma so h
refer the dogma of free will to the
dogma of
determinism and um I I can ask I I would
ask those um determinists if you like
who don't believe in Free Will and think
it's an
illusion um I'd ask this question why
are you telling me
that you know I mean they're telling me
in order to influence my
behavior or my thought thoughts they
don't like the fact that I really
sincerely believe that we we have a
reasonably large degree of Free
Will and we have to have otherwise we
can't be adaptable enough to survive as
humans it it reminds me I posted a I
just posted a clip a few days ago an
interview I had with dom Chomsky and I
asked him about Free Will and he said
everybody just like quen in one of your
quotes says irrespective of what we
believe everybody acts as if we have
freedom of the world so there's no point
in denying freedom of the world because
of that if if we're always going to act
in this way most certainly it doesn't
really matter philosophically no and we
assume and and we make the assumption
that we each have free
will and and uh we do that of course we
do it because whole judicial system is
based on the fact that people have
freedom to act in different kinds of
ways and if you choose to act
malevolently then you're responsible for
acting Mal prevently without free will
you wouldn't be responsible for it I
mean you'd be a self-driving car and if
you had an accident then you'd have to
find something wrong with the
machine uh rather than the fact that you
made a judgment based on your wishes
your hopes and fears and loves and hates
and um you know and you killed that
person because quite frankly you didn't
like them and you got in your way and
and so on and yet we have strange kind
of devices called morals and ethics and
behavior that we shouldn't behave like
that and so and we start imposing them
as much as possible on each other and we
do that because we know that people do
have
choices so yes I I find I mean in any
case even if we accepted it as an
illusion it's fantastic illusion I'd go
go with it all the time I mean I'd
rather have that illusion than not and
and what do they mean by an illusion
they mean that it doesn't really EX
exist but then I go back why are you
telling me
this they're telling me it because they
know D well actually that the illusion
matters is the illusion is Free Will I
mean if it's an illusion it
exists okay they might if I can I can
acknowledge to them okay you you can
have it if you like call it an
illusion but you only having to call it
an illusion because you you you can't
understand how something immaterial can
influence something that's
material I find fascinating I see I see
two brothers and one perhaps looking at
a microscope looking at neural cells the
other one looking at maybe the essay
node looking at all these Action
potentials in different parts of the
body physiologically obviously all
intertwined at some point one looking at
eegs one looking at
ECGs and then somehow you guys manag to
almost develop a like a hive mind
together and and it's very Inseparable
you can sort of see how one of you can
think of something and the other
finishes the other person's sentence do
you guys disagree fundamentally on
anything
regarding this
field I don't think we do because we
don't we're never trying to establish a
Dogma I think what we've done is over a
period of what is it now getting on for
about 20 years of
interaction um in a sort of Fairly
rigorous way way publishing papers
together after all is pretty rigorous
we've we've come to
hone a lot of our own rough edges in how
we interact but that tells me that you
you need academic communities that can
interact in this kind of way because
that is the way in which we get closer
to an analysis which we can
defend um because a group of people can
think of many more reasons why one might
be wrong about something than a single
person can I don't think it's possible
to be a really good thinker academically
alone that that's my explanation for
what has happened if people interact
over a long period of time there is some
kind of honing away of the minor
differences that might have
existed and you see it in other
communities too monastic communities do
the same they they they well
particularly some traditions like
meditative Traditions they're
continually hacking away at each other's
so-called misperceptions of the
world they even have sutras to remind
them the fact you think you understand
the world no you don't that's the
diamonds Sutra you think you understand
the uh nature of the person no you don't
that's the heart Sutra and so you can go
on um with the the different ways in
which it has been expressed but there is
a a strong sense I think to how long
people interact
together to the process by which you
come to be able to finish each other's
sentences because with as it were
danced and created a harmonization of
the way we
think may be an illusion of another kind
it may be we should have a third person
doing this with us or A fifth or a sixth
or a 20th you know but but the group is
m is group think matters is what we're
really saying it is also the case that
um if one or other of us comes up with
uh an idea at the boundary as as it were
at the
edge and I mean one might
think gosh you know should I really say
that I mean should I really go there I
mean is it too is it too
far uh we would bounce that off each
other in a sense I mean you know and and
build on it rather than reject it see
where it goes and if you do that often
enough you begin to understand how the
other mind works works it's also the
case that we bring to the table
completely different
experiences that's right and I don't I
mean many might many people might not
know this might not understand that
because they might think well we're the
same
family but we had completely different
trajectories in
life and those trajectories mattered in
how what we bought to the
table
um I I mean I I kind of had an
introduction to philosophy before I had
an introduction to science I had no idea
I'd be a
scientist and I I mean I left school
when I was
15 I grew up in a one parent family on a
council
estate and I left school at
15 and uh my school um Headmaster said
of me in my an ultimate school
report uh that he could see no reason
I'm quot quoting now no reason why
public money should be wasted on the
attempted education of this boy that's
harsh so you see I left school well I
couldn't see any reason
either and I I certainly didn't want to
stay there because they couldn't see in
me the potential actually to be fair I
mean there were one or two of them my
teachers who could um and um so I left
school and I left school very young um
I did not know then that I would become
an
academic I didn't know certainly didn't
know I would become a scientist of any
kind um my first interests were in
politics philosophy and economics when I
say my first interests because that's
not quite true I mean you know as they
developed my my instinct was to tend
towards philosophy actually um and at
one time I thought I might study if I
could get into University in those days
back in the 1960s and said early 70s and
it was extremely difficult to get into
University if you'd left school in the
circumstances I left in very few people
in the United Kingdom went to University
about 6% uh very tiny uh percentage of
of those that had qualifications went to
University um I mean we hadn't
experienced then the sort of massive
expansion in higher education which is
wonderful incidentally I I you know um
the more we have higher education the
better it seems to me as long as it's
doing the right thing which is creating
people who think and some not willing to
think outside the box and protect them
because that's one of the other crucial
things about universities so I was
outside the
box really physically outside the box
for a long period of time and uh one one
for some reason I I read um I started
reading Carl poer for example which in a
sense was one of my early introductions
to science um because I I was fascinated
by his approach to Scientific thinking
and methodology and conjectures and
reputations and so on and um how did we
unravel uh problems but I was also
fascinated by his concepts of open
Society of open systems I didn't know
then incidentally that what he was going
on to say was very similar to the kinds
of things that we were saying I had no
idea then I don't think even he had any
idea then uh when I first I was back in
the 1960s you see late 60s and I started
reading that so I came I came at this in
a sense timed with an interestes in
philosophy rather than with science when
I eventually went to University in the
1970s I went to study
zoology and the reason for that was
because I got so fascinated and wanted
to understand how living systems worked
but I came to it you see um because I
felt the need to do that I needed to
understand it did um it wasn't so much
that I had necessarily a love of zoology
or whatever it's just I had a I wanted
to understand how this system
worked and um when I did so when I
started studying zoology at Manchester
University this was at the very moment
when things were beginning to Pivot
towards a more Gene Centric View and I
saw more Behavior being explained by
maintaining jeans and Je pools and so on
I actually even as a student repeated
some of Richard dorin's uh experiments
that he did when he was doing his PhD
and not long after he actually had done
them and and so on um and um looking at
bird behavior and things and hecking
regimes and things and interpreting
everything in terms of PE PE PE changing
angle PE PE all very um uh algorhythm
driven you see and I this dissatisfied
me inherently because one of the reasons
I'd gone in to study living systems is
because I wanted to really understand
reason why did they behave like that why
did they make that decision how do they
make
decisions uh and you know because I'd
come at it from a completely different
angle if you like so what I'm saying is
and I'm very trying to shorten what I'm
saying after we didn't come to each
other in um by sitting around a family
table I mean in the end we did as it
were but we didn't that it wasn't a
natural sort of thing that you you
know and curiously while you were
encountering Gene Centric explanations
in Manchester University I was examining
Rich Dawkin thesis
yes strange into
weaving one thing after another it's
it's Dennis at that what was yours like
what did you bring to the table and at
what point did you guys sort of come
together and coales in such a beautiful
way it is the last decade or two that
has really seen the coming together
flourish
um but there have been other things that
encouraged it we we both like music we
both both even sing and play guitars and
we both have um have acquired also
through creating a music group together
um an interest there too and so we it's
it's a
complex uh p as it were it's a
dance and it's had many aspects which
have come together the more it's gone on
I think that's the best way I can
describe it but as Ray said earlier on
our initial trajectories were miles
apart there no no foreseeing what was
going to
happen there were one or two events that
one might look back on I mean one was uh
a a a debate that just shortly after
selfish Gene was published at bileo
college and I I came all the way down
from Edinburg I by that time I was now
starting to do my PhD in Edinburgh and I
I came all the way down from edur talks
to this debate um uh and I think it was
Anthony Kenny wasn't it Dennis I think
was part of that
the two philosophers and Anthony Kenny
was absolutely brilliant he asked
Richard after he presented his case for
the selfish Gene and his theory said
look I I want to know the following if
all I knew the English language was its
alphabet I would not be entitled and
would not be able to understand
Shakespeare now I was listening very
carefully was I was chairing this
meeting
and Richard then said well I'm not a
philosopher I'm just a scientist I'm
only interested in
truth and that lost
him my that was the break point I don't
think he knows that but I broke with him
there because what Tony as a philosopher
was getting at is that if all you know
is the sequence you cannot know its
meaning I I happen to have almost fluent
reading of hul script which is Korean
script but I don't have a command of
Korean language and I would never be
able to understand a play or a poem in
Korean without a considerable amount of
explanation and that illustrates the
point and he missed the point he didn't
even see what Tony was getting at and I
did and and and you know that that that
was so influential on my own thinking uh
uh about all this uh I it it just
resonates in my mind just listening to
Anthony Kenny make that point and then
the surprise and shock at Richard's
reply um to it I then later experienced
a similar kind of dismissal of
philosophy to me that was an example of
how philosophical thinking can be so
helpful in unraveling a
problem uh and um because there's a
facility of saying that something is
like
something uh and then saying but
wouldn't you say this about that as it
were and it's that preciseness that I
was it was I found it very impressive
and uh and I thought it just so
fundamentally destroyed the notion of of
the gene Centric View and so it was very
influential that there so curiously if
you if you like you probably discovered
something very interesting here which is
that I think that that meeting at at
baia was significant was probably the
firm of what subsequently came to be our
sort of collaboration will be right
that's a good point and it's come out of
this particular discussion yeah
exactly so it's served a very useful
purpose for us too but I'm I have to say
I'm beginning to watch the clock because
I was lecturing all day to today and
I've been going since about 5:00 this
morning there are there there are even
limits to what philosophers and
scientists can do so we're in your hands
Tevin where when how are you going to
wrap this up I was just enjoying
listening to you guys Remis it is
beautiful sorry guys I got caught up in
the motion there as well okay let's
let's let's wrap this up a little guys
the one thing I wanted to ask just
before we close is um I was speaking to
Professor Terence Deacon and Michael
Levan recently about Tio Dynamics and
teop phobia within science and
philosophy a lot of philosophers SCI
hate talking about this they hate it
absolutely hate it yes on the purpose
meaning of this universe of life and uh
final thoughts from your side Dennis and
then Ray you can end as well just
briefly the break occurred between
Wallace and Darwin way back in
1866 um Darwin was utterly shocked when
Wallace decided he would go on a
different route completely from Charles
Darwin Charles Darwin was working on his
idea that the peacock was really trying
to impress the pen and that was an
intentional conscious Choice it's in the
1871 book I quote it almost verba him
from it Wallace went off in the opposite
direction and said no um Charles
natural selection explains Everything
full stop that's the break that's where
purpose was
eliminated and I have one statement to
add to that which is I don't think you
can fully understand life uh by
excluding
reason uh and
um I think that
that is such an important ingredient we
tend to dismiss I I remember a
discussion I I I won't I won't say names
um with a colleague who was shocked by
my interest in
philosophy and by my interest in the
significance of
psychology
um we create our
niche as well as adapt to it all
organisms do that Niche creation is a
fundamental in the way life
Works a major part of that is the
psychological aspect we've referred to
some of it in terms of the way things
work in synchrony the way things work in
Harmony and so
on that is is so significant to our
well-being to our health and well-being
and understanding how things can go
wrong with the
system with health
consequences that if we eliminate
reason uh
it leaves a void of understanding for
humans to cope with what it is that
they're having to cope with which is
this
extraordinarily difficult psychosocial
environment that we have to be adapted
to and adaptable
within and that is increasingly
difficult because it changes so rapidly
that it we find it harder and harder to
find the normative within which we're
going to work ethically this is
extremely difficult for us
um because um as we gain more reason
more understanding if you
like the more we challenge those very
things
that constrain our Behavior constrain Us
in the in a in in a in at that
psychosocial level and provide grounding
if you like things that we don't have to
question or you know accept as given and
those things that are accepted as given
are getting are now becoming smaller and
smaller and smaller which makes it very
hard I think for people to be so easily
grounded uh and and that creates a
psychological problem so it's it's no
surprise to me that so many people
experience certainly in the Western
World um so many people experience some
kind of mental problem uh in life at
some point have some kind of breakdown
even whether they don't realize it I
mean the I think many people go through
uh mental health issues without
realizing that that's been a major
problem to
them having stable relationships becomes
harder and
harder uh and and working with others
becomes difficult too uh and
um so so it it matters reason matters so
the psychology that that level if you
like the psychosocial level of causation
is so significant um particularly in an
organism like us that uses it
linguistically we use it to express
ourselves to understand ourselves our
our our um dependence on cultural
transmission of information is as strong
as our dependence on anything that might
be regarded as
genetic um who we are our identity
matters
uh and um so sometimes that is
challenged um it can breed hate or it
can breed love it can breed all sorts of
create all sorts of
problems and so maintaining Integrity
within that psychosocial I'm going to
call it space but you know really I'm
not wanting to create a kind of
dichotomy like that but this
psychosocial space can be
extraordinarily
difficult um and it's a challenge I
think to
humanity um at the political level it's
a challenge because I think that
we we are getting to the point where
even even in what we say to each
other we can challenge the foundations
of it in terms of reality in a way that
perhaps we wouldn't have done in the
past uh so what is truth becomes a
fundamental
question uh um and that's a I I think
perhaps a nice point to
end philosophical question but curiously
it's a fundamental I mean what is truth
on social media For Heaven's Sake yeah
it's the relativistic view of it all and
this the way people are approaching this
becomes very very fishy territory at
this point but but gentlemen this has
been such a pleasure for me thank you so
much it's an honor and privilege to chat
to both of you big fan of both of your
works for many years and uh I hope that
in the future we can discuss and dissect
certain papers and books in detail and
and and like focus and hone in to
specific topics and it's been such a
pleasure thank you so much for joining
me been a terrific
host thank you very much Dennis well you
made that You' made us think of some
things that we probably hadn't focused
on absolutely yes yes well thank you
gentlemen I really appreciate it okay
bye bye bye okay
