and that is the fundamental reason why
it's incorrect to describe them as
selfish either metaphorically or
literally so jeans are not the blueprint
for life and that is the
title believe it or
not the top side sence journal in the
world in February of this year published
an article with precisely that title
they knew exactly what the editors were
doing because in effect they were
announcing the end of 80 years at least
of misunderstanding the fundamentals of
biology and this talk is going to reveal
to you why that statement is
true because standard biology I'm sad to
say because I'm a biologist myself
taught students over 60 years now has
got causation upside down genes to quote
Richard Dawkins genes creators body and
mind I reply we control them and change
them when we need to
so the structure of the talk is going to
be that since as I will show genes are
not the blueprint of life measuring them
and their Association scores with common
diseases which is something biologists
do a lot now cannot work for the purpose
for which it was intended and I'll first
explain why that is the case and then
conclude by showing that statistically
anyway with a study from University
College London it doesn't succeed even
in predicting common
diseases and since that approach fails
and that's the reason why the II has
asked me to come and give this talk
today what is the
alternative what can biologists now do
to deliver what we failed to do and the
answer is going to be to switch to
investigating the functional networks in
organisms that control the Gen gome and
enable it to be edited and to show how
that can be done that there is hope on
the horizon I will choose to close with
two very interesting examples of what
physiologists can
achieve so just a little bit of 101 uh
biology out what exactly is the genome
for those of you need to be reminded it
is of course a very long thin thread of
molecules called nucleotides because
they're in the nucleus and there are
four types you don't need to know the
actual names a t g and c and in humans
you and me and many other animals too um
there are at least three billion
nucleotides that's an important figure
for a bit later in the talk all our
cells except for the red blood cells
contain a complete set of those now the
important thing to realize is as
chemicals because that's what they are
they can only do what chemicals
naturally do their associations and
dissociations from other chemicals in
the body are determined by the energies
of those associations or disassociations
so a likes to be with t g likes to be
with c and in doing this they have no
choice and that is the fundamental
reason why it's incorrect to describe
them as selfish either metaphorically or
literally um only organisms with the
freedom to choose can be described as
selfish or cooperative a baby therefore
is not born
selfish it simply has needs food and
care to enable it to live to grow and to
flourish and it slowly learns that it
can choose and after about three or four
years the parents get fed up of course
because by God by then he can choose and
he knows what he wants but for those few
years it doesn't so let's um get down to
the nitty-gritty why is looking at the
level of genes not the best way to get
to understanding a living system well I
would say is because focusing on the
genome sequencing and that alone is like
mistaking the pixels a message this is
the message at the end of the little
book understanding living systems and if
I expand it up by a few um tens of times
you can see the pixels but at sufficient
magnification it's no longer possible to
see what the message is and this is my
analogy for explaining why yes genes are
important we would not be able to make
the proteins we make that enable us to
move and do all the other things that
organisms do that's not my point of
course genes are important in enabling
all that to be done but nothing right at
the top of the organism really depends
on being able to read the A T C and G
does your medical practitioner your GP
read your CTS A's and G's in order to
decide what to do with you no and never
will so I asked the question you see how
then did The genome become described as
The Book of
Life creating us body and mind to repeat
the Mantra of uh my friend Richard I
call him my friend because I've known
him for 56 years we debate as you some
of you know here in Hy on why um his
books are absolutely brilliant extremely
convincing until you understand where
they go wrong but
now actually we agreed on that two years
ago so some of you will remember uh we
both told each other your books are
brilliant but they're wrong
anyway now amongst other things I am a
computer programmer I learned to program
valve computers 61 years ago in order to
work out the rhythm of the
heart but if as a computer programmer
you look for where the if this then that
else the other
where those Clauses lie in the genome
you will never find them nobody's ever
found that kind of Computer Logic within
the genome there are switches in
genomes each gene has an area near it
usually which is a switch but those
switches are controlled by other
physiological processes they're not
controlled by the genome itself except
indirectly because some of the rest
which doesn't code for genes codes for
what are called little rnas that do in
fact have influence on what the genome
is but that gives you gets you into what
I'm going to refer to at the end the
physiological networks that actually
control what is happening so where are
the control
mechanisms now this is a very
complicated diagram I'm not going to
take you through it but it shows you
just how complex a in your body really
is all of those structures you see there
are actually lipid membranes like soak
Bubbles and it's essentially the fats in
us that are forming those membranes and
it's the proteins in those
membranes that have the sensitivity to
the outside world the chemicals we
encounter the electrical changes we en
counter the mechanical changes we
encounter absorption of photons you name
it um they sense it and those are where
the E andil Clauses lie and of course as
I will show at the end they send
messages down to the genome to tell it
what to do
incidentally choice is an essential
element in any theory of how organisms
are able to make choices and it's
important to know that in addition to
all of our cells nerve cells
particularly have these controllable
onoff
switches now there are no genes coding
for
membranes yet all of that is
inherited as a debate two years ago
Richard told me Dennis we could inscribe
your genome in
Granite keep it for 10,000 years and
then in 10,000 years we could re
recreate Dennis Noble I said no you
can't why
not oh Richard where would you get my
mother's egg cell as it existed in
1936 and that's the point you see all of
that has to be inherited in addition to
the
genome so now I'll just go through the
simple proofs that were featured in the
nature article in February that the
idea that Gene Centric biology is the
whole story the complete story it's an
important story remember what I said
earlier on genes are important they make
proteins they enable those to be made
but we've uncounted unfortunately four
major errors the first one is what is
called a central dogma of molecular
biology formulated by crick in 1958 it's
the the idea that you simply go from DNA
to make an RNA or RN in plural and
enable the organism to make proteins
that is absolutely
correct if you keep the central dogma as
a simple chemical statement of the
sequence uh described there absolutely
correct and you cannot reverse that
that's why it's called a Dogma it is
impossible to reverse it you can't go
from proteins to make de
DNA but that is not the way in which
organisms control their genomes what was
happening during the pandemic
illustrates this perfectly well a new
virus
appeared our immune systems detected it
they then proceeded to
mutate the relevant part of the genome
and only that part that codes for the
grabbing part of the protein they've got
to make called an imunoglobulin that can
grab the virus or the new bacterium
whatever it is and neutralize it how do
they do that a message goes to those
cells that can do that to start
proliferating and through chance changes
to change the genome sequence the system
then not the individual cell can't know
that but the system then decides which
cell El succeeded in getting the one
that grabs the virus those are told to
reproduce as fast as possible and then
the rest are told to die so the central
dogma does not
prevent that kind of process occurring
it clearly occurs it occurred during the
pandemic to all of
us the second Dogma is one that goes
back a very long way indeed it was
formulated by the ger geneticist in the
19th century August vicman in
1883 just a year incidentally after
Charles Darwin passed away fortunate for
him because Charles Darwin would never
agreed with him his idea was what we now
call the vican barrier which is that not
only are the germline cells that's the
future egg and sperm kept separate from
the rest of the body but there's a
barrier between the two so that the body
changes can never be communicated to the
ger line incidentally Darwin totally
disagreed with fisman about this now
we've now found that all cells in the
body extrude tiny packets little vicles
if you like they're almost like very
tiny cells but they're not really cells
they're just recycles containing some of
the control molecules rnas proteins and
other molecules that control the genome
many of those bubble over and pass
across the so-called barrier and have
now been shown to affect the metabolism
and other major physiological properties
of the germline cells incidentally if
you doubt any of this all the references
for that process are in the transcript
of the debate with Richard Dawkins which
you can find online the third one is one
that I also discussed with Richard
Dawkins two years ago um that
DNA
self-replicates like a crystal that idea
goes back to
1942 and the lectures given in The
Institute of advanced studies in Dublin
by the great quantum mechanics Pioneer
Irvin
flinger to continue watching this video
click the link in the top left or in the
description below or visit I a.tv for
more debates and talks from the world's
leading thinkers on today's biggest
ideas
