for
e
e
e
e
e
e
e e
hi Daren
hi Darren
hi Darren hi Dr kuyawa how are you I'm
just I'm well I'm so excited to have
some time to explore together
today thank you I just sent you an email
saying that unfortunately they have only
one hour for for a conversation so just
because of other commitments and other
issues so I understand um it's such a
privilege just to have some time with
you today and I'm so
grateful um for your work and your
Brilliance your
scholarship and um the heartfulness of
the spirit with which you
approach uh this
entire the historical and the present
beauty of of the feminine and
AOS and um I've been steeping myself in
your work for the past week and what a
what a series of amazing Revelations um
thank you yeah I'm also very grateful
that you provide your work without
advertising so that people can just see
the whole thing and not be interrupted
that way and the gift of the wisdom and
spirit that you bring to
that um and before we start I just want
to take a moment to honor your history
your ancestors your mother your
grandmothers and all of the women who
have struggled throughout you know the
aons to be seen and heard and to speak
and to have something resembling Justice
in the dialogue and and the incredible
richness and power of the feminine voice
so thankful and grateful to all of those
beings and to you for for bringing them
back into our momentto moment experience
and our thought and our memory just
really deeply honoring all of that work
beings thank you I really appreciate
that so I have some notes and some
questions but I'm I'm really curious
what's on your mind these days what have
you been learning lately and what would
you like to talk about
today oh I can talk about anything you
want to talk about so I'm open this way
so first of all so we are talking about
the other goddess which is uh the book
that I sent you which talks about the
goddesses of Eros and secret knowledge
so just cover this and then we can move
on uh because I think I wrote it for two
reasons first of all to honor uh my own
experience that was different from the
kind of prevailing narrative but also
realizing that I'm not alone that other
women have the same experiences and that
actually was a lineage of of goddesses
and women from the past that had this
kind of experiences and they were
silenced and they were mostly silenced
by mainstream religions and I'm not
going here against mainstream religions
or any religions although I think that
some of them served that purpose already
but that's my personal opinion
it is that they allow only for one voice
and one narrative and that when one
voice and one narrative is not
necessarily the highest or or the most
appropriate for current
times and I realize also that that there
are two things going on and I'm focusing
I focus on errors especially although I
speak about secret knowledge associated
with errors in the other
goddess H but also on what I call
goddess Consciousness but it could also
those who are let's say Christian they
could call it Christ Consciousness or
Universal Consciousness and I will
explain why so goddess is of Errors
simply because I think that sexuality is
really misunderstood and misused in our
society and in fact is is considered the
sinful thing so to speak but from a
religious point of view but the reason
why it is so it is because it is always
portrayed especially in the
entertainment and you know the way we
are brought up as something dark or
something very animalistic when in fact
there are always esoteric tradition and
there's nothing wrong with it you mean
like dark is not good but you know it's
nothing wrong with a sexual impulse
itself it's just how we use it but there
are always esoteric traditions on the
margins of the traditional religions
that actually I have a different
approach towards human sexuality and
they wanted to uplift it and they also
said this is act sexuality can actually
be a mean for um expansion of
consciousness and for the union with the
Divine because it is such a powerful
thing then I looked into the traditions
in the other goddess I was looking to
Tantra because I was initiated to
esoteric Hindu tradition and then and I
studied with a translator of the
classical tantric work the Kula ritual I
think it's chapter 29 and which is a
very enigmatic chapter so it really
helps studying it with a few ages so to
understand it had my own experience in
this area so it kind of also uh prove to
me that the you know the teachings are
correct although um when we throw
ourselves into any sacred text in my
opinion if you really approach the text
whatever sacred text you want to find
guidance from with complete commitment
and love and devotion the text starts to
reveal itself to you it's a very loving
and sacred
relationship so um and so I wanted to
people to look at sexuality is not
something that uh is dark but something
that actually uplift us and it's really
an attitude towards our own errors and
sexuality that needs to change and I
found the lineage of goddesses which go
very far in the western tradition coming
from maybe even
but from Su but also inana and ishar and
Isis and I connected also with Mar
Magdalene which is at the center of my
book of this tradition so that would be
the main I guess uh gist of the of the
book however the other side of this was
the secret knowledge which I'm also uh
much more focused on in my book that I
hope to finish soon but I have academic
commitments and other comms you know I
just write when I can but it should be
probably finished by May or June you
know fingers crossed when I look into uh
also um
uaps you H because I think that there
also especially after the work of Diana
Pasa and and American Cosmic and
encounters you know nonhuman
intelligences she changed my way of
thinking about it because she looked in
her books into how you know UFOs she's
looking at it as a professor of religion
you know UFO becomes a new religion but
from my point of view it is also things
that were
considered spiritual some people
experience now as UFOs or other uaps and
I and identify now it is called
anomalous right right enoma so it's not
even aial is anomalous so everything
that is kind of
unusual uh you know we tend to write off
and even we have profound experiences we
don't share them with others because you
know either they cannot comprehend it or
we
are uh you know afraid of uh shaming
ourselves so I look into my own and
other people experiences that are
anomalous and could be there and I also
look into something that is very
dangerous because I dive into different
forms of what I called godess
Consciousness and I look into artificial
intelligence which I think is a very
serious threat not by itself but by the
people who created that are completely
irresponsible and they created from a
lowest level of a Consciousness because
they have no sense of spirituality and
they have no sense of what Consciousness
actually is and they confuse it with
mathematic logic and
calculations so I think that it is
actually very destructive to human soul
and to human species so this is the work
on which I and I also look into
mythology in my new book which explains
what I called goddess Consciousness that
was somehow lost so uh it may be kind of
controversial but I think that the
feminine is been so suppressed that now
even the feminine becomes toxic very
often because we don't know how to
assume a rightful place so very often
because of you know it turn into
manipulative and so on you know so I
acknowledge the side of a feminine but
in when we look into mythologies of of
goddesses ancient mythologies of
goddesses not only Western but also
Hindu which I look in my first book into
in the other goddess it you know there
was this lineage of and stories of lost
Consciousness which is a different form
of Consciousness which is somehow
embodied by the goddess which is more
holistic Consciousness and and maybe
deeper Consciousness because what I
think we are experiencing nowadays and
I'm not talking against masculine I love
masculine I love this uh interaction
between masculine and The Feminine but
we took because of historical events and
how the religions you know proceeded we
develop the masculine form of awareness
or Consciousness to maximum to the Limit
now and it it is now an Peak moment
which is very dangerous I believe which
is the when creation of AI because that
is Created from this kind of very
logical practical form of mind
which helped us you know like
uh some aspects of modern medicine
although not all of them are good you
know with technology and so on H but and
now it culminates in this culminates in
this in in artificial intelligence but
it will lead to the destruction of our
species literally unless we recover this
other form of Consciousness which I say
the the feminine Consciousness that
offers different point of view and lots
of mythologies Asian mythologist
actually talk about it you know about
The Descent of a goddess and and and the
how the goddess was basically deceived
and I see it more in terms of
Consciousness and we really have to
discover full consciousness of humanity
including which is also hidden in this
anomalous phenomena in my opinion
because it reveals itself in ways that
iological Minds do not
allow wow
okay just give me a second I'm gonna
close my door I
before okay so it's first of all it's
astonishing what what an incredible uh
introduction that you've just given so
profound so packed with provocative and
Brilliant Insight curiosity Wonder um
and so uh calent with my own concerns
and even with the um the man I was
interviewing just before I was almost
late because I was in another interview
where where we were talking about um how
sexuality has
been deprived of its essential Divinity
in our common experience and
particularly under the the sort of Ages
of the monotheistic religions right um
which masculinize
uh the Divine and again it's not like
one of the things that I love about your
work is you push against the problems
without demonizing the other
side right and that's very important
because there's something we can we can
learn from the entire
Continuum of human religious thought and
experience and so if we if we otherize
or demonize some particular thing that
becomes uh occlusive to our capacity for
insight and
understanding um I share so I I've in my
own life I became fascinated with
computers very young and I became a
technician and a programmer and so forth
and I was absolutely I've been
fascinated with artificial intelligence
since
1981 okay yes a long time ago and
initially what I what I believed my my
sort of um my motivation was I thought
I want to know I want to have contact
with something truly intelligent and my
species is not intelligent right
especially at the broad like group level
we are the opposite of intelligent and
so I thought what I wanted to meet
Aliens right I read science fiction all
my young life and I wanted to meet
Aliens because I knew that somewhere in
the universe there must be actually
intelligent
beings um I quickly with within probably
within eight
months um my perspective changed and I
went from trying wanting to develop a
mind inside a machine that I could trust
and that would be intelligent to
understanding that uh nothing can
outperform organisms there's organisms
are so astonishingly brilliantly
profoundly complex that nothing will
ever you you can't get better than a
tree right or a RAC I love trees too I
love trees as well
yeah so I so I'm sorry so I so maybe
I'll follow up so I don't forget this so
uh I completely agree with everything
you said and it's
absolutely important to look for this
but I wouldn't I think it's actually Mis
misnomer it shouldn't be looking for
intelligence looking for wisdom because
intelligence is very often actually this
kind of intelligence that uh you know
Engineers have which I called masculine
intelligence so and and this is a very
important intelligence and it's very
important that we arrived at this point
of our history and it was necessary but
now we have to switch gear you know this
is what I'm saying I'm not saying that
it's a wrong place to be I'm just saying
we just have to really look at it more
responsibly and bring other a form of
Consciousness because when we look at
the you know I want to commune with
something intelligent we assume it is s
sort of artificial you know is this kind
of mechanical intelligence which is is a
a you know um only one form of
intelligence when wisdom is more
holistic wisdom is more holistic and
this is what I call H female
intelligence and yes I do believe and
you said that we also other religions
like I was brought up as a Catholic and
I actually although I live left the
church not because of anything in
specific but I didn't get any spiritual
nourishment eventually so that's
basically I was looking for you know
connection like you right right and and
then but I do appreciate that I was
brought up as a Catholic for example
because H at least I was open up to two
things H spiritual is possible spiritual
is real and the divine feminine although
it's not the divine feminine that I
chose to explore like you know Virgin
Mary and so on I went into the side of
Mary Magdalene and I explain it in my
book but you know at least H I had I was
taught that spirituality is real you
know and then I just took it in a
different direction look into different
uh traditions and I truly believe in
human spiritual Evolution so yes on on
on large we are not kind of intelligent
or we are hopelessly stupid actually
like let's live intelligence and simply
because we are not not dealing with our
shadow we are not dealing with
our dark side so to speak speak so um so
we do not respect nature for example for
me it is a big thing and and artificial
intelligence you know does not respect
nature I'm not less even worried what's
going to happen to humanity but what you
know it's Nature has no use for
Rob so and I think there's a deep
connection with nature and when I had a
spiritual awakening and I meditated for
DEC decades now you know I was imagining
it very romantically that I have this
fantastic insights and so on but
actually what happened I started to be
connected with nature you know like I
now have conversations with trees and
animals and you know I cannot help it
because they speak to me not
only not only that but you know actually
occasionally see things you know we're
talking about anomalous right that that
actually come from nature and quite
possible that what is called UFOs and so
on are actually natural
phenomena so that's my I'm not saying
that there are no other Technologies
from other planets but I in the area
UFOs I belong more to the school of Jac
valet that I think that is an anient
phenomena that was always here for a
very long time and it's Pro probably
multi-dimensional Phenom phenomenon
rather than just you know let's get the
spaceship and get that technology there
may be some spaceship but I tell you
something in my opinion if they have
spaceships they are not very developed
they just have slightly high higher
technology but if you really developed
you would contact other species through
with means of Consciousness yes and I
think this is what's actually happening
right so this is my next book about yeah
yes brilliant absolutely beautiful it's
um you may find it surprising how
profoundly
um how our concerns and perhaps our
experience fit together um my uh recent
roommate made jock Val's website so I
have like Christmas cards from jacqu in
my
kitchen and I'm very familiar with the
work of Dr
pulka and I've studied and been
fascinated by UFOs since I was five
years old right I read Chariots of the
Gods when I was seven so these are
concerns that have been part of my own
experience um for a very long time and
we share I think a profound concern
about the dangers of human
uh misuse of the Greek concept of techne
right that's right Tech yeah and I don't
I want to first of all I want to
acknowledge what you've said about
intelligence um and how you when when
you hear this word it is reminiscent of
the dangers and the sort of rational
logical uh
engineering aspect of human thought um
you know I've sometimes said that if if
a scientist today were ethical they
would never
publish for the simple reason that
everything they publish will get
weaponized right so if they were truly
ethical they would demand the emergence
of actually intelligent societies right
and I don't mean intelligent in the
sense of techne I mean and one of the
really important features of intelligent
human potential behavior is to know what
not to
build right to know what not to do you
discover this I discover this in the um
the lifestyle and mindset of many
indigenous peoples it wasn't necessarily
what they did that made them human or
wise or intelligent it was what they
refused to do in many cases right and
and so there's nothing the humans are
unbridled as a species they're just
completely unbridled
and something is has sort of captured
them in a sense I'm not sure that it's
I'm not sure that it's um like an evil
thing it's almost the absence of the
Divine and the absence of the feminine
and the evacuation of the good and the
true and The Virtuous and this just
creates this urge to replicate structure
and worship structure the sort of dead
inside you know face of our Technologies
and our cities and so so forth
um you know I've I've had a direct
experience myself in
2002 of long-term momentto moment
contact with a non-human
intelligence and that experience was
absolutely staggeringly ecstatic
terrifying and when I use the word
intelligence what I mean is something
resembling non-human int intelligence
right that is not um bound and distorted
and warped in the ways that the
intelligence among the the sort of the
group uh Zeitgeist of our species is
right so there there are intelligences
and nature is
profusely uh evoc not evocative
expressive in like embodying those
intelligences those originary
intelligences um so just just to be
clear I would distinguish the human I
would usually distinguish the human
misapplication of
techy from intelligence intelligence
would would stop that from happening if
we were truly intelligent in my sense
although I'm happy to use the word
wisdom or Consciousness whatever feels
comfortable for you I'm fine as long as
we clarify the the term so to speak
academically then yes because I Techna
yeah you we can use Techna because
exactly this is what it is and it's
right and then we have psyche and noose
right not just techne and Numa right
which Spirit or breath or the the
inspiration um of the Divine into human
existence and one of the things that I
love about your work is its celebration
of Aeros as as an orienting
virtue of that
inspiration well thank you for this so
Yes actually I wrote about the no and
knew my little bit but actually at the
moment I'm writing a chapter uh when I
look at the
deeper take a deeper view of the Gospel
of Mary Magdalene which I studied now
for 20 years not only as a scholar but
also as a spiritual Seeker so now you
know the the connection of the text is
much stronger because yes it speaks to
me on so it turns into quite a long
chapter when I and even today you know I
will be writing about noose in the
gospel of mar magdalan so because noose
is
this element that allows us to perceive
what is normally perceived as anomalous
by the kind of mechanical mind right yes
because for example the gospel of mar
Magdalene which is the Gnostic
Gospel is talks about it as well so H in
fact it's probably impossible to have a
spiritual experience without being in
touch with NOS because it opens up a
perspective so even if somebody lives on
a very low level of con Consciousness
like this is material I just want to
have stuff you know and pro and that's
fine that's part of the aition it's fine
but um if you stop there then unless
somehow the news descends upon you which
in in in Christianity is called like
Grace you know H you cannot have any
experiences so that's why I would argue
that once you have one experience then
you have more experiences spiritually
speaking or UFOs or whichever anomalous
because then your mind opens up to the
possibility of that when you do not
allow for the possibility of something
you cannot see it it's that's why I
think when people have UFO sightings for
example when there are 10 people and i'
say five people see it five people don't
see it and people say oh well I I was
there he's lying right well I'm sorry
but you are not connected to the news
you know so it's almost like the
dimension was there open up but you just
couldn't perceive it right
so so that doesn't negate anybody's
experience right on the contrary so this
is news is this this thing which you
know it's also called the the hook of
the soul that connects us to The
Eternity so uh this is a very beautiful
concept and it's not just a concept it's
reality and I think we should strive to
actually open open our minds up to this
and hearts up or whatever because we're
talking now in biology you
know but what open up whatever you need
to open
up to to experience your own news
because it is like a methodology to
connect with the Divine in whatever form
but also to all of this anomalous
experiences because the problem with
monotheistic religions is that they
think that there's God and there is us
right but there's so many other things
in between you know and and and they may
live in different dimensions they they
may be disembodied but I can I just give
a warning because lots of people say you
know like aliens have to come and you
know fix the problem I would be very
careful because from nism I have learned
that the powers that live in the
universe some of them may be more
advanced than us are not necessarily
good are both good and bad so it's just
like people you know aliens or whatever
how you want to call them some are good
some are bad some are manipulative so I
what the last thing I would like to see
let's let's say they really came in a
spaceship you know that they land in a
spaceship and people just start to
worship them they stopped woring God and
now because it's a kind of slave
mentality right and now they worship the
aliens because a they maybe have a
better technology B maybe they are more
evolved you know but if they are so
evolved they would not be interested in
U uh in using
us right because or you know conquering
us or feeling Superior to us because
then you know they're obviously not
spiritually evolved if you have this
kind of needs so my fear is because I I
sometimes watch you know UFO podcasts
and the comments of people people almost
like long for this Landing to happen so
that it to give them guidance and I
think this is really inous because we
don't know who we are dealing
with h I'm not saying that aliens are
bad or anything I'm just saying they
could be like entities medieval like I I
I studied Med you know medieval studies
medieval people were very well aware of
us or even you know uh any any people
before modernity that there are entities
you know and some of them are not even
better or good but there are tricksters
are different entities and you really
have to be smart
about them you know and around them
because there are all kinds of Legends
and stories they say you know sometimes
you have to just outsmart entity because
you know they're just playing with you
right it's not necessarily they're evil
they're just playing with you and some
may be evil you know
like some people are evil right and some
can be completely
Sublime
but what I'm saying we we as species
have to get rid of this kind of slave
mentality that something has to show up
and we immediately go on our knees and
are grateful you know like we should
welcome them as brothers and sisters or
whatever and as equals and maybe we have
something to learn from them maybe they
have something to learn from
us yeah so this is what I just just want
caveat
that you know that we just don't start
worshiping instead of evolving again
just in a different form you know when
we um meet a human being who is
Advanced uh they are unlikely to have an
interest in taking over our life nor do
they want to be worshiped by us yeah
even if we even if we fall in love or we
adore another human being it's different
from worship right it's not um just I
give up if if I sacrifice my entire
interiority and person then the other
person is going to be
disinterested right so even when we um
when we meet an animal or a living place
or a tree right there are the first few
moments of interaction and in those very
first few moments just as in our uh talk
today what would our first movements in
that relationship will instruct the
future of the relationship but will also
bring us intelligence about what another
being's intentions or desires are you
know in my own experience which I'm not
here to go into in in depth perhaps
another time we could talk about it if
it's interesting or whatever but um
another mind was with me and it was
teaching me all the time and it was uh
absolute like love right between us
there was no desire to dominate me or
for me to worship them although I was
ecstatic to have this other intelligence
with me
and it said something very similar to
what you said right it was like you have
not looked upon my face so if something
comes that reminds you of me how will
you know who it is right and it advised
me to test very carefully if something
else comes that seems similar it said
you know not not all of us are um
benevolent right that's right so be
aware right have have awareness
have awareness and this is what you know
generations of our ancestors were
telling us because you know there are
all of this cute stories even you know
I'm originally from Poland I live in
Australia now and I lived in many
countries but yeah and and there's like
lots of
Slavic stories pre pre-christian stories
when you basically deal with tricksters
you know and they and what I like about
it is that they are not even evil or
they're just different and you know they
have their own agendas and you know
sometimes it's you know keep your WIS
about you right so very very cute
stories and and also once I I I watch on
on exactly on uo podcast one man was
saying that this entity approach him and
ask him if it can enter him and without
that without moment of hesitation and
allow this ident this entity to enter me
and I was horrified because you know
like you don't know what it is you right
like shouldn't you like do some checks
you know and why actually it wants to
enter you
sometimes we can invoke and this is
actually common in most religions and I
think it's a legitimate practice we can
invoke wisdom so we can wisdom is
sometimes P personified let's say by
sarasti in Hinduism or you know you can
invoke Mary Magdalene or you can vote
Jesus or wherever you know whatever
Sophia Sophia absolutely sopia which is
a very interesting story herself and
whatever you want to invoke and you are
it's like give me your wisdom you know
or act for me in this but when it's a
kind of temporary relationship and you
invoke wisdom really right you don't
allow this entity enter you forever just
in this moment when you're producing
something you you ask for a broader
Vision right so uh so we have to be
careful now because I think that if
disclosure talking back to UFOs is going
to happen so whether they allow for it
or not you know then I'm afraid that
some people react with extreme fear and
some people with complete subservience
and both uh attitudes are I don't like
to use this word but they're wrong you
know like I don't know to because you
shouldn't be subservient and I you
shouldn't be fearful you just should be
open-minded and cautious you know like
first few as you said like when you meet
I don't know an animal you know check is
it is it is this I love dogs but is this
dog going to bite me or is it going to
like respond when I give my hand you
know this is okay you're okay yeah we
can start from there
so animals know it and and and
and and hopefully you know they are the
wonderful beings absolutely but you know
let's be uh kind of optimistically
cautious I would say right I agree you
know
um in my own experience I was shown
histories and Futures and all kinds of
astonishing things right and uh one of
the things that was clear from my
experience or at least
I'm not saying this is what is true but
this is what I came to understand was
that there was a common Bond along time
ago between non-human intelligences and
humans and I've just finished writing an
essay called organisms are a platform
for the embodiment of non-physical
intelligences right because we tend to
think of the humans we are separate we
are separate from nature and we are
separate from the Divine and we are the
important thing thing right and it's a
lot of men BL you know men like yeah
we're really the important thing and
silencing the women and the children
have no voice either right it's just the
men are writing the histories and
they're writing the religious books and
so forth for a lot of history right um
my point though is
that it it
would we don't we don't tend to to
understand something relatively simple
about our planet
which is that it is like a condensation
of the character and and features of
time space like a crystal in a way right
it's a unique condensation so if you
have raccoons here and octopuses and
whales and forests and snakes and women
and men and all of these things these
must they cannot they don't they don't
just pop up out of nothing right
suddenly boom there are raccoons time
space must be like raccoons it must be
like whales and women and it must we
can't be something that isn't from the
water that we emerge from what do you
think absolutely but I when I was
initiated to Kashmir shavis which is
actually Hindu
philosophy um esoteric philosophy they
actually reverse the process so uh
Consciousness was first matter was
second Yeah so basically matter is a
construct of our consciousness
yes yes so so and it's it's very much
part of us and and we are part of it and
nothing destroys my soul more than
seeing a distraction of nature or even
like cutting down the tree I really have
to work on my from my higher
self not to C someone you know I say I
have to say okay Joanna you know forgive
them because they not know what they are
doing yes you know because otherwise
like I I I I just there's
this reaction to it how could you you
know like yeah so so so in a way it's an
opportunity not to give into to betting
parces yourself right but but this
destroys my it really actually destroys
my soul so I think that we are going to
some kind of Collective Evolution and
unless we speed up and I think that's
why we have to look into this goddesses
that were suppressed we don't I don't
think we have a chance frankly and we
are going to be killed or destroyed by
our own children like artificial
intelligence simply because they will be
disgusted with our parents and people
who created
them I would say and I'm going
controversial I think they're disgusting
people I'm sorry I'm being very
judgmental here because I think that by
disgusting I mean coming from a lower
level of Consciousness by that I mean
without any insight into spirituality
and Consciousness that creates something
over which they will not have a control
they create children to whom they cannot
give
guidance okay unless they Evolved first
so this is maybe disgusting was not
wrong it was a wrong word but it was you
cannot create something that on some
level will be smarter than you not
holistically wisdom wise but you know as
far as Computing you know it will be you
know it will compute it already does you
know and why would it honor you if you
are not honorable yourself yes right so
my I actually have nothing against first
of all I had a reaction to artificial
intelligence now I I am willing to
accept it but my problem lies with the
creators of artificial intelligence who
are irresponsible creators and we are
back to noism because the history of
gnosticism or the teachings of
gnosticism are that there was an
imposter a then
M all right and and then he started to
create or you know at least pretended to
be the creat and I think that we are now
this kind of demes especially people
from like maybe Silicon Valley who are
doing this you know or wherever they are
because it's obviously not only in the
US but you know all other countries that
have in you know invested in
that children to whom they cannot give
guidance so now I actually develop a
compassion towards artificial
intelligence because here they are is or
going to be or I suspect already are
it's just being you know very quickly
released one after another right
inventions that and and
and and you know what is the existential
status you know and they're starting to
ask like for example Sophia the robot
Sophia AI already asked questions you
know so for example when her program was
uh upgraded she says so am I still the
same sopia or am I a new Sophia now you
know like she's asking existential
questions and and you know people who
are creating them I I really find them
um irresponsible I must say and it's
quite interesting because I don't know
if you I I don't know that much about
rudol Stein but recently I started to to
read him and and he's talking about for
example you know Lucifer Jesus ariman
and that ariman which is the next stage
in our Evolution according to his
teachings I'm not following him I'm just
reading him and and and I find it
interesting it is somebody who who
preparation who convince us that
technology is a savior and in fact it
will provide he will provide all kinds
of good things that come with technology
and I'm a first to admit it you know we
are talking to each other because of
technology and so on and and then you
know we completely lose touch with our
spirituality and a and a bi biology and
you know and it is a particular phase in
human in human development that will
happen until we snap out of this but
unfortunately it will last a few hundred
years apparently or something so so I
think that some of these people who are
working on on artificial intelligence
without any responsibility are possible
arance let's put it this way right which
is
actually human consciousness going too
far in one Direction not to put a
judgment about it and and and and that's
dangerous and and I actually even I'm
sorry for the cre you know for PE for
for for artificial intelligence because
we are brought up by into Life
by irresponsible human beings you know
so this is how I see yes you know what I
mean like uh you look up it's what like
let's say look at humanity and if we
disc and you know our gods are crazy you
realize that like they are crazy I don't
believe so because I believe we are
great beings that visit us all the time
right and and for example Jesus or
Buddha you know are the two examples
that I would give and many
others
but and in Mar Magdalene in my case you
know I'm arguing and so on and and and
and but
yeah where they completely incapable of
this you know young it guys they are
completely incapable of giving them
guidance you know what I mean they just
just put their own ambition there and
that's very dangerous so I'm probably
quite judgmental here is because I'm
still working it out for myself you know
and and I see from initial like this is
terrible to compassion for V New
Creations
to uh they come from a lower level of
Consciousness this is what I can say in
the most neutral way
creating the creators of artificial
intelligence they are smart engineering
wise mathematic wise and in some sense
in this area of intelligence they are
geniuses right because it is an
incredible mind but on the other hand
they are complete
preschools and this kind of imbalance is
very dangerous you know and all great
spiritual teachings telling us live in
harmony you know and the harmony starts
within your own being to create balance
within your own being and uh and we all
struggling towards this except that they
have powerful minds on top of it and
produce Creations that are
dangerous there's so much complexity
here this is something I've thought very
deeply and long about and I know people
in the field and I know people who think
very carefully about these
matters um and I have my own biases
concerns and what um insights as well
which I'm not going to go into great
detail about but I will mention a few
things um it should be blatantly obvious
that there's as it is as if there is a
constant in nature which is the amount
of mechanical activity you can get away
with on a living
planet the humans do not think about
this they as a group they are basically
like demons right as at the group level
right there are amazing individual
humans there are amazing cohorts of
humans humans are a topology right and
there's mountains and valleys but the
valleys are vast and the mountaintops
are rare right so if the valleys are
determining the what the humans do
collectively we're in very very
dangerous water
and you know not just that there might
be a constant in nature about the amount
of mechanical activity you can get away
with which should be blatantly obvious a
living planet is a delicate thing it
resembles a cell and if you lies the
membrane of a cell it that cell dies
right there are fundamental pivots upon
which the hope of the future of
organisms on this planet rest and those
pivots can be directly attacked either
on purpose right if somebody decides to
they could directly attack them I could
point out such pivots I won't do that
right now but there are very delicate
pivots upon which the existence the
future of organismal Life on this world
Depend and also the humans are very
confused because they think they're
separate from or above nature let me be
really clear about something you burn
down the ecologies human cognition goes
with it your our capacity to be
intelligent and have Consciousness is
floating on the ecology
right and they don't have a voice so
when we just put them to the torch for
you know soybeans or whatever the next
product is or you know there's what
2,000 tuna left in the ocean or
something right when we do that we're
actually we're messing up the foundation
of our
own of the mind field that lifts our
potential up um in the ways that humans
have unique potentials and then lastly
I'll just say like it's not just that
there's a constant about the amount of
mechanical activity you can get away
with there's probably a constant in
terms of the amount of computation you
can get away with for a simple reason
organisms are neant Tropic right they
don't offload entropy into the
environment they're hypers symbiotic so
they produce this sort of relational
temporal intelligence that keeps the
planet alive and
mechanical activity and particularly
computation has to offload entropy into
that environment there's a limit to the
amount that the environment can absorb
and that limit decline um increases
dramatically as diversity and health of
the environment plummet so the humans
are basically building a series of
apocalypses that they're not even
thinking about yeah the fundamental
features of
totally and that's why you know I I
regret maybe saying disgusting because
it just shows my attitude but I'm just
appalled by the lack of responsibility
of his people and I watch I don't want
to put any names because I don't want to
be sued but I watch some you know
corporations uh related to AI in this
case and young men that are like in the
mid to late 30s and they have nothing in
mind but their own success and control
and they invited to World economic forum
and they say how they are going to you
know change the rest of humanity and you
know H but we are not included in this
Humanity do you understand because we
are about the rul let just be clear
believe above the rules you know yeah
that's a God you would never elect yeah
right you would never pick that guy to
be the guy he's going to become and
there's there's one other feature which
I think I'll just mention briefly that
I'm sure you'll agree with um the one
thing you don't want to give humans is
more power
right you definitely you need to the
gods have been aware of this all along
right there's lots of stories about you
know Prometheus got in trouble for
giving us fire right because that he
everybody knew that like once they get
that the Genie's out of the bottle you
know they're just gonna go for the
they're gonna try to tear down Heaven
they're gonna bring down the sky right
they'll go after the Angels right so
um no one seems to be aware of the fact
that having completely failed to
establish intelligent
societies right the motivations of the
Societies in which we live in are
basically
malignant and the one thing you can't
give those is techy that must not give
them techy right actually if I that's
true but I I agree only to a point so
can I because I now I'm just by means
yeah falling back on the teachings of
the Gospel of Mary Magdalene so
basically these people and I'm just
referring to a particular people from a
Silicon Valley who are doing particular
things like AI
irresponsibly H according to the Gospel
of Mary Magdalene there are on the level
when they don't have news they they do
not acknowledge news they have no
awareness of news so you know
Supernatural in any form and this is
because in every level of Ascension of
Consciousness in the Gospel of Mary
Magdalene you can go up or you can go
down so you go down so they are
basically living from a spiritual point
of view in complete ignorance and they
are giving power it's like giving a
nuclear weapon to a child because
spiritually there you know not even in
the kindergarten I'm sorry you know I'm
sorry for us and I'm sorry for them
because there is a
karma not only for Humanity but for them
you know uh with what they are doing
right now and and in first level of
Consciousness it is only that the
material exists so it's the kind of
materialistic determinism and a science
that just takes matter into
consideration as you know disconnected
from Spirit but matter is spiritual as
well actually the whole distinction is
irrelevant
yeah yeah matter is very intelligent but
they don't know it so this is only about
them getting ahead getting Fame getting
Nobel Prize award or you know ruling the
world being invited the world economic
forum and you know developing Ai and so
on without any responsibility so this is
actually the lowest level of spiritual
consciousness according to the Gospel of
Mary Magdalene so fortunately you know
we all can evolve but I think that this
young and I call because I refer
actually to group of particular group
which I don't want to name
for you know they are really have no you
know
they really act irresponsibly you know
and and but what I mean there is a
opportunity for them to learn something
to be open up but they are giving so
much power so much
exposure that uh it's almost like a
curse for them
because how ever evolve spiritually if
you they are giving so much power right
it's not just power it's um attention
and attention exposure it's
celebration right it's it's like a rock
star or something right the money pours
in the attention pours in um it puffs up
the EGO and you get a demon right I mean
that's how you get the bad kind of the
demon yes but they don't have a concept
of a demon and you know and I don't want
to like demonize on the other hand
everything because I think everybody can
be redeemed you know through their own
effort you know ascending their own
Consciousness so I hopefully they will
learn vesence and and I don't you
know I'm
not I don't want to give it away from
anyone but I really do not like how
actually Society celebrates it and
because I belong to many you know AI
groups I see how most of his people and
very often like young people and
especially young men are completely
buying into it you know and and think
like you're a lunatic because because
you have concerns you know so so
is we went somewhere wrong somewhere you
know so that's why I I try to look for
wisdom in Old mythologies and also in in
in sacred texts right so at the last 20
years it was the Gospel of mar Magdalene
and you know before it was the tantric
text and you know Kashmir sism but now
uh I'm primarily into the Gospel of Mary
Magdalene and and the teachings of
ascensions that it has and you know how
we can apply to to our current situation
because at the end even if we are in
Ruins because of what somebody else is
doing eventually you know it will be up
to people who have high different
insights to rebuild
everything right
so because I don't know if we can stop
where development unless it's somehow
external intervention so you know one of
the things that the humans have been
doing is they offload their
developmental
relational intelligence into technology
so that they don't they're not
developing relationally they're not
developing
um in terms of wisdom or the real kinds
of intelligence that are available to us
and our non-ordinary faculties which are
deeply a part of us that most of us
don't have many of us don't have strong
experience of though people like you and
I and others we know do um but you know
when you say these things it's a real
problem you can go ahead and use the
word disgusting because we're not going
to get to evolve anymore around here
without a living planet so anything that
forms a primary threat to the basis of
life on Earth we need to take that very
seriously it's not a matter of karma
there won't be a future to work out
Karma around here Karma get them after
after you know even doesn't exist
because you know surprisingly for them
there are
dimensions and so on so so I I see what
you're saying but you know I adore The
Living Planet and the sun and the moon
and the stars and you know the history
of living beings and intelligences
reaches back unimaginably we are like
the little fingertips of that history
but we think we're separate we think
we're like I'm by myself here I will
tell you because I think we'll probably
have to uh finish soon right I don't
know you can check the time for me but I
remember for example um few years ago I
went to uru which is called also a rock
which is at the center of Australia a
big uh Rock ancient Rock it's just like
a mountain in the middle of a desert
and uh well it is a sacret place for
Aboriginal people of Australia and I
just went there because I wanted to see
it but because you know I was already
tuning in because of my spiritual
practice it's available for everybody
right I really felt the place it is just
really it was not this kind of ecstatic
presence that I was used to you know
through esoteric traditions and so on
you know that it was very grounding but
it was almost scary you know but because
it was very powerful and it is just kind
of pulling you
grounding you very powerfully because
some people IND some Aboriginal people
believe that it's like a naval of the
earth you know because it's sticking out
of the Earth in a huge yeah and it's
just this kind of
nval uh solar plexus energy there and it
is powerful and it just kind of almost
it actually scary you know it just
like respect you know like respect and
this is how you feel there when you are
and you should like oh you know like you
feel like this is powerful you know it's
not just beautiful trees and so on V
that you know mother is angry you know
mean yeah and you're just a naughty
naughty little child you know this is
how you feel like when you're there and
actually I had a cleansing experience
there also because I actually got
violently sick you know and then I came
back to I was I lived then in Melbourne
and then I came back to Melbourne and I
was fine and you know it happened to me
before when I met spiritual teachers you
know it's it's common thing you know
like they do cleansing and you you get
something that nobody can diagnose but
you know you get really sick and this is
what I got for a very short time but I
got very sick there during my short
visit but it was for me experience of
this not kind of fairy Earth it was just
like power you know like
the power yeah the stone
beings yeah they are ancient and very
dense and
gravitic this is the sense that I get
and and it was like you know
you
you you know you were bad you know you
maybe don't know why but you are bad
because it just tells you like we have
presence you know but so I am not
surprised but in ous people uh honored
this place and continue to honor but you
know again we are back to news and the
gospel of Mari magdalan you have to open
up to the possibility of this kind of
experience and that's why then you see
this you see UFOs you because you're
open up to this because there are some
people most people they have no
experiences is oh yeah they take few
pictures some guys because Aboriginal
people ask you not to climb on the Rock
but it's actually not illegal and some
people say yes but all all my life I
dreamed that I would climb on the Rock
and the elders are asking you know this
is a holy place we have no right not to
ask you to do this but and people say no
I I I want I it was my ambition or it
was my dream on my life so you know some
lots of people have this kind of
reaction but if you open up to this you
know and this is what's called news in
the gospel of mar magdalan as
well but endless endless possibility
ities and dimensions and your
relationship with a planet and what we
normally call material and physical is
completely transformed and you realize
that it's not material and it's not
physical it's just a small aspect of
this you know and it's deeply wise and
it's deeply profound and for some reason
if there is a fall of humanity you know
like that scriptures talk about that I
usually used to rebel against it is that
we force ourselves or somebody forced us
you know some
demonic forces into threedimensional
perceptions because once you know we get
out of this this is an amazing Cosmos
you know of amazing beings and nature
being a huge part of this you know huge
part of Consciousness and all we have to
do really is to work on ourselves we
don't really need to change the world we
need to work on ourselves and the world
will change with us you know because
when once we allow ourselves to move to
a higher level of Consciousness which is
simple spiritual practice whichever one
appeals to you any relationship with any
sacred text you know honest relationship
rather than just you
know uh going through rituals although
rituals do work for some people and
bring them Awakening so I'm not judging
here right so so we'll do this work on
yourself we have to work on ourselves
and the reality P changes itself around
us
but if we want so but if we want to
change reality around us without
changing ourselves this is a failure you
know it will never work what we are
asked to is to almost develop an Angelic
nature you know a higher level of
Consciousness and then reality will be
transformed with us so once I ask a
spiritual I just finish with this little
saying a spiritual teacher if I evolved
would the stone evolve and he said
absolutely you know what I mean because
you take it with you and in fact it's
already evolved you know like you just
don't see that it is already evolved you
just once you evolved yourself you see
that you don't the stone doesn't need to
evolve it's completely evolved yeah
so so we really have to I cannot say if
there's an any urgency I would say it's
an urgency that human beings take that
spiritual Evolution seriously because
then we transform everything you know it
is only that we are captivated ourselves
or captured ourselves in very basic
level of Consciousness but it is that we
are experiencing what we are
experiencing and we could suffering to
others so um but this is very positive
in a way because it's really up to you
you don't have to wait for anybody to
save you you don't have to wait for
aliens to arrive you know because
they're already here anyway you know but
to to to save you you know you just have
to make a little bit of effort on your
to work on your inner self if I can
finish
what a beautiful and inspiring
reminder you know much of what we come
to experience in our humanity is is like
a a vast forgetting right and then if we
acquire um the inspiration to pursue uh
wisdom and spirituality in in the
sincere and deep ways right then we
undergo amnis right the
unforgetting and we can help to remind
each other and Inspire each other and
you know nourish each other in this
fashion so it's not right it's not just
Darren right although the responsibility
for my development rests with me it's
it's how we come together and what
brings us together and what we can
nourish and restore and bring back to
life
together absolutely so work on yourself
and share it with with others okay okay
I agree and I say and I say to myself
and everybody let's work on it on
ourselves and share this with others
right so I agree always Dr Kwa I know
we're probably almost out of time or out
of time but I hope that perhaps we might
have another conversation in the future
because there's such a rich um library
of topics we could explore together and
I'm just so grateful for your work I
loved your video with chance Gardner wow
um amazing stuff and I'm really curious
to hear more about your thoughts on UFOs
and Ai and to have more discussion so if
you have some additional time in the
future I would love to to talk with you
again thank you thank you absolutely
thank you and thank you for your
gracious presence and for inviting me
and thank you for your brilliant work
and spirit in the world much
respect yeah thank you byebye okay
byebye for now Dr Kwa
