I'm out just absolutely thrilled to have
some time together what an amazing uh
opportunity and
privilege good I'm you know why I wanted
to follow up and meet with you is
because your article was so
accurate because you know people can
write things about you and most of the
time it's like
50% and you managed to you managed to I
don't know you did your research or
something but somehow you were able to
get into my character as well and I I
thought it was the it's the best thing
that I've seen period so I'm yours you
can let's talk about whatever you want
right on um I got some tea water boiling
I'm going to bring that in here in a
second um I'm so grateful that you could
take the time it looks like you got to
your office so that we can have uh
better
connectivity it's a little it's no it's
the same crappy connectivity so um but
I'm using a better computer um than I
usually do to teach and whatnot um I'm
glad I'm getting better receptivity
because they hit that cable they hit
that fiber line and to and everybody's
bed it was even we even went to the
library and the speeds were still slow
there so you know I'm glad it's not just
me all right I'm gonna put a I'm gonna
pour a little more hot in my tea yeah
take your time man finally can you hear
me yeah I can hear you okay get get me
up oh finally okay fine there we are I'm
so sorry it wouldn't let me back in I
was like oh my God I'm going to get sh
out for good okay it looks like the
internet's cooperating so let's do let's
do whatever we need to
do sounds good man uh I just want to
show you my My Fit For Today Lone Wolf
and Cub in honor of you being a ronin oh
that's nice I like that i' like that you
probably don't know the story but it's
about a samurai who got
framed and so he just went against
everything took his kid with him on the
road and became a hired
assassin oh right nice nice I like that
is I is there somewhere is it What's the
title of it again in case someone to
look at up and read it yeah it's it's
Lone Wolf and Cub it's a manga um one of
my favorite stories I've uh is it based
on a samurai on a real Samurai who did
this it's unclear um it seems to to
steal a little bit from mhi's Life H
who's Masashi so Masashi is probably the
single most famous
Samurai
um when I was in my 20s I read a book a
novel about his life and it it deeply
influenced me uh you know I studied
martial arts and um was fascinated with
Japanese culture for a long time still
am uh that book actually resulted in me
beginning to study Zen meditation
I I was impressed I read a um just out
of my own interest because it has
nothing to do with my field when I was a
grad student I
thought I'm G to read something about
the Samurai and when I found out their
poetry skills I was like oh wow this is
little bit more sophisticated and I you
know um so the I'm sure this famous
Samurai was an author of some kind of
Hau or something you know or maybe
involved um I I is that a big factor in
the manga like you know do they try to
go all
historical on you with it or is it more
is it more fictional it's a little bit
of both um Masashi I think is famous for
having written the book of five rings so
he did write he he started out as kind
of a barbarian right he was a coward and
sort of a an idiot and he became uh one
of the most amazing
swordsman ever that ever lived um though
you know it's not my it's not my goal to
explore the samurai Heritage today I
just wanted you to know that I recognize
something in your way of life ah ah okay
yeah fantastic it's the it's a free
was this were these Samurai free I think
they were when they became Ronin
although there was such shame attached
to it so I kind of Fe I kind of felt
that when somebody told me that they
said you're really
Ronin I um yeah I think it's I think it
is there um let's hope I know how to use
that sword right that's all that matters
right okay let me shut up and let you
ask some questions or discuss whatever
format you want let's go for it yeah so
I want this to be a conversation so I
want you to feel free to ask questions
or you know delve into
anything and uh that comes to you love
your T-shirt there that's amazing the
the two snake Chariot right yeah that's
Mia Dragon Chariot right right on I have
a uh an old vintage clo on pin with that
image on it that I found during the time
that the uh the the angel quote unquote
was with my mind and that was like a
nine Monon period in 2002 so that's
where I learned that's where I got my
education right about the gods origin
magic all these things I was in a school
you know for for nine months with
something I don't know exactly what it
was I referred to it as an
angel a source of inspiration is that is
that yeah that'd be putting it mildly it
was like being dead while I was alive oh
that's must give you a fantastic
Vantage I mean uh you're at a point a
vantage point where you can see things
if you're in that zone you know nine
months
Jesus yeah what did you learn oh my God
enough for a thousand lifetimes I mean
it changed everything that I thought
about everything really did it totally
it's part of what I recognized in you
right you can recognize the
fingerprint of either the dead or the
Gods in another person's mind and
thought right you can sense it the Muse
The Muse you can smell smell her perfume
it's very
nice so I just want to take a moment and
thank than you for the amazing work you
do you're educating so many people
you're teaching ancient Greek just that
by itself if you were just teaching the
ancient languages that would be an
amazing service to the people and you do
it for free you you're not trying to
make money yeah no I do I do have a paid
Dojo though I have students that pay me
hourly to teach them Greek right not
connected with Lady Babylon but I have
to earn as a as you know with as
somebody with a satanic
contract I have to earn my own way so
it's part of the you know I don't know
it's the physics of everything but yeah
no I teach for I want you to I want that
to be clear I teach for cash right um
but lady Babylon can't be a part of that
I don't I don't want to anything I say
ever be yoked to some kind of profit
potential or some crap like that you
know what I mean I do uh my own works
very similar right the work that I do
which is my soul work that's not a
money-making
thing um it has to be free of that
binding right yeah y otherwise How You
Gonna how are you going to be truthful
right right you're gonna have to worry
about interfering with with your
livelihood Ood every time you open your
mouth Yes and so another thing that I
want to that I want to mention here so
first of all thank you for the work you
do it's amazing I respect you as a
teacher and someone who's
instructing uh the new generations
that's awesome also appreciate
appreciate the fact that you don't allow
advertising on your YouTube channel so
we can watch you
uninterrupted
correct I also can't imagine how you've
managed to evade YouTube bands because
your content is about as provocative as
it could possibly be and yet somehow
they don't take that  down look look
somebody somebody explained it to me
once that not and when I heard this I
was just as amazed as you will
be um for those of us who don't
monetize when we can and it is not many
no I can PR promise you yeah I'm one of
them it is the me okay when we don't
monetize somebody explained to me that
that keeps us off the algorithm that's
searching for a reason to kick you off
so um people have tried in the past over
the last two years people have tried
numerous times to like report you for
content right some kind of violation of
content rules MH um and what I would
every time we do we appeal and we win
right so um I we're following chewy is
following very closely of the things
that we can and can't do and I think
between that and the fact that we're not
monetized I don't think we're getting
the same
scrutiny that we would if we were bent
over and somebody were advertising up
our backside you know what I mean yeah
right yeah if we were if we were taking
it from the posterior position yeah now
I did for the first time a couple weeks
ago I interviewed uh a Russian scholar
and we spoke briefly about topics
related to
um the poisoning of
food and they took that  off
instantly they just they were just like
no you can't say anything about medicine
right nothing so wow seriously yeah and
I'm not monetized so that's the only
thing that I've ever had that I got my
first strike I have 400 videos right I
talk about all kinds of crazy  but
that was my just for that just for
talking about wow and by the way so I
want to be clear this video probably
won't go on YouTube to protect me from
getting a mark so I want you to feel
absolutely absolutely candid right we
can say I want you to just be completely
whatever whatever you're feel whatever
you want to say no sensorship I don't
have to worry about F bombs or anything
like that nothing um Perhaps Perhaps
there's something more to what you're
saying about why Lady Babylon is staying
on the staying up and not getting taken
down seemingly defying the odds maybe
it's not so much to do with the
algorithm because we're not
advertising um and we're not drawing
that ATT ention um maybe it's something
wow maybe it's something different if
you figure out what it is let me know
because we've tried to stay within utter
bounds of Purity yet we can very
clinically talk about texts that say the
most I don't
know um provocative provocative
disturbing being
provocative you know it's a you could
say it's a miracle that we've been able
to stay uh active and I am grateful for
that I'm grateful me too for that you
know it certainly occurs to me that um
the intelligences and the beings whom
you invoke and and whom you are in a
sense the human voice of yeah may have a
say in such matters
oh isn't that gorgeous
yes
fantastic yeah
gorgeous it is oh God I love it I love
it I love the discoveries all the
discoveries with the best jar the timing
was absolutely
impeccable they found a drug with
vaginal excretions and body fluids in it
right one of these compound drugs who
has been yelling about that who has been
yelling about that it's the guy who says
he talks to the Muse yeah one guy yeah
right yeah okay fantastic
fantastic right same channel oh I love
it love it and just to to get something
sorry I didn't mean to interrupt no just
to get one other thing out of the way um
we got to sing Chewy's Praises my
God like yeah absolute support gives you
a whole other dimension of your
presentation takes care of the tech I
mean wild hand of Applause for
chewy oh are you kidding she knows that
too she knows it so um uh you'll
probably hear her in this Danny um she
was in the background doing like
documentary type stuff which by the way
chewy we can release that now now that
he's released
I can we can put that up as footage
maybe fun I don't know people may want
to see it maybe not but yeah so yeah
fantastic just so much respect and
appreciation for chewy and everything
she uh contributes to the work right so
beautiful so powerful yeah it is it is
and she flies that Lin just she threads
that needle
perfectly um because she doesn't put
stuff up there that's going to get us
kicked off right and yet it has to cover
material that has to that is that depth
of darkness and she's able to summon it
you know what I mean
without without
um in a very kind of gential sort of
artistic way so you know it it doesn't
come out as pornographic you know what I
mean it comes out as yeah almost almost
documentary like and I think that's a I
think that's why you need that virgin
Oracle you know what I mean you need
that you need that uh Vision I don't
know I don't know and it's a good thing
she knows how to run everything because
all I know is to stick this thing in my
face that's all I know you know what I
mean
yeah well um you've been provided with
not merely an assistant but a
co-pilot of incredible depth Insight
creative ability so I just you know I
just want to um praise absolutely praise
that and and acknowledge and respect her
profound contribution to the work
yeah she is listening and I need you to
also understand she has one motive one
motive for to know I'm going to say it
because people want to know she has one
motive for doing this entire thing and
that is to get the attention of Henry
Caville and that that is such a powerful
driving
motivation um I I congratulator for that
and I hope someday I hope someday that
you know he walks in
and we you know we have some kind of um
Universal reward you know what I mean so
that's why I'm doing it because she's
hold me prisoner no I'm just
kidding and you love it I know you you
want to be held
prisoner a willing prisoner so okay side
question that crop that you use off
camera whack whack whack is that the
crop from Meda
it is I thought so yeah I thought so how
did you know that were you yeah I'm I'm
a tricky  I'm a detective really
oh my God that's amazing I didn't know
because I didn't think I said that
lately but yeah that's the one from the
play so it's got a very special
significance it does it does I jumped on
the stage with it when we're um the
administ rator came in told us um they
had raided the
props right they had raided the prop
Department because they didn't like the
FAS them the FAS was a problem exactly
and people were so pissed off those
students wanted that man Torn to Pieces
for what they were doing so that was the
whip that um it's kind of a symbol of
the freedom of the stage and people got
it those students picked it up like that
it's like an ancient it's like an
ancient practice that you just offer the
people and it's like it's natural or
something but yeah that's a um yeah I
was whipped with it that was one of the
issues that was in the
deposition I read that yeah D isn't that
funny it's like they wanted to know well
how many times were you hit you know
what kind
well it's like they're really into it
they're grooving on it and then the
thing that people don't realize um maybe
they do if they've got the full
deposition because it's all there but
they had a whole catalog a whole catalog
of whips and dildos that they had pulled
off the internet that because somebody
had run an article that I was in on the
site they thought I was like a some kind
of dildo Pryor you know yeah I read that
and then they they were trying to get
you to explain the meaning of BDSM and
you had no idea what that meant and they
couldn't believe that you couldn't that
you didn't know that they clearly knew
what BDSM meant and they're just like in
the Inquisition they're interrogating
you and you're like bondage sex I don't
know what those other letters mean like
the bondage part I know but the other
stuff I have no idea bro like what but
you guys seen to know all about this I
mean it's kind of ironic right the
inquisitors know what this four-letter
you know acronym means but the uh the
defendant doesn't clearly does not know
right they they were total perverts man
they were total perverts I thought I was
gonna have to take off my clothes I
thought I was gonna have to take off my
clothes I couldn't believe it I was like
dude this guy's really interested I even
talk with my attorney
afterwards Ry what's the dude wanted to
get me naked number one and thanks that
I have some kind of cult that's going to
involve these Catholic virgins oh God it
was these people were they had some
dirty dirty stuff in their minds yeah
they did no and I just I felt
um I felt sorrow for you being subjected
to that kind of idiotic
Inquisition and them like refusing to
call you Dr Hilman right you would say
like would you please refer to me as Dr
Hillman and they'd be like yes Mr Hilman
we will right yeah it was demeaning the
whole thing would but that's part of it
my lawyer said they're going to do that
to you just to get you to explode or you
know to give them something that's bad
right that's so I kind of saw that stuff
coming but um when he asked me the uh
final time that I answered um are you
the god pan I was honestly sitting there
like it was the most surreal moment of
my life I thought what did he just say
what I think he said and he did and I
was trying to sit there I was sitting
there as my lawyer was objecting I was
sitting there trying to figure out
what what is in the
mind of of this cruel
pervert it was it was exactly a bakic
mirror right I could look I could look
into this image and
see the reality that was the
interrogator and I realized oh God
that's that pantheist that's that that's
why they're reflecting the all the bakic
religion does is reflect back to the
individual who they actually
are right which the guy is projecting it
was perverse it was perverse yeah it had
a slight sting of masochism to it and
the fact that they had that whole
catalog stuff I'm not none of that's
mine do I sell that do I have anything
to do with it no it is nothing to do
with me and you could tell that they
knew it and they leaked all of my
personal information they took all of my
personal file and made it public and my
attorney said that it's
intimidation this what it is and the
whole time there's nothing that I can do
because who the hell am I I got no money
right I I can't influence the judge
right so we were in a we were in an
uphill battle but it was a a worthy a
worthy
fight you know I remember when it
finally occurred to me you know I've
grown up in America I I haven't really
been to other countries I haven't
traveled much really not at all and I
remember the day it occurred to me that
um the idea of Rights was kind of
ridiculous because you really don't you
only have the rights that you can afford
to defend and for many of us that's none
right so the idea that we have rights is
a sort of a a legal fiction right you
have brilliantly said brilliantly said
gorgeous yeah and something that we
share and which I recognized in you
right away when I first heard you
speaking on um Danny Jones's original
podcast you know we have uh an ache in
our soul for
justice not Justice is Vengeance Justice
is the
restoration of something profound and
actually intelligent yeah Beautiful
Something Beautiful right yeah putting
that back where it belongs oh God
totally pagans man we're pagans I think
yeah
all right so I do have a ton of
questions and I I've got curiosity about
a whole range of stuff I did do a lot of
research on you but it wasn't really
research right it's like Fascination I
recognize something in you that's
familiar from my own experience and one
of the things I recognize is that
throughout life you know we are
subjected to
situations that are painful and that
hurt us and they hurt our our capacity
to be professional in the world or they
may destroy that
capacity and these are like experiences
of death right part of us dies in that
process and then if we're lucky on the
other side of that death there's a
resurrection right and we come into life
in a new way right with a new mind and a
new a new purpose and a new
spirit and obviously you've been through
a few of these deaths I mean from what I
understand understand you were raised to
Christians am I have I got this wrong
yes no absolutely I would say Baptist
before I would say Christian but um yeah
love Jesus man totally part of it
totally part of it yeah definitely so
was there a a sort of a a juncture which
there was a profound Schism there talk
about that process for me say whatever
whatever comes to mind what's in your
heart about it and I just said it on
Danny Jones too I just said it on Danny
Jones I was reading Aristotle and
reading Aristotle and seeing the
beautiful complexity of
nature oh God and exactly what that
purposeful hand of the Muse is um you
see they said Cosmos was the
organization that is
everything and that
Cosmos is
is really a way for you to interact with
the
Divine yes that it's it's a it's a means
of um pulling out of the person what is
that
corruption and you know those guys are
sitting around like Pythagoras saying oh
this is every 3,000 years how the hell
did they come up with that I don't know
and that aspect
but
um uh I was reading Aristotle with all
of this in
mind and I suddenly realized I was 21
and I suddenly realized you know what um
they were right that
nature he is
gorgeous and it clicked in my
head and I put my Aristotle down I put
on some nice clothes with some
cologne and I was a
virgin and why was I a virgin because
Jesus was watching me he used to watch
me he used to watch me do things and
imagine you know I was so susceptible to
the beauty from the very beginning to
suppress it in my Christian virginity
was so incredible that on that night
reading Aristotle I drove to a bar and I
picked out a woman
and I said hi this is my situation and
I'd like to be done with my virginity
are you up for a go and
proceeded to start my pathway of
learning what is that nature and that
beauty and what is it about Christianity
that wants to kill that to Snuff that
out and to take that component of what
is the cosmos the organ organization of
the universe why do they want to stifle
that so it's almost like it was a
religious thing for me that
involved selfawareness
and that that was coming through
that God that beautiful Uranian Queen
you know what I mean um Aphrodite was
also called
urania and because she's the product of
uranos right um
and that component of ancient mystery
was what the monest first cut out and I
think they did so because that is an a
it's like a battery or some kind of
powering for the individual to um uh for
them to see a beauty put back where it's
supposed to be and um yeah yeah and that
was my moment so uh if you can say it um
I I totally understand why it is that
people associate
sexuality with um sin and Temptation and
the devil because in the Pagan way of
thinking nature is what we worship right
makes sense right
so um nature doesn't do things that are
not beautiful and for us to see her put
together the world through this act of
Kus perhaps the kius is a religious
experience and I mean imagine that
imagine people that think coidus is a
religious
experience because everybody says oh you
know those those idolators those pagans
they were you know what they were doing
there were sex stuff prostitution going
on that's because they looked at sex and
the act of
orgasming as a pan state of awareness
you know if you want to call it
spiritual go ahead right I I don't
understand the physics myself but right
Isis and Osiris the stuff was catchy
it's not like there was only one group
of people that was doing this right so
um why is she carrying the f around
right it's because you're within a
culture that has stifled that vision of
Aphrodite and that's all the bakic
Mysteries did was bring the person to
Aphrodite so oh God you know how can how
can you let that stuff go I don't know
we got to bring this stuff back let
people know so that's where I escaped
Christianity and I told Danny that too
yeah
amused liberated
me beautiful gorgeous oh love
it so you know I had my own uh walk I I
I started out as an
atheist and then I became interested in
magic for a time in my uh teens I was
late teens I was exposed to Crowley not
a fan of Crowley by the way um but that
was my why is that why is that did you
discover that he was a cook or something
it's it's a complicated thing the simple
answer is um I knew these two young
German guys that were Christians right
they had to go to a fundamentalist
church every day but they were secretly
practicing uh you know the rights of the
Otto and
stuff and um they couldn't have they
couldn't have Crowley's books sent to
their house so they had the book of the
law sent to my house
and I remember I was fascinated to
receive that thing I was like what the
hell is this right I'm I'm hyperlexic
I've been a reader since I was a little
kid books have been my education not not
school I've never been to high school
for example um and that book came and I
paged through it a
bit and then I was I was feeling into
the ethos of that thing right and I got
in the
shower and I had a vision
and the vision was that there was a
giant uh
wasp outside the shower like a monster
kind of and this is one of the things
that terrifies me because I I got stung
when I was a young kid and it nearly
killed me it wasn't allergies just got
sepsis right and I love insects I'm
fascinated by insects my entire life but
the Wasps scare me and I just saw this
this sort of um
image of this wasp hovering outside the
shower and it was one of the first
non-ordinary experiences that I had
while I was awake right it was a vision
it was in it was there I could sense it
and I just got the feeling in a very
deep way in my heart this path is not
for you do not take this path your path
lies elsewhere right that kind of thing
so after that I stopped studying crowle
although
it's clear he was um an incredible
scholar of magical tradition and
practice there's no doubt of that he's
kind of a shitty writer um wrote
thousands I've I've absolutely never
read a word but he wrote a novel that
came across my way cocaine Diaries I
think it is oh right yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah I think that's yeah that's the only
thing I've been exposed to I didn't read
that sacred book or anything so how did
it strike you like have you you said you
um you mentioned young didn't you I
haven't mentioned Yung I'm somewhat
somewhat aware of yung's work have you
read any of the red book yes yeah the
red book is an astonishing non-ordinary
thing right full on how would you
compare the red book with the with
Crowley because I haven't read any of
him okay so you know one of the TR okay
so there are some let's just be clear
there are some
traps about being human right there's a
difference between virtue and
vice and and you can engage in sex in a
way that is spiritual and
religious and you can engage in sex in a
way that lowers your soul down I think
and or demeans other people or demeans
yourself what do you think now now okay
wait a minute wait a minute what if your
job is to demean what if the perspective
is this is
hell and you are a Punisher and if that
means
demeaning then de it we require
demeaning to wash away your
corruption that's an interesting
perspective um I get it right obviously
I don't I don't necessarily think that
human existence is heaven or hell yeah
what it is is the it has the entire
Continuum of the possibility space of
incarnation there's hell in there
there's heaven in there there's theater
there's play there's disaster there's
tragedy there's horror right it's all
part of that Continuum yeah and perhaps
as humans uh one of the one of the
aspects of our agency as incarnate
beings is to um
instruct that possibility space what are
your
thoughts to to instruct it I find that
fascinating but I have to I have to
think about it to instruct it if you
mean that I get to spank someone I'm
going for it you know what I mean well
if you want real instruction
I think it has to do with
um the ultimately the power of the
eron that Wilderness where the Mind goes
under the influence under the Visionary
influence right in into that place where
the devil becomes the
tempter I think the whole purpose is
defined that
perfect existence that purified I think
it's why the Mysteries are always
focused on purification what is this
initiation going to do it's going to
purify you what the hell I mean I'm
still going to work next week right what
do you mean it's going to purify me I
think that's the I
think the purpose of the
mystery is to bring
that individual into
association with that
creative
voice and um I think
that that creative
voice of
necessity must be
just and that's
why joining up with Lucifer means you
get to 
ass right right you get to bring you get
to bring people exactly the hypocrisy
that they are and show it to them in the
mirror say this is you you know why it's
because I am the god of the dead right
dionis
Hades right the
devil right um I think that's the power
I think it's necessary it's not like
there's a I have no moral problem with
talking to somebody who loves Jesus
Christ and telling them awful things
about Jesus Christ why because they need
to hear
it if they're going to be purified yes
it'll be painful um demer is holding
demon the little kid over the fire just
like thetus is holding Achilles over the
fire fumigating his little ass right and
it's painful it's burning his eyes and
everything it's painful so everybody
comes to the defense of the little kid
 you know what I was doing I was
burning off his mortality you can have
him back now he'll be half as
smart yeah gorgeous I mean there's
there's a reality in it that must be
satanic or saturnian we have to
we have to continue with with the
contract you know what I
mean Fallen Angel sexy stuff what do you
think about the Bible what's your take
on the bible stuff so you know I was
reading novels by the time I was five
and uh I was as I mentioned hyperlexic
so I I I was I had an easy grasp of
language and I got to tell you that um
the only book that ever encountered that
I couldn't make any sense out of at all
was the
Bible I was just like what the actual
 is this this cannot be this is the
primary book of the people all over the
world this
really is that a drive your atheism or
no not not really the thing that drove
my atheism was the idea of a kind of
cruel punishing surveilling God right um
and also let's be really clear about
something very simple by the time you
have to give people laws and
rules they are no longer human they're
just not being human if you got to write
that  down and make Commandments
about don't kill each other and please
don't lie and  you
are living in a situation that is
absolutely  by the time you have
to say no no God said these 10
things and that's brilliant that's
brilliant somebody you need to bring
that up to the world because that's you
know that's gorgeous that's just
straight up reason that's your you're
just flexing your reison muscles godamn
that's gorgeous yeah we don't have to
tell each other I don't have to come to
you and say Amen we're going to be
friends right don't murder me right
don't
you know don't do bad things to my
daughters right don't steal my house and
don't lie right and and you know don't
do things with my wife when I'm not home
I don't have we don't have to start out
because if I have to start out that way
where what kind of a hell are we
actually living in right like we're
 if you have to have um formal to
the degree you have to have formal
agreements your humanity is missing
AC yeah it is cuz you should know that
stuff you should know that and should
have taught you nature should have
taught you you come from her she'll show
you and everything she'll teach you the
way to act oh my God don't we have that
naturally when we interact with our
mothers even if our mothers are 
isn't there some kind of natural
morality that comes through that I don't
end up  my sister when I'm eight
right of of course there is it's
fantastic I love it it's and that's what
I hate when Paul the Apostle says oh you
you worship the creation not the Creator
 you right oh
God sorry about that no no so actually
my my
temple was the living
creatures right plants and the insects
and the animals and the sky and the
mountain and the forest and the lake and
the river that was my temple as a child
naturally right no one had to tell me
this is beautiful but the idea that
there was um some kind of Central
scrutinizer right just overseeing and
constantly you know really a jealous God
like if I come to you as a friend and I
say Amen you will only love me you'll
have no other friends right what are
what are you gonna think about me like
what what kind of a guy am I I'm gonna
think that you're probably GNA put
cameras
everywhere can see me all the time right
you know what I
mean and you know there's a function I I
study I've studied for many years I work
with a neuroscientist and I study mental
illness I don't study it as as a
clinician I study it as someone who's
trying to understand the nature of human
minds and awareness and stuff oh I
didn't know you were a neuro guy I
didn't know that that's gorgeous big
time yeah I've worked with a
neuroscientist for 20 years and I was
fascinated with the brain long before
that but um what I'm trying to get at is
the idea that there's a negative
overseer is a critical feature of
schizophrenia right is that right oh
yeah um and schizophrenics will often
draw like a single eye kind of like the
eye of Toth in Egypt right um that that
single eye and that
represents an aspect of Consciousness
that has split off and become
domineering and it's it's very similar
to what you see in the accounts of
Yahweh right it's not the only thing
that is said about Yahweh but this this
is a central feature I am a jealous God
you will have no Gods before me or after
me or around me or anything
right and I watch you all the time and
I'm a
scrutinizer you jerk
off
yeah yeah so you know um I had a natural
disaffinity for the idea of a punishing
God now on the other hand I mean there's
you know I tend to have a a a complex
view of stuff right I'm not just on one
side of an argument well yeah yeah we
should be nobody should be totally I
mean I've talked with Christian Mystics
and I've been in side um nunneries and
talked with the old nuns and I've talked
with the old monks you know at the
monastery and I have to say like when I
went and had the privilege of sitting
down for four hours with a couple of
carlite nuns that was one of the high
moments of my life those those beings
were
shining with what I can only understand
as spiritual Bliss and beauty and power
right there's no way I can criticize
that for me right you make me want to
date him you know what I mean yeah yeah
I get
you no I mean I never encountered
anything like that you're saying they
were pure for you know for goodness sake
that's yeah no I totally I no it was
like sitting in the room it was like
sitting in the room with angels it
really was they were not human they were
they had become something so profound
that I had never encountered in the
secular world so I want to be careful
for myself
uh no um no Bridals on you right yeah
but for myself I have great reverence
for people who travel
sincerely any spiritual path right I
have great reverence yes yes of course
it's the sincerity it's the sincerity
that is that goodness yeah no yeah yeah
totally with you right on um all right
so I have some other I have a whole
sheath of questions and I'm so I'm just
so excited to be doing this together man
this is awesome do it love it let's do
it when did okay when did you let's see
actually I'm going to start here I'll
come back to Jesus a little
later what do you mean when you use the
name
Satan because I don't think you're
talking about the IAL Satan if even such
a thing exists that looks to me like an
invention over time I don't know but
what do you mean when you use this
name I'm talking to the Satan um I'm
talking to the same Satan that Lord
Byron has Cain talk to I'm talking to
that oh
overthrown
Guardian who was
sincere with
Eve I'm talking about that individual is
that
individual and historic individual that
individual is a
cosmic individual part of the
organization of the makeup of the cosmos
MH and and my recognition of that is no
different than my recognition of The
Gorgeous tree outside or you know um any
of the goodies that we have it's still
part of nature so that's how you know I
look at it is as soon as I saw how the
Greeks were looking at Divinity I was my
mind was was blown up because we don't
look at when you say God in the sense of
Western god um you're talking about the
Son of God um you really are not talking
about what they were talking about when
they said God right and so um when you
can look I try to crack people with this
with love and because sometimes it gets
through them if you look at Aeros that
desire and it's not love like you're
thinking it's not
romance it's that desire that desire for
sexual intercourse
is the origin of the orphic
universe Aeros is very much the devil
very much the winged one from whom who
is the beauty the primary beauty of
creation right EOS foros so the
sincerity in the in the
Serpent's instruction of Eve that look
you know um you're not going to die
right your eyes are going to be opened
right and what does the text say happen
her eyes were opened and she knew that
blah blah blah and he said he's just
afraid God is afraid that you're going
to be like
him right that
sincerity is to me the it's that
Divinity that the Greeks would recognize
and why they would say um Lucifer the
bringer of dawn is a Divine entity a a
member of the cosmos remember they said
we're just the reflection of the reality
the gods are in the real we are
reflections of their activities yes I
don't and I don't get the physics of
that but it's beautiful if you think
about it you know I don't think physics
is the Arbiter of the nature of things I
study Physics right I'm fascinated I'm
fascinated by physics but um there's a
there's sort of there's something Beyond
it and what the Greeks and the ancient
peoples uh were on to and I I know why
they were on to it you know when a lot
of people will ask things like um well
where where did the Greeks get the
knowledge that they encoded in their
traditions and their theater and their
temples and their orgies and their poly
Pharm Pharmacy right where did they get
that right and you could do do the sort
of anthropological thing and say oh it's
from the
pelian or you know I don't yeah the
right right you could say that but
that's that doesn't answer the question
you have the same problem it's just it's
a change of venue right you just go from
the problem of of it originating in
Greece to the problem of of it
originating originating there you still
have the same problem where do they get
it right yeah yeah and they got it I I
mean I don't know where they got it I
know my own
experience um with the teaching being
right which is very complex and messy
thing I'm not here to sing sing about
that but I'll say um something that you
might find
interesting because I asked them about
the angels and God and these questions
right birth and death and origin and sex
and all these things I asked them
questions every day all day long right
fantastic and they they never told me a
single story they all they always told
me three stories and they're like don't
get a single story in your head have
three right have
five and the best thing you could do
with them is ask them the same question
over and over again rather than
different questions because each time
they would answer the first question it
would explode into insight and then it
would condense again and then you would
ask the question again and it would
explode twice as much and you just kept
doing this one question right they're
like the ory they're like the orai um
that's gorgeous three and it's an
inquiry and you keep asking the same
question that is has oracular perfume
all over it that's gorgeous so tell me
what happened continue so you know they
asked me at one point what do you
want right this is a common question
from gods or
Muses you underwent the same process
with The Muse right you came to her and
you said let's have a let's have a
contract let's have a PCT between us
you'll give me what I want and I'll give
you whatever you want in return I heard
you it was it was more even more
specific than that though um because it
was me requesting um me requesting via
the text so um specifically Sophia
running through the the text was Sophia
running through the streets and coming
to the house and saying if you will take
me in and hide me I will stay with you
your entire life oh man and it it was
that is it well I mean who what kind of
 would turn that down you know
absolutely yeah which idiot would be
like no there's something better than
that yeah give me money right I i'
rather have a Ferrari thank you yeah I
want stable income right yeah yeah maybe
oh beautiful man that's just beautiful
you know uh I don't know if I I probably
made some serious mistakes during my
experience because I had no idea that
anything like what was happening to me
was even possible I had no one to talk
to about it um and I was naive and when
when you are taken over by the
consciousness of a Divine being
your ego under go some problems right
you're G to have to face some some
trouble of your the difference between
your human desires and the desires of
your soul so to speak right yeah so but
I asked them you know eventually they
asked me what I wanted
and this is a thing that happens a lot
when humans encounter other
intelligences because the best way to
know something about someone is if you
could give them anything they want and
you just ask them hey you know what's
your desire right what's your
EOS what's your vision of fulfillment
look like right you're gonna find out a
lot about the person naturally yeah
logical logical makes sense yeah so I
asked them you know there's this
story in the Bible seems to be the
source of all these problems right it
seems to be where everything went
sideways it's this thing with Eve and
the tree and the tree of knowledge and
the tree of life and you know what I
what I would really like to know is um
can you help me understand that story
and what really happened there and is
there any medicine can we give medicine
to the people so that whatever ruined us
as beings as human beings so that we
could heal that is there any way to heal
that that's a nice question that's a
good question you know a woman I know a
I'm very privileged to have a number of
very wise women in my Orbit right I seek
them out and sometimes they seek me out
and it's beautiful and I I Revere and
respect their their wisdom and
understanding yeah it's sexy stuff it is
um and you know there are there are
intimacies that are even more profound
than
sex yeah I agree I agree I totally hear
that and I bet I've read somebody in
Antiquity say the same thing yeah yeah I
bet I'll have but we have to
remember that without sex
itself we wouldn't be able to have other
forms of in no no I agree this is a
thing where I'm like like wait there are
guys who are misogynists where do they
think they came from yeah right right
like you were let's just get something
clear buddy for 10 seconds here okay you
started out as an organ in a woman right
did you forget that you were an organ in
a woman's body that she
exteriorized yeah you think you're
better you got something better and and
you got a broken chromosome okay
right and there's something kind of
similar upstairs in your brain bro you
gotta bro you're like missing something
up here which is the memory of the
Beauty and the virtue of the mothers
yeah if you were reading if you were
reading a five which I think is great
I'll bet you have some kind of better
development I'll bet you can remember
stuff earlier than most of us because
dude I couldn't five is difficult for me
to even remember you know what I mean if
you're reading then you must be more on
the ball I mean I was reading but not
like you know you know Dick and Jane and
you know not I don't even think I was at
Dick and Jane at that point but um uh so
with you being a driven why do you think
it is that you're driven by that reading
I mean you you would think the Muse
would be like everywhere that you go you
know what I
mean yeah I mean it's a complex thing so
people who have you know we have all
these labels like schizophrenic and
autistic and all these different labels
right but what what seems to be more
true about humans is that we each
include a sort of unique selection of
all the variables and then each unique
human embodies or fulfills some of those
seeds and others of those seeds lie
fallow so to speak and and this kind of
thing
so you know for
me I'm just going to be relatively I'm
going to say something kind of
radical it's my experience that when we
come to Incarnation there's a companion
intelligence with us and maybe more than
one and what happens as we learn
language is that the faculties that were
used in that relationship ship they get
shunted into representational cognition
language and ideas and human right
interesting yeah that stuff gets shunted
and then we transfer the expectation of
that companion onto our parents and the
society but there's none of that in
there but that's not a connection right
it's not an actual connection right
because we're that reflection and those
parents aren't your parents you don't
realize what you've done when you were
plugged in it's because of that Ley man
what the  is with the Ley yeah right
there has to be some kind of
Amnesia yeah in order for this process
it's like um you know okay if this is
all the purification process is that
just the drug going in that's going to
allow us to go to the place where we can
be purged where we can be treated
medicinally you know what I mean is it
some it can be the drug but there are
other there are many other catalysts
let's call it a
catalyst right because you can have
experiences that are more catalytic than
drug experiences you can also have drug
experiences that are more catalytic than
ordinary
experiences so there's a catalyst right
we and the you know in order
to okay there's a difference between
forgetting having experience and
remembering and there's something
profound about the forgetting right you
can't have the remembering without the
forgetting yeah right yeah so I think we
um and by the way when I said about our
parents you know some of our some
people's parents are lit up from within
with intelligence and wonder and Beauty
creativity and playfulness or demons or
demons and breed and abusive you know
that kind of thing definitely definitely
that's what I mean when I talk about
like there's a whole Continuum here
right it's not just one thing going on
this isn't just Hades though I
understand that perspective right that
makes sense to me no it does no I
understand what you're saying did you
have Mr Rogers at all when you were
coming up  yeah yeah yeah and I was
you know I was a an absolutely loving
kid like the idea of hitting another kid
my father had to threaten me right to
make me fight back right I would just if
someone hit me I just feel sorry for
them right I I was a loving child you
know good for it hit me and i' start
crying and they're like does that hurt
and I'm like no I'm sad because you're
all messed up inside why are you messed
up like
that that's funny Ah that's good did it
um did you ever get into music or did
you avoid
music no um when I was a kid I used to
sing along with the radio all the time
and I planned to be you know like a
famous singer and my dad was a musician
and I play guitar and I I comp I can
compose a bit and what about you any any
musical experience no I don't and that's
shameful and something that I've you
know should have propagated and I'm
beginning to see more and more how it is
that um I just basically ignored the
musical text in Greek because to me it's
like so super Advanced and I don't
understand um because I had no music
upbringing but the problem is so much so
much of the written word is dependent
upon that
musician's understanding of what's going
on in the vocabulary you just can't get
away from it yeah and so I brought I
actually did something really neat I
brought I had the opportunity to bring
the musical writings too um one of the
greatest musicians on the planet and um
historically one of the he um he will go
down in history is as um one of the
great Heroes of music and he was able
without any with um just a very well we
just started looking at some Greek but
without any longterm exposure to the
actual language he was able to pick up
on what the author was saying saying
because of the
music and he was trying to stay up don't
get me wrong he said these guys are
brilliant right um but these were his
people and I thought oh I just sat in
Wonder and thought you
know maybe that
remembering is so important in our
education our Cosmic education this
whole reason we're here maybe that's
part maybe people who go
astray right maybe it's they're not
receiving this education and they knew
it in Antiquity was coming through the
plants and the Animals was coming
through their medical systems that they
all developed from the plants and the
animals and the effects of these earth
powers so um yeah okay almond though
there's some there's something you're
overlooking here and it's because you're
thinking like a like a technical
um you're thinking in a technical way
okay okay and what I recognized when I
first listened to your voice which is
this is just hilarious bro because
um you know one of the things I love
when I started introducing my friends to
you right I'm like oh God you gotta you
gotta meet my friend almond fantastic oh
oh love it yeah and and they just they
just absolutely love you know when I and
and and so in case it's obvious what I'm
doing here you make vocal
music and you draw people in with that
vocal
music and you have your own way of
singing right and it's very powerful I
like that I had I hadn't considered that
but I mean just listen okay look
sometime sometime listen to one of your
old lectures oh I do I do all the time
that's why bre right and you can see
this the dramatic transformation between
you as a lecturer and you as a
maniac oh I see what you're saying no oh
you know why I miss that is because when
I watch myself I'm watching to make sure
that I've gotten all the references and
then I've hit at every point I'm doing
it like technically I'm not paying
attention to anything that has to do
with
presentation yeah so you think it's gone
from more professorial or academic at
least to uh
invocational invocational and um
exhortation you exort right when you
speak you're naturally theatrical right
bring you bring the Muse into your body
and you speak with her music yeah right
oh God that's what that's why it makes
me high that's why it makes me totally
High to do it yeah yeah yeah I get it
and and I've had similar experience of
my own it's one of the things I I
recognize as an affinity between us is
the same of thing yeah possession you
could get possessed too right right this
isn't my universe after all right no
everybody who says I had to I ran up
against this tell me what you think the
people that say like a generation of
people who came through the 60s in their
maturity in the 60s and said it's God in
you it's God in you and you know the
hippies and the drugs and the that has
always been like a cat's claws on a on a
chalk chalkboard yeah yeah right yeah
yeah I hate I hate that I absolutely
hate that um because it's kind of an
undignified uh
misrepresentation of the N the the
organization and the nature but um I
don't I don't watch myself to catch that
I wonder what you're sensing is that
because it's more uh I'm liberated now I
don't have to worry about worry about
it's not just that it's it's like the
living inspiration so you know I've been
writing poetry for about I don't know
almost 50 years 40 years or something
right I've written thousands of poems
and two or three of them are actually
decent but uh my point is that even as a
musician I remember the first time when
I was and and I'm not I was a feral
musician right so I didn't read music or
learn music theory I just played the
guitar right without knowing what what
I'm doing right and I remember a few
times when I was making something or
something was being made through me that
was actually
beautiful and I felt in the room the
presence of the
muses if you make Beauty if you make
Beauty yeah they come right definitely
right and then there were other times
when
um I'd be
writing actually more often oration is a
crucial part of this thing to orate
right I'd be orating and suddenly
I was gone and something was singing
through my throat and my face and my
voice yeah it wasn't me and with meter
with meter that I could imagine oh the
meter my absolute just beautiful
orchestral metering and rhyming and all
of these things that I couldn't do if I
was you know trying and I'm pretty
decent at it gorgeous so yeah to be Tak
over and to become a vessel for the
expression of the Divine intelligences
and the muses that's a holy that's a
holy vocation it's the highest dope
there is you know I mean it totally is
yeah you cannot get higher than that
right you can't right you can try but
you're never gonna meet that level of
when um that Union I call it a union
right so um looking at her as the one
who I am
Sheltering right I mean it's it's very
Athenian if you think about it it's that
whole um look this is the the the beauty
here is to the Virgin um you are you are
just the dragon who is protecting the
Virgin um that's why Athena is what is
she doing she's nourishing the dragon
Kings of Athens it's absolutely uh you
know these people are so plugged in on
so many levels and just to be able to
see the expertise traveling from Century
to Century to me is like okay they
understood what we call the physics they
understood how the world is all put
together and we've lost some of that
knowledge and we've lost all that
knowledge I want to be really I want to
just say a couple things here and then
I'm going to go back to the story about
the question I asked yes so
they weren't they were aware of the
principles but not like what we do is we
snip off origin and the Divine beings
and then we just look at the
mechanics that's a
curse that that's like a prison sentence
for the mind they actually understood I
I suspect from what I've read and seen
of their intelligence and depth which is
infinite yeah they were in
touch with these beings that we would
think of as laws or principles right
they were in touch with them they were
they were having a relationship with
these beings definitely definitely and
so you know the scientists don't have a
relationship with any
beings at all right a except for the
dirty ones that follow them around right
and give them a hard time
right relationships with those um yeah
not plugged into that beauty why would
you want to live that way you know what
I mean why if you knew the other side of
it you'd probably rather be dead yeah
exactly and I think that's why people
like Cicero are saying I wish I had have
done it when I was younger right
something and and why they're saying
you're born
again right what what is what is that
resurrection that you're looking for
it's a resurrection to a new life right
so I think that's I think that's why the
focus is on um that relationship and why
it's always the Kora in the in the
mystery it's always the resurrection of
the Kora right that's all they can
really talk about is that what is that
and you and I are sitting here
experiencing it trying to replugged back
into that reality because we don't want
to be  anymore I don't want to be
lied to
right I'm sick of people freaking lying
to me so I mean the worst lies that I've
been subject to came from me yeah of
course we live in a culture that's a
wreck it's a wreck but nothing  me
up like the lies I told myself oh
God blame yourself though can you blame
yourself no but what there there's a
much better move than blaming yourself
which is learn we can learn and remind
each other we can resurrect each other's
sense of justice and beauty and
intelligence and creativity and joy and
all of these we can resurrect each other
right moment to moment where did you get
that where did you get that from one of
those books that you read when you were
so young did you did were you reading
like did you work your way up to like
what you and I call literature they're
teaching in college and stuff like that
did you work your way up to that pretty
quick no no where did you set your
morals then where did you set if you're
reading at five pretty good yeah where
did you set your morals who set those
were those things were born in me they
were born okay I brought them with me
right got it yeah I brought them with me
most of what I read until I was a young
adult was science fiction I read
thousands of science fiction stories
those those authors were my teachers did
you like Dune did you read Dune yes yeah
Dune is amazing
yeah I read Dune when I was an early
teenager like 13 14 I read Dune in a
whole bunch of uh um Stephen King just
because the writing was so damn good it
was so on the mark it was compelling
first time I had ever read a book that I
felt like I was part of the story like
it was talking to me and um uh Dune was
in the Dune was in the series I read
like all four there's three other ones
outside of the Dune yeah I read them too
yeah and um beautiful love it yeah is
that's an education right there you know
what I mean  yes yeah not only that
look that is a
Bible that is a Bible good be yeah that
is the Bible quizat hok yeah that's the
Resurrected that's you resurrected
that's an image of you that's the Bic
mirror showing you your nature totally
totally gorgeous don't you love it's
like a kiss from the universe that's
writing this whole thing yes it's like
just some kind of the Greeks had that
notion of filia what is filia well you
can say it's a kiss but it's not always
a physical kiss right it's it's a thing
of affection it's something that carries
your affection to another person and um
that's what you
want in in in that aphrodi ultimately
that's what that aphrodite worship of
Aphrodite all comes down to it's that
transference of that philia and it does
something to the universe it does
something to you and it allows for that
possession and the fact that we live in
a world where religions specifically cut
that out
is amazing and put they don't merely cut
it out they counterfeit it they sell you
back the the  counterfeit right
which is a shitty virgin I mean a shitty
version because who wants to be the
Bride of 
Christ I mean come on
seriously seriously how do you
reconcile you know okay the church is
going to be the bride of Christ so you
have the Holy element of the marriage
there but who wants that dude right what
what happened where'd my love go oh I
don't know but you'll be with this dude
forever I don't know it's just like a
it's I I think the Romans were more
right than we think they were cruel and
when they called the Christians you know
infantile in their
thinking uh I think they probably were
right and if you lived in that that
classical civilization if you were
embedded in it you probably look at us
today and say the same thing oh look
they they act like the Christians do
what the  is wrong with these people
right yeah yeah so what did you what was
your favorite when you were growing up
reading did you have like a favorite
that you you know were you a tolken guy
or were you oh tolken was unbelievable I
mean I encountered that when I was
around 11 and oh my God yeah that  I
mean the depth of the poetic spirit in
that man it's like the muses got
together and built a baby and then set
it writing I mean whoa that  is off
the charts there's other I mean there's
a broad array of astonishing stuff
um my favorite it's hard it's hard I
read thousands of books I don't remember
a lot of them I mean not thousands of
books I read thousands of stories maybe
a few a couple thousand books you know
over time yeah eventually eventually I
got to literature and then I get started
getting to philosophy and stuff like
that did you hang around the Greek stuff
at all or the classical did you do any
GRE I read Plato a bit when I was
17 and it was mindblowing I had never
encountered anything like that but not
in Greek of course I'm reading in in
Translation which is that's okay it can
come across in Translation that's it um
but I want to before I lose the thread
and I've got so many other questions so
when I asked them what what was going on
in in this Garden thing they told me
many different stories and they were
astonishingly enlightening but to just
collapse one of them really
quickly they they showed me an image of
what you could think of as God which I
would call the being that dwells in
unity and that being lives in a woman
that is the Living Waters right and
these two are madly in love right madly
in love and they conceive a child in the
origin
place and that first child is extremely
precocious like its father right and
there's no one there there's no one
there for the child to mate with because
the Living Waters is taken right she's
with
Dad so it punches a ho in heaven and it
mates with what we think of as time
space right and this produces galaxies
and stars and worlds and this is the
first Angel they call it the first angel
now you sound like a presocratic are you
aware of that you they talk just what I
was shown just like this yeah I don't
this is not my I'm not taking zero
credit for this this is what they showed
me okay and they and they said what else
the first Angel what it it's what it's
really good at is cutting things it
makes cuts it made a cut in the membrane
of heaven right and it got through that
cut into the into the physical
universe and when when they say in the
Bible now this is in Hebrew not Greek I
don't know what the Greek word is maybe
you can help me with this when they when
God says um don't eat of the tree in the
midst the angel said this word is not
midst it means where it was cut it's
from the Hebrew root root TC it means
cut so what they're actually saying is
where the Earth was cut away from Heaven
the angel that made that cut that's the
Angel that's there that's the serpent
and that angel the cutting it gives you
the cutting in the mind and that's what
makes language and knowledge is the
cutting right it makes Cuts in the
manifold of identity and quality and
characteristic and value
interesting and this is one one of a
number of different stories they gave me
right so and wait is this under the
influence at all no no just completely
just Visionary just your Visionary
experience I was writing passionately
one night and something showed up in my
mind and just started teaching me
non-human things and that went on for
nine months and it was always with me
still partly with me you should write it
up have you ever written it up so that I
wrote thousands of I wrote a few
thousand pages of material okay don't
talk about the experience hardly ever I
mostly talk about what I learn because
people don't need to know about the
experience what are they going to get
about that from that I don't know I
don't know that people I don't know if
I'd agree with that um if you were to
write it up use your talent to write it
up so that people could see it almost
like a scientific report you know what I
mean yeah can I say something very
simple briefly of course of course I
don't think we know what it is to be
human I think we we like fish who have
never seen water I like that or we like
um people with eyes in a world where
there's no light and we don't even know
what we are for because let me say
something briefly here when that mind
was with me I knew what I was made to be
and what I was made to be was with that
mind yeah oh made for water or birds are
made for the sky I was like oh my god
I've been alive all this time I had no
idea what I am you knew oh that's
perfect that's perfect you had no idea
who you are yeah right that's what it
says on the Temple of Apollo know
yourself cuz you don't and the Bic
liturgy is full of it you don't know who
you are this is why we bring you the
mirror so you can say yourself that's
gorgeous and you're meant to be you're
meant to be isn't is that a gorgeous
gift you were given oh absolutely I mean
so there were two things that were and
I'll stop blathering about this excuse
me in a moment but first of all absolute
ecstasy ecstasy that makes orgasm look
boring all day long right all the time
all day long and then Terror absolute
Terror because the beauty of their mind
is catastrophically terrifying it's not
Terror as in oh I'm going to get hurt
right it's Terror as in I can't survive
this much Beauty yeah it's that kind of
Terror oh God yeah no that's it that's
it so you know um I love it I love it
and where else would you want to be
nowhere I mean I'm a regular human just
like you and and chewy and and everybody
we love I'm a regular human but I've
seen something far beyond anything I I
ever thought was was was imaginable all
right so I'm going to stop Ling I got
questions that's G okay let me take a
five can we take five take a five yeah
okay I'll be back be right back it's
127 and okay give me five
boom
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e e
all right
fantastic let's do this what okay is the
next question all right so I want to
know everything about the dead
girl how did you meet her when did she
first
appear and and you know if if there are
things that you feel should not be said
I'll respect that I understand about
that some things are not for public
consumption no that's okay no um I'm
perfectly fine the um I have only seen
her physically once and it was in a
reflection it was in a
reflection um so much so that I turned
around um and uh very surprised that she
was gone um absolutely gorgeous the
Living Dead Girl so to speak I like to
use that phrase right so where did I
first come across her I came across her
in
Antiquity and um through reading these
sources that talk about the priestesses
and their
activity and um I realized right away
that my research could be guided into
this area to really you know to really
facilitate that Muse so when somebody
tells you I'll come in if you take me
into your house I'll come in and you can
hide me for as long as you
breathe right
um uh in a way I just have to say this
in a way you become the Heyman of her
virginity um the barrier between the
world and her this is just a thought
right I suppose like a drag
protecting that Relic right protecting
that song people are shocked when they
find out that on the Golden Fleece
that's hanging in the Grove of Mars the
the very famous Golden Fleece has a song
written on it there I didn't make that
up the ancient Greeks said that right um
why all of the emphasis it's that
guarding that that
virginity that is the Vestal lame right
recognizing it was a crime of death for
you to violate that Vestal flame and
Antiquity both for the vessel and for
you right if you were caught um but you
know that's the way it is that's the way
it is there's something in nature that
just works that out in the cosmos and it
just bleeds in and the dead girl is the
one that you invite in right that you
ask
um and it's a pose of
protection and the witches The Witches
understand this because remember we're
dealing with when you talk about the
dead girl you're dealing with um The
Invisible right here's my dead girl well
don't you see she's dead no you don't
see because she is
dead do you understand but
through the
science of what they called
Magic and a part of some vein of poetry
some vein of cosmic poetry you can
communicate with the invisible you can
experience the
invisible right and um that invisible
world doesn't have to be invisible they
had ways in Antiquity of bringing you
up where you could
see what was invisible to everybody else
and it gave these people that they did
this to a serious advantage and one of
them was
Achilles one of them was
Achilles right oh God that stuff when he
was on it oh right now and you ask
yourself what is this fiction no it's
history they're giving the the same
thing to the Emperors of Rome they're
taking the same drugs or at least what
they have managed to find from the old
Scrolls yeah and every classes should
know this and they don't in galin is
preserved the recipe for that Divine
freaking
drug right and it's a compound huge
compound thec deathbringer put together
and we have it and nobody Jesus Christ
who's going to find this stuff it's
sitting right there people bring it out
oh God and this is all Tech that has to
do with exactly what you are talking
about in your experience in your life in
your reality right it's just Tech right
oh god well it's not it's not Tech the
way we think of tech it's Tech as in
techne right the Greek techne right
right which is a method it's a method
yeah yeah it's it's what it's that true
skill that true craftsmanship that you
know is divine that when this guy plays
the
guitar um he makes it sing I can hear
words dude played guitar for me I could
hear I could hear that I Amic poetry
just it's almost like it's coming to
life um there's a power there's a divine
power to that music and oh God it's
gorgeous just to watch and like you know
make love to it you know what I mean
just enter into the beauty wouldn't that
isn't that what you want is that beauty
in the universe you don't want the
ugliness really do you remember the
devil everybody's given the devil a hard
time but remember Devil's the best the
best looking of all creation the most
beautiful it's funny what you said you
know this isn't a fiction yeah what we
have is a fiction right what we have
instead that's the fiction the other
thing is like the Living spirit of
origin and wonder and insight and
awareness and love yeah coming coming
through some of the most brilliant
vessels um people like Pythagoras this
is the stuff that's coming through them
this is the craftsmanship the tech that
is coming through them it's an ability
to see the world around you right um and
they are saviors they are saviors that's
for sure she made you her
vessel yeah so that she could speak and
sing to the
humans you belong to her isn't that a
gorgeous picture isn't that a gorgeous
picture absolutely I mean what what what
do we bring inside us that we then bring
it to life through our Humanity yeah
right if it's not something Divine EX
ecstatically beautiful Bo what are we
doing right what are we
doing yeah 100% if I had that 100%
button I'd be hitting it right now 100%
100% no that's and that's what they
discovered and built temples to the Muse
all about to bring about that that
Awakening and Cicero scratching his head
he's like damn it I wish I'd have done
it when I was
young why because he realized this whole
time right you're able to see the work
of the hand right through through that
that knitting they expressed it as a as
in a sense of
textiles that textile telling you a
story right it's the story of the cosmos
very Uranian
but it's meant it's meant to bring you
to an elevated
state of
awareness and the awareness of the
invisible and uh I think it's a gorgeous
form of Salvation if you will right I
don't honestly the people who were doing
it it it looks like it it may be just an
altered form of the stuff that we see in
the oldest hymns of the women purifying
their children and exposing them to this
process that also involves music it's
like dude are you kidding me they're
using music and drugs to take their
infant and turn them into a
hero yeah it's amazing this is the other
thing right if you've been
exposed properly to the originary minds
and int inces and the
muses one of the results often this was
true of me during my experience it's not
as true today is you do not you cannot
be compelled you cannot be compelled to
lie you cannot be compelled to serve
 you don't care you're not
afraid of death so there's no way to
you're not afraid of pain so there's no
way to compel you to do anything you
can't
defect once you've been purified in this
way you will not defect
no it's because it's not a matter of
Faith you're exactly right yeah right
coming into that uh relationship just to
just to I mean it's the highest dope you
can possibly get right your brain cannot
go higher than this and I'm sure there
are a ton of musicians out there who are
just like
uhhuh right because they're the
instruments of
those those gorgeous sisters as they
described them right oh God I love it
okay now I'm getting all excited but um
yeah yeah what um what what do we do
with that if you don't listen to that
Muse you were talking about who's
serving who it's very what are we
serving instead yeah the things that are
it's  it's stuff that's dead inside
it's dead structure it's like scler itic
dead structure that we're serving yeah
and we think somehow like well I'm
making good money yeah whatever the
excuse is right like uh what a
ridiculous ripoff it's the ultimate con
game ripoff of our human existence
that's why they said what happens to
those
people those people thinkk it's just
logic those people when they get to the
reality that is what is beyond that
black hole when they what they they
called Antiquity the dark stars when
they finally make it there and they see
what is in the Beyond it doesn't strike
them to honor the
memory it's almost like they haven't
formed it so they described it as they
go to drink of Lethy and they enter back
into the system to have maybe this time
the  that they get exposed to will
bring some kind of virtue and Pythagoras
was like they had to do this all through
animals had to go through that's how you
do it you get cycled through the animals
the animals teach
you right all of their it's like they're
it's almost like they're Superior and
they're tutors yeah right and it's like
dude these people and their animals oh
my God even their goats
man understand goats understand bonic
religion they're so respectful of
gorgeous Mother Nature right whether
they call her Gaia or whether they call
her siil right oh God love it love it
I'm sorry you know there's um distracted
no it's all good and I want to go back
to the dead girl but in indigenous
Traditions they're very aware of a
simple fact fact we are a new animal and
they are old old old we are like a brand
new thing and we are
fragile and we are delicate compared to
them so they go to them and sit at their
knee to learn what it means to be human
you learn what it means to be human from
the nonhumans that's gorgeous yeah right
you don't get it from the other humans
they don't know right they don't know
what it means to be human right right
so you engage at least in some stories
that I've heard in a magical act that
sometimes is called bibliomancy but I
think you refer to it as
necromancy yeah no it's bibliomancy but
um it is a division if you will of
ancient
necromancy um and it is the use of
verse Okay so what do we have to have we
have to first of all have developed
verse by that time right if they're
using it right which they have no
problem so it's the use of verse to
determine the course of events to follow
things that are going to happen for
example I could wake up in the morning
and by the way it's all it all works
through a
Randomness yes right it's not cannot be
controlled right it has to be randomized
sority
yeah exactly the sortes is what they
were called whenever you want when the
Divinity you want to consult the
Divinity to tell you what to do and
they're doing this in the temple in
Jerusalem by the way it says it in the
septu agent um you can cast the
sorties and what you can do is the most
sophisticated form of this I found is
with the verse and you can call out of
the language direct responses for
example you can get up one morning I got
i' love to tell people this story I got
up um started to go off to where I was
working then which was with this big
mouth that I was starting to really
dislike and we were
rabing um uh uh one of his Vehicles
right um it was the Airstream golf
stream what which one Airstream
Airstream Airstream sorry and I was just
there as slave labor right so I I I have
no crap in this I'm just making money so
I can pay for my you know food right and
you know and clothing and so I was there
and he was bolstering and in my face and
I was that morning before work I said
hey Muse what's gonna happen today
because I'm about to pop this guy right
I'm going to lose it right just walk
away and I perform the sore taste
um and I use a very specific Latin and
Greek sores and the sores said you're
going to pull his
beard out and I thought oh God that's
gorgeous that's absolutely gorgeous
anyway at work that day as I'm sitting
there with this in my head right because
I know she is never ever
wrong she's a little living dead girl
she is never wrong and she told me he
was I was going to pull out his beard so
I was waiting and he was
doing stuff on this
insulation and was using a foam some
kind of foam that was costic right so we
were all gloved up and everything and he
looked up and that stuff dripped on his
beard and he started
screaming  stop st put put your
gloves back on put your now take it out
take it out and he's screaming at me and
so I'm sitting there pulling and I just
pulling chunks of his beard out right in
my hands and loving it because it was
every second of it was pure possessing
possessive power it was a
necromantic
Mainline and it was absolutely gorgeous
and you know he got his beard pulled out
so you know what I mean this kind of
felt good well you know this the the um
relationship between the beard and the
Soul right so you're almost like yanking
his soul or his virility or his Vitality
right is being torn away from his face
and the the really beautiful thing about
that is that you're not being violent
you're rescuing him right you're
rescuing your enemy right from from the
terrible deal that he has found himself
in yeah right you're rescuing him right
you're not hitting him in the face
you're saving him from getting acid
burns on his
skin right right exactly that's see
that's the real Beauty right it's not
violence you're his savior in that
moment and you're you're being fulfilled
at the same time
right and it's fun to hide the reality
of the
pleasure right yeah I was your savior
all right right um I love it I love it
and I think you are a very subversive
individual it's punishment we all need
it you know what I mean well that
purgation right it's the you can't be
you can't become
um
Envision you the the the Visionary
intelligent intell within you requires
purgation right yes you will pay a price
so to speak actually mostly what's
happening is you're being shriven of
things that are unnecessary yeah think
of it as a procedure again to capacitate
you right it's going to burn it's going
to burn but we're going to go through it
all the way and when we're done um
you'll understand as a matter of fact
um just like you were just
describing
um you'll
know when you finally know who you are
you'll know and it'll be gorgeous oh God
otherwise if you want your Ferrari in
your Penthouse keep drinking of the
 Ley we don't care right that's
what needs to happen you need to be
purged right oh God God what a gorgeous
bunch of nerds you know what I mean
putting stuff like that together you
know I think it's you know it's
incredible man and you know people say
all you got to do is throw in their face
you realize there people like pagas and
hypocrates right you realize this is the
founders of everything that you take for
granted right um yeah if it weren't for
them you'd be you know much less
survivable that's for sure you know what
I mean holy mackerel it's who you know
we we have to at least ask the question
like once we had the ability to write
something was getting lost and there was
a gain in another do domain but before
we had the ability to write all the
Transmissions were or oration right they
were like you would sing the music of
the knowledge into other people and
we've largely lost this in a lot of ways
yes but um there's something that occurs
to me about the dead girl because you
know I've I've been I've had the
privilege of talking with a Greek
mystagogue who's been initiating people
in the elinia mysteries in Greece for
you know
decades and I don't know you know I'm
not a scholar of
Greek okay so I I can't speak to the
veracity of her work but after after
speaking with her I get the sense that
she's the real thing yeah and she talks
about that the Greeks thought some of
the Greeks because we can't always say
the Greeks the Greeks were a diverse
group of people right so but some of the
Greeks who were involved in
administering the
initiations they saw human existence as
kind of the
death like this is the death of your
soul and so when they when they
underwent the initiatory
ordeals and the
intoxications and they were introduced
to the aonic life directly in their
experience right then they could not be
compelled when they came back now they
this purified them right so what if we'
got have no fear of death right what if
we've got it backward fear death yeah
what if we've got it backwards alen what
if the dead girl is the living girl and
we are the dead down here yeah yeah yeah
I think you'd be right in line with a
priest of Apollo named plutar you'd be
right in line with that we are that
reflection right you have to understand
right our living dead girl is their
reality yeah right this um you can talk
they talked about it with the dream a
lot right um and how do you know um when
you're
dreaming right is this experience the
shadow of that reality that we are the
reflection and what we do is we compose
some kind of story that reflects a
greater Divinity and it has themes in it
like justice and
Nemesis right a hubris huis and Nemesis
yeah
yeah's Nemesis sorry no those are the
that's it notice how you jump to it
hubris it's it's a real track people
right these are things these are
observations of Reality by people who
were pushing these Mysteries as a way of
of burning off that mortality and the
smarties in the group were saying damn I
wish I'd have I wish I'd have done this
when I were younger I wouldn't have
wasted my life you know think think
about that for a minute this isn't some
idiot you know what I mean yeah these
are people who have achieved and gone
and gotten to the top of society and
they're saying oh  my life has been
crap I should have done this a long time
ago right right almost like you're under
a
delusion and there is a process to bring
you out of the delusion and then to
inject you back into what you were
deluded by and it gives you an an
immunity it is an anti christing that
allows you to come back with that
reality to bring it through the
forgetfulness just some kind of barrier
in physics I don't understand it yeah
but it's gorgeous and that mystery is
the way to do that and the Living Dead
Girl remember what is what do we go to
ausus for your Priestess is going to
know this right what do we do it for the
the girl who is the queen of the Dead
resurrected before us all that's the
only thing those initiates can talk
about they can say that they saw the
Kora the dead girl right and they saw
her living and she peeps through that
reality and she is gorgeous oh God it's
pure physics man do you want to know
what's going to happen tomorrow right do
tell ask an oracle ask an oracle that's
all you have to do you know the Greeks
said this I maybe you can explain this
because I've been struggling with this
for
years they said that your
dreams were the first and most basic
Oracle it was a
communication link between the Divine
and the Mortal yes right yes that's what
you're dream were supposed to be now
something happened yes something
happened and whoever was in charge of
maintaining that system backed up and
said 
this and broke it apart no there was so
this is one of the things that I was
shown is that um again it's like uh you
know as my hand is to my to my mind and
my body yeah we were to
them right we were one with them okay
imagine a hand right severed from the
wrist just going around on its own with
no mind and no angels and no dead girl
and nothing right and it just doesn't
even know what it's for and that's how
it is for us but there was there were a
Cascade of
accidents that that damaged what you
could think of as our Uplink right our
Uplink to the Divine beings and by the
time we had to have that sounds yeah by
the time we had to have the Mysteries to
restore it it been badly damaged or you
wouldn't have had to have that right it
was because before it was just like
breathing oxygen correct possible to
imagine that you could be separated from
the Divine beings they didn't worship
them worship is something that happens
when it goes away right it oracles had
sex ecstatic Union right the oracles had
sex with them they had sex with them and
we have these people in our lineage if
you're a Roman right ramulus and RIS are
the child of an oracle the great
Lupa right children of Mars do you
understand lus the dog right if you
would if the wolf specifically if you
were in the cult you would recognize all
of those images you would understand the
birth and the origin that's one of the
reasons of the Roman people that's one
of the reason
they're using these very same cult drugs
in the Empire with the
Emperors and Marcus Marcus aelius is
documented that's documented they're
using it go back and take a look at
galen's thec right oh God just if that
doesn't turn you on man um now what I
wonder at is how many how long am I
going to go how long are we going to go
before they ReDiscover this Tech and are
able to employ it and um you're talking
about this Priestess and I've told
everyone this the measure of
authenticity will be did she find the
cup right because these substances the
true the true communion is coming from
her
body and it's reflected they do the same
thing in the Middle Ages with the
satanists
yeah she ejaculates the
communion
right so do we yeah do we have it or
don't we yeah I don't know well okay so
there's some simple parts of our actual
Human Experience right what happens when
you kiss someone you love you ad door
right and you taste her
saliva yeah right it comes into you like
a drug yeah and it transforms you
there's no nectar like her mouth right
and yes but you've already been hit
you've already been hit before that
because um they're producing
pheromones and your nasal capacity is
picked up on it without you even knowing
it you dummy right right oh God dumb XY
you know what I mean and what happens
that that pheromone drags you in they
understood this in the ancient world and
the people who are developing the drugs
are the smart women The Midwives they're
the people like media who are working on
a drug knowledge that is people say is
the best that's ever
been yeah I mean this um chimes in very
closely with my own experience because
all throughout the experience and there
was a specific phase of it in which this
was absolutely ecstatic they're just
singing the Praises of the mothers and
the reproductive intelligence in their
bodies and how ancient that is and how
it is impossible that it's not a direct
expression of the nature of origin and
being itself the shapes of their organs
the intelligences in the living seeds
that they carry in their
ovaries things are like living rattles
of a million Souls inside them they
canest reality to a degree that you
can't build equipment to do right so you
know hilariously they even showed me the
story where Robin Hood is actually the
clitoral hero right he's the hero of the
little Hood the mothers right yes his
lover made Maran a virgin right he
protects her right there's this whole
thing is wrapped up in that story I like
that yeah he's the Little Red Robin of
the clitoral hood right that oversees
who enters and who doesn't they had not
seen that they're gonna accuse us of
just being dirty now yeah let him accuse
us if this is dirt I want more right I
want to understand and see better you
know yeah imagine you can take a you can
take a kid and you can augment them
using a cult process process that
involves education they will be educated
in the process and the ultimate goal is
to produce she who can contain the voice
of the
cosmos isn't that gorgeous like like
they're creating Perfection every child
is an attempt to do that yeah exactly
who doesn't right there isn't any other
thing going on the adults are just so
confused used and Le bound that they
have no idea what is actually happening
they're completely oblivious right I
mean I'm not saying they don't adore
their children but they don't
understand we don't know anything about
Incarnation or why it happens or what
it's supposed to be doing or any of that
stuff exactly and we're afraid of it
because we're influenced by several
monest religions yeah that that is
considered to be bad because remember
any source that is not the source
whether it's Allah or
Yahoo right any Source not the source is
the devil is the bad so the devil gains
every Power in the
universe right they don't even realize
that it's the one of the weaknesses of
monism right once you throw away all the
all the other divinities you you've got
you don't have certain privileges
anymore
right you don't and that's AOS disappear
you break off Aeros and all of a sudden
all of creation that has to do with that
love that brings life all of that is
unacknowledged that thing can't stand
forever whatever that philosophy or
religion is those monest religions they
can't hold up forever they will kill
themselves right it's generally what
they do so and um we're watching it I
think we're watching a Resurgence any
anyway that's just my no we are I mean
um the the apocalypse you talk about
could be a physical apocalypse on Earth
but I think the apocalypse that you're
really concerned with bringing is an
apocalypse to lies right you want true
knowledge to be reborn in human beings
in their direct experience and
relationships with each other and the
sky and origin and the the actually
Divine beings that was beautifully
beautifully perfectly said and once you
put this out there
some monest will say that's exactly what
the Antichrist would say
exactly right
you in freeing Humanity from the
ignorance you feed the satanic garbage
can where they're just GNA throw you
right they're just going to throw you in
that can and they'd love they'd love to
use tyrants to climb the I'm telling you
it's Nemesis it's pure brutally
beautiful
Nemesis and in play right just watch
we're watching it play out oh God 2025
holy mackerel I can't believe we're
still alive right in in our childhood
this was science fiction the distant
future right oh yeah I never expected to
live this long did you expect to live
this long so right right
um I didn't expect you know we know the
nukes are close right yeah we know
people can sense the heat because let
historically if Cleo taught me one thing
it was this never has there ever been
invented a weapon that has not been used
right and um it's time we know there's a
nuclear age coming right we know it's
why the apoc ocalypse is so appealing to
people right now right they want it and
the pastors will sell it out the boot
right right yeah yeah the Christian and
the mono religions they all they're all
about this they've got the wrong idea of
Apocalypse but they want to bring it
because they think that's the apotheosis
of our human uh uh purpose right right
right it's the which is totally
ridiculous because what's actually
supposed to happen is you're supposed to
die and get resurrected while you're
alive can we just underline this for
people you're supposed to undergo the
resurrection while you're alive not in
some future thing handled by a mono God
it's got nothing to do with that Faith
isn't it funny yeah and it's showing
people that history it scares the hell
out of them because all of a sudden your
insurance plan is gone
right your insurance plan is gone and
you're in trouble I love talking to
people who are enthusiastic Christians
about
Jesus because right away just painting a
couple of brush Strokes here was just
couple of verses and all of a sudden the
scam becomes
obvious and it's a real weapon man I'm
this can be beaten back or we can let it
overtake us and I think um you and I can
sit here and freely discuss this but
there will be a time when you and I
can't if the future is anything like the
history it's going to turn out there
will be a time that you and I can't and
I think um that living dead girl gives
you a distinct
Advantage right why did they make these
oracles people are like what they had so
much power why did they make the oracles
right be because that
voice is the most beautiful it's the
pathway right it's the one who has
already been there and is joined and
those oracles they have the power to
bring you justice because they see in
the ion they are outside of time
itself outside of time itself right
right that's why we worship them the way
we do and people are like are those gods
and they think oh idols and all the all
the monest you know Traditions that we
have around Charlton hon is you know oh
I'm going to lead you across the sea
right the splitting of the  you
think that  lasts for a second
with these Greek
rationalists who are worshiping AOS and
these using these drugs to go through
ini iations that they come back from and
say  I should have done that years
ago there's a couple of these
initiations there's the cave of tronus
where they drop you in with snakes dude
and you can't get out the way they drop
you in you have to hike down this River
everything's dark and there's snakes
there bunch of snakes some people die in
the process but when they get out they
have to go talk to the priest their
family goes and stays by the exit and
it's usually a couple of days but
remember they have water right and
they're given a potion before they go so
that they can
commune with
tronus and who's tronus do you remember
when they set up the tent in the
wilderness in order to have an oracle
with God that's the voice you're
harnessing and they're doing the same
thing and it's scary though they're
doing a way dude I don't know if I could
be snake born I I have friends who are
snakes and you know I don't know from
ones in the region I'll bet they were
poisonous dude oh
God no I mean I've had a my you know in
my own experience I've had a preder
natural affinity for poisonous animals
since I was a little kid I used to have
a black widow that lived right above my
bed I had snakes I had a away with
snakes since I was little right this has
always been part of my I I love snakes
now the thing you're talking about
though is really like being
um being cast into death right being
basically cast into death and then
probably having to crawl through a long
kind of constricted tunnel that's
terrifying and you can't tell if there's
even another end of it you don't know
where it ends so in a sense you become
you're
dependent on the intelligence of the
Divine beings that are with you in that
ordeal right and it rebinds you to them
it makes you understand like your
existence depends on this not your
thinking right that's exactly what the
mithraic Liturgy uh brings across
because they instruct you it's actually
it's list of instructions not only how
to make the drug that you're going to be
using that they make there you bring it
to them the right ingredients and they
put it together right it's got to
ferment for a while so you go through
all this uh uh fasting and whatnot and
through a preparation of song because
you're going to encounter this is all in
the Mythic liturgy you're going to
encounter certain
forces and this force will be this and
this is how you identify them and this
is what you say this is what you speak
this is what you sing and it's all
they're like
hems yeah and so it's kind of uh you
know look what they did they charted
they were like Pioneers that charted the
the cosmos there and out of it somehow
brought healing to be yeah yeah it was
medicine medicine is in not just for the
body though for the body too if you were
sick or if you were dying or something
like this you could go and you could be
healed but also medicine for Le right to
the
anamnesis the unforgetting the Anam the
Anam noetic
medicine yes you're throwing the
gorgeous Creek around right yeah right
exactly it's coming from the noos the
mind and that mind is what's behind the
cosmos that's how they described it
anyway the the let me put it this way
the entire organization of the
universe has a mind and she is sexy sexy
gorgeous oh I love it I love it oh God
too many drugs those people were way too
many drugs though right for all the
healing
sake and Galen by the way for those of
you who think we're just messing around
gayen the physician of mar of Marcus
aelius um says Marcus aelius is looking
better under the influence of the thec
right and they're not telling people
about this he says and he says oh but a
couple of who was it the next emper not
after
comus right it became known that people
were actually involved in um preserving
the theak within the Imperial line
because after all these are Caesars you
know they are The Offspring of
ultimately of Aphrodite
herself and that's where the living dead
girl gets real tissue she gets real
tissue okay you know Numa from Antiquity
right yeah he's one of the original
Kings of Rome blah blah blah and he
creates a set of books right Scrolls and
these Scrolls become the base of Roman
religion all of the priesthoods all of
the sacrifices that is the the enogen
that we use in our fumigations all of
those are set up by this guy now the
story is
he has a
girlfriend who is
constantly just
pubescent right and the story about her
is she's actually a thousand years
old right and some people
say they do have intercourse some people
say they
don't right one thing we do know though
is she dictates she meets him in a very
specific Grotto and she dictates to him
the whole time these Scrolls that
ultimately become the religion of
Rome and um what is gorgeous in all of
that is that the people sit around
debating things like well were they
lovers you know just because we're
curious we want to know were they lovers
they debate that kind of stuff like that
and they don't sit around and say wait a
minute either these people are High
they'll believe anything right or
there's something going on with this
oracular
tradition there's something there's some
kind of Science Tech that they've hit
they've hit some kind of vein now they
took some of these books that the
oracles were writing it wasn't just her
her name was aeria right and they made
her the Muse of Rome
all right it wasn't just aeria there
were other oracles who are performing
and doing the exact same thing and they
are writing the future think about this
for a minute you have all sorts of
genres of literature today you don't
have this no I'm gonna give you a whole
set of books about what is going to
happen a 100 years from now 200 years
from now 300 years from now 400 five six
seven right and I'm we're going to set
out all these books well the Romans
decreed hey um throw this stuff away
away right um conceal it hide it because
it's going to cause bad things to happen
so they do and every once in a while
they'll find them oh they were buried at
Numa the first time they hit numa's tomb
boom all these books came out they
consulted oh God what do we do with
these things what do we do so they
checked and the future that was the
present was so scary they said this
can't get out destroy them
now the question is the question is
there was a priesthood of people who
kept those books called The quind deam
Weary right and we have we don't have
the books anymore some people say maybe
the Vatican has them in their archive
squired away I who knows maybe they're
in the herculanum library um I don't
know but we have uh one author who was a
priest member of the group that was
keeping these prophetic
books and um he wrote an
epic he wrote an epic about
media and
sandwiched within this epic are the
oracles you have to find the the
exact sorted
translation of
reality that's the mission use your
sortase and bring the reality when
you're telling the future right um and
they had it down to such a science that
media could give an oracle back in
around a, to 1100 BC she could give an
oracle about 17 Generations later that
the Priestess of dely could then hand
down to the dude that media predicted
would come for it and instructions of
what he was to go do and it had to do
with building civilization and so the
dudes would do it go off and found a
colony here we are and the next thing
you know they've got civilization so
this is an ancient Priestess who is
spreading civilization Through Time
apparently with the ability to know
exactly what was going to happen MH
right what yeah this this makes perfect
sense from my own experience because
anyone who manages either by being
assisted or somehow by their
own initiative or heroic uh in like
precociousness to get above time from up
there the whole linear thing is missing
it's just not there it's all one moment
that is like a living book that sings
its Soul into you right and then you
sing you sing like an instrument that's
being played by that
intelligence isn't that gorgeous and
sexy I mean you got to admit the
universe urania is
absolutely  you know what I mean
you know what I mean like this is this
is what you dreamed about when you were
you know peep you best and just coming
into the world of awareness and then you
hit those Junior High years and you're
all dirty and Lusty and all of a sudden
the world of Aphrodite is coming into
power at that time when you most
discriminatory right when those senses
are hitting you for the first time and
that euphoric Ecstasy of her image is
hitting you that's what you want you
want the
universe you want the universe it's like
a crying out between
lovers you know what I mean and that's I
think that's why the orix said the
origin is with AOS and yeah yeah Aeros
and Anan right so it's so unfortunate
because um when we are prepubescent and
we are entering puberty and stuff we're
expecting to be reintroduced to the gods
and what's happening is we're getting
reintroduced to like rap music or you
know being in the military or you know
some some uh vocational school or you
know like we're getting our our Soul's
urge to develop and and experience
anamnesis is getting misdirected into
 yeah right yeah yeah and that's
tragic because that's the time when when
you know older societies would initiate
their children yeah the mothers and the
fathers differently right and different
cultures differently yes right it's not
like there's one appropriate thing right
the humans are a vast they're like a
topology of different worlds right so
you have to respect I mean you don't
have to respect but I have great
appreciation for that incredible
diversity and how that is similar to
what H what you see when you look up in
the sky right you don't just see one
star field you see all these stars from
all different distances in time right
it's just like it's above time up there
already and the humans down here were so
trapped in linear time in our thinking
and expectations that that's part of
what the leth comes from yeah right yeah
I the fact that I can't predict an
eclipse really bothers me because that's
like standard they had that they had
that  understood long time ago what
have I lost under my Western monest
influencers what have I lost that is
human like an understanding of what that
is when you look up you know what I mean
yeah yeah yeah no I want to know I want
to know what the
Ancients
experienced when they looked at the
night sky this is one of my quests I
want to have that experience I don't
want the representational knowledge I
don't want the description right I don't
want the
explanation yeah I want to experience
their mind yeah
firsthand think you think of those cians
a horse culture you're on Horseback all
day long right and then when it's time
for you to hit the hay there's no hay
for you to hit you form a circle and you
create a fumigation
pit and everybody fumigates with
cannabis and then what is there to do um
because you haven't built buildings with
stuff and your mobile culture you know
you don't do that they're what we call
Gypsy Maybe today more mobile culture
right and just right in there with the
horses using all the horse products
everything oh God having relationships
with your horses that are like building
building those spirits that create the
Greek world and you're out there um
fumigating they're fumigating with
cannabis and looking up talking about
the
constellations right there's got to be
something that connection with uranos
with the as the grace called it and with
Gaia you know you bring together those
two and boom you're a human like you're
supposed to be right oh
God right makes me so
excited yeah so I wantan to I want to
ask you some questions about your sense
you know you seem like a kind of a in
some ways very
conflicted because you have an ache for
just
and the return of the Kora yeah right
talk to us about the Kora for a minute
before I blather on just Queen of the
underworld baby think of her and when
you think of her Kwa is a Myan word and
it's a very specific it's like saying
virgin but not in the type that is the
paranos this is the Holy Queen who is
wedded this is her wedding to the the
king of the
underworld this is what she is entering
into if you think from her perspective
because what is the elisian mystery we
know this they said it they were allowed
to say it it's the Resurrection The
visible resurrection of the
Kora it's her who is she she is that
prophetic
Oracle right why do you think we want
her in the first place right right
remember we're going to the underworld
and coming back in this process we're
not going to stay we're going to grab
something and come back right and that
thing that we grab is going to be
perceived as a by us as a new birth
you're G to feel like you've been born
again something is
different right so it all of that stuff
is only triggered by the Kwa it is only
triggered by the Oracle and that's why
aeria and they know this as far as Italy
that's why aeria is working with Numa
the king why isn't he writing his own
goddamn laws right because he because
he's not that vessel he is not that
vessel and the fact that they recognize
that as a human potential to me is
absolutely fantastic does it do what
they say does the regimen make you
younger is it an Ambrosia that sustains
an age lessness and is it true that they
were
performing um
transfusions and people say that there
this is not only depicted in the text
it's depicted in the
art the art of the transfusion and guess
who guess who is declared to be the
inventor of this
media and what is the purpose you you
have to do it very carefully because you
can kill the person in the process so
you have to know exactly what you can
put
in it's absolutely fantastic it's
gorgeous and it uh it um is this kind of
a tech that's Divine it's a kind of an
art that is truly
integrating the physical the visible and
the
invisible right very very much putting
everything together for One Vision I
love it I love
the women
are
transmitting into the
men like a spirit nectar that is both
wisdom and medicine and protection from
death and
resurrection and healing and insight
they are they are pulsing it into the
man in this Vision right correct and a
direct support of what you just said can
be found in plutar Who quotes a Spartan
woman as saying I think it was plutar as
saying or maybe it was one of lyric
poets no this is one of the lyric poets
who says um Athenian woman asked a
Spartan woman why is it that Spartan
women have total power over spart their
Spartan husbands and her answer was it's
because only Spartan women produced men
right yeah this is what I was talking
about earlier like you were an organ in
a woman's body do you think you have
Primacy over her where did you get that
idea right like right what got messed up
in your brain sack that led you what
were you feeling um insecure or
vulnerable or something so you had to
make up stories about your Supremacy
over your mother or buy a truck buy a
big truck it doesn't matter whatever
whatever the exactly you know peacock
around you know like inflate your
importance some more go ahead see how
that works for you there are famous
accounts of these Spartan women just to
illustrate the Spartan character and
there are numerous accounts of mothers
murdering their
sons when they come back from Battle if
they don't have their Shields or they
have any marks on their backs
oh I see for the for the sake of
Sparta you are not a guardian and boom
kill him wow can you believe what kind
oh God I know that woman is sexy right
but what kind of place do you have to
reach where you are that you are that um
Power that gives the true courage gives
that true Marshal Spirit to your sons
you're the one passing it on right it's
gorgeous I love it I love it no wonder
like kgus was right um wrote it in law
in his reforms that the women have to be
educated right when I read that for the
first time I was like wait a minute it
makes sense now because they're just
going off to War and the women have to
run everything just like they're running
their marriages and by the way they
don't all the time where
clothing that covers up their breasts
and if you have a problem with it go
 yourself right oh God such the OS
the OS is everywhere apparent and
unhidden and not seen as something to be
denigrated or ashamed of or
embarrassing it's quite the opposite
without that what have you got what did
you what did you substitute for that
that you think
is what Pure Clean what what's your
story right what kind of fiction did you
insert to Blind you to the power of the
feminine
Aros what kind of faith has compelled
you to put on this
burka and to hide
your natural beauty I mean think about
that for a minute it's so contrary to
the worship of Aphrodite
right remember the the Arabs the
Arabians people that we're talking about
living in the Arabian Peninsula those
people are full of the worship of two
gods
bakus and uh
afrodite and so um it takes a lot to
remove that aphrodite but when you do
you left with the faith right you left
with the faith thank you very much now
we've got a faith and and uh we we cut
out that gorgeous gorgeous feminine
which I think you would think would warp
your mind after a while don't you think
if you can't Envision like I'm I'm being
completely honest with you
here very difficult it was very
difficult for me to hear something
feminine whenever I say
God whenever I say God it took me a long
time I wanted to insist
no it's masculine it's masculine it's
got to be masculine right and then I saw
an ancient Greek text that used a
masculine form to refer to
Aphrodite and I suddenly I was it was
like a my mind was free and I was like
oh I get it they can hear it that we
can't because some jackasses kicked the
 out of our Tech and now we can't
join we're prisoners right you're
talking we're farmed dude I totally
understand when people say you know
we're farmed we're part of a process of
farming this stuff has been taken out of
your life it's been taken out of your
programing you were supposed to be
exposed to all these mushrooms and grass
and stuff coming out of trees they even
used an Antiquity like you bruise a tree
intentionally and then you take all the
the sap that comes out of the tree oh
God you'd love that stuff put it in
anything you drink and after a few weeks
oh your stomach will work better you
dumbass and you'll feel better right oh
god what happened to that world oh you
got something there from a tree or
something right yeah this is
pollen from my tree right and when I'm
doing things I use the pollen right it's
its
reproductive Essence yeah it's pollen
right it's the spirit of the trees you
know
sex yeah straight up you're a tree
you're a tree
molester yeah that's oh that's me yeah I
go around molesting
trees you've heard of tree hogers this
guy no I take it to a whole other level
this guy's got jars of pollen you know
the the tree vice squad is going to
break in soon as they figure out to move
they're going to break in they're going
to arrest you and they're going to use
all that pollen as as evidence it's
anti-inflammatory isn't it or something
I mean um it's very complex like uh
it I don't you there's things you can
use sap for I use sap too right like
what you're talking about these are
things that I discussed I discovered by
talking to trees not by talking to
humans oh fantastic so you know go to
the source yeah you know direct
connection it's one of the reasons why I
spend most of my time talking with women
there are there are unusual men but the
men mostly they're inclined to kind of
peacock and stuff even myself right I
have the same problem I'm I'm a man but
the women man that that the water of
their heartful wisdom is just I want to
preserve it and sing its praises and
protect it and adore it you know I'm
just I'm made for that
yeah I got I got some other questions
here though that I want to get to and
I'm hoping that we'll get to have
another few conversations at least over
time of course of course okay right on
so we don't have to get to everything
today but I want to know was
scarber was
he
doing the rituals in the
PGM absolutely not absolutely not and it
would be a a sh shame if I were to say
that he were um to his family it would
be an absolute shame no Dr scarber was a
straight up straight up um history of
medicine
scholar and that's why he got chosen to
do the medicine uh of the PGM and to
translate it and whatnot um no
absolutely not so the that is no okay
and um as far as so I appreciate that
answer that makes sense to me and what
you're saying is you know he was a
scholar and academ and one who studies
the language and translating it and and
you know the histories and things like
this yeah he was not a classical
philologist he was a medical historian
so um he used Greek of course he had to
learn Greek in the process um and he
used Greek uh um in order to get just to
the medical sour es so like he he didn't
have to read Homer and Plato and P he
did end up reading a whole bunch right
over time but his real strength was the
fact that he was burrowing into the
medical text and nobody had done that
and he had a little medical background
too he I think he went to medical school
for a year maybe two when he decided to
trans for over um also he has like
Byzantine studies he did a master's in
Byzantine studies and nobody um Nobody
Does that late um you know classicists
tend to stop like the third Century anod
domy fourth Century maybe they'll go
that far anything after that they don't
want to get involved so all of the great
doctors like or obesus right who are not
part of that you know they're not one of
the early ones like you
know it's not dority so people hadn't
been jumping into
Dr Scarboro to his credit he did he
jumped into it and he did all the
Byzantine docks and there's a whole
bunch of uh christing there there's a
whole he didn't know that I mean he knew
he knew it but he didn't know it would
become an issue right the christing
thing so um he was a good scholar he's a
very good
scholar when did you first begin
experimenting with actual
magical practice
oh since it's obvious you have yeah um
you know over time just in enjoying the
Muse I would say that there were
numerous things that you could claim
were magical but I didn't really
get um I didn't really approach it as a
kind of a scientific you know inquiry
until I was working on the play um the
media and and I come across a couple of
incantations that were of the incubus
and that's really when I said okay I'm
gonna I'm gonna really push the Border
here and see you know if I can if I can
reproduce it so when the uh when the
event you know happened in the next day
somebody said oh my god um this person
is claiming that X1 and Z happened um
and it was an exact Narrative of what I
had
done from a
distance right then it's a positive
example it was at that point that I was
like oh wow wow right and it was from
that point forward that I get all the
emails bombarding me people saying
you're having intercourse with me in my
dreams I get that it's like a genre now
and so now I get it so much I'm at the
point of saying um um how was
it it has to be you know maybe it was a
good experience and some people
volunteered and tell me that I saw you
and you were a goat and you strangled
me okay I get it wow oh right so what
can you do I mean I mean that's
different though because um so look you
are something of a
psychopomp and a psycho what a
psychopomp right a a
hierophant um this is what priests mimic
yeah right but you're like the actual
thing so when people encounter you right
it's like you are um pulsing like a drum
right and their psyche receives those
pulses and then at night they dream and
those pulses take form
in their awareness yeah right so it's
not necessarily the same thing as you
did the incubus right and then something
happen it's not the same right well like
I said that first trip that first trip
really showed me how it could be done
and um imagine that you discovered
something like this um wouldn't you
wouldn't you uh take it to its Nth
Degree
wouldn't
you you know what I mean I'm serious
wouldn't you because I was so taken
aback by the fact that those results
were exactly what I had done in the
performance even to the point even to
the point of oh thought just as I was
envisioning this thought just in my head
there she is the it's a roommate oh god
I've got to paralyze this person her
description of my paralysis my Incubus
paralysis was gorgeous it was right on I
wish it could be preserved if she hadn't
gone nuts it would have been great to
preserve it right um there's a capacity
here that is feared and it's the reason
that people get kicked out of
Institutions it's the reason that people
get um written off it's a reason um that
you sustain the current Faith narrative
right somebody's got to come along some
Pythagoras has to come along and has to
poke a big hole in your Universe in
order for you to go there that's what
you're talking about in your experiences
right those are Divine experiences and
that has to take place until it does
guess what you're bound for Lethy you're
just going to keep going and drinking
the Lethy until what happens what if you
never Purge that corruption what if you
believe
lies for an
eternity right what happens to
those living
Souls right oh God these are the kinds
of this is the kinds of thing that I'm
glad that this new
Renaissance of the understanding that
drugs go hand in hand with life and and
beauty and
intelligence and um some kind of Marshal
Triumph where the beautiful
overcomes the
ugly all right oh God it's gorgeous it's
like that invisible Muse it's like she
has a you can tell her themes that she
likes in her stories if you just look at
your life as her story what has she told
what are the themes that have run
through it there's certain things that
she really likes and that whole
AOS that whole love um I don't know when
you describe you being in that place
right I I get it I kind of get Addis and
mother sibile I kind of get what they
were doing you know I don't know what do
you think about all those mystery
religions are they are they reaching for
the same Beauty what are they
doing you know one of the problems that
we have as humans is we want to
Encompass something in
language and that can be use
like I'm a I'm look I love books I'm I'm
a book you know I'm a book guy um and
I'm really curious about all the books
on your shelves maybe you'll send me a
photograph so I can see what's on there
sometime uh and I was also hoping in the
future maybe you might do some
bibliomancy but let me respond to what
you
said there's some things if I were smart
if I were actually wise what I would
have done during my experience was write
nothing and say nothing and stay 
pregnant stay
pregnant right that's what I that's what
I would try to do in the future because
they were pouring something into me and
I was transforming it into language but
that fails in a certain way right some
things are meant to be silently
undergone
and you are fertilized and you are
transformed but you don't let it out
right you don't speak it there is
actually a form of necromancy or a form
of activating the sores that they call
is um invoking takita on the Roman side
takita who's the Goddess of
Silence right there's a communication
all of these magical forms that they're
doing all of this liturgy this is oral
stuff and the song is a big part of the
whole process so for they they recognize
that you can kind of don't know switch
the polarity I don't know how you switch
over to the silent Oracle right and for
some reason that's supposed to give you
a more direct it's like what is it like
a secure connection or something you
know what I mean it's like I don't
understand it but um the dance that they
do is incredible so there's a direct
link with that
silence um yeah I don't know maybe the
monks figured something out too with all
that all I'm trying to say is that we
moderns we have a problem and the
problem is that once we have a name for
something we think we know what it is
let me be really clear that's not
knowledge that's something different
knowledge is when you've tasted her
mouth yeah you know where you are right
right yeah knowledge is intimacy it's
not that you have a word for things or
now you have
explanation that's a different thing
that's an aspect of knowledge but I I'm
starving for the other stuff I want the
direct intimacy of the
experience you want the devil man that's
what you want because you know um Adam
knew his wife and the question is did
the devil
know did the devil know yeah did he know
well he had they had had two children
yeah some people say Cain was his there
are apocryphal texts that talk about the
devil scraping I don't know if you've
seen these the devil scraping his
armpits and putting it into Eve's drink
and why was he doing that because he
wanted her to fall for him
alone isn't that something it's like a
love but you know it's obvious to it's
obvious to me almond that um the stories
in Genesis they did not arise with those
people they those stories come from
elsewhere it seems pretty obvious to
me you know people say it's it's
reflecting its Hebrew origin or its
Middle Eastern Origins and they'll
compare it with Gilgamesh and stuff like
that I still can't get by the very
opening of Genesis and how technically
Advanced it is and there's nothing
coming out of their languages that's
even close to that we have to let me put
it this way we have to try to figure out
how they built stuff right we have to
try to figure it out do we have to try
to figure out how the Greeks built stuff
no because they coined the term grammar
and they created a language that could
express how things were grown and I was
or built and I was just looking the
other day I was reading I think it was
philostr
imagines um and he's talking about the
great wonders of the world and he
saysyou know what everybody talks about
these wonders and I'm likeoh dude he's
going to say something really radical
right and he says I've seen this I've
seen that I've seen the
pyramids and I have seen the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus and I can tell you for
a fact there is nothing more Heavenly
more beautiful and more perfect than the
Temple of
Diana makes those pyramids look like d
like junk people think about it what do
you want to build giant heaps of
rock right what are we gonna make it
it's gonna contain the cagus the
Pharaoh right and then everybody makes
up their magic but  that look at the
Temple of Diana dude look at it Artemus
of Ephesus oh my God oh my God the go
just the just the proportions dude I I
don't care about a stack of rocks I want
to see some columns that remind me of a
woman's figure that's what I want to see
and you know what they did they brought
it right out right out of the stone
they've got ladies standing there right
columns they're making columns into
women with sheer sheer clothing you can
see through it's like a mirage in
stone right okay you can either have
that or you can have some big piles of
rocks there you know there's nothing you
can do with a pyramid besides look at it
right oh
God yeah well I I applaud your active
veneration of the feminine and Os in all
of her glorious expression yeah
absolutely
beautiful it's a compensation for
Christianity right we've got to bring
her back to stop the
monism um that's their weakness love it
isn't that gorgeous yeah absolutely I
love it what do you think about talking
to Bob Larson do you think that's a
productive
Avenue uh I don't know him
yet I heard you mention his
name we we we can discuss
this just check him out I'd love your
opinion because he is a he goes way back
in Arizona used to listen to him when I
was a Baptist and he is a Caster out of
demons now he did say that I have demons
and when I told him to shove his holy
oil he didn't take it all that well um
but in the episode he does actually
anoint he anoints a little statue that
Dany that Dany has there of a God that
you're supposed to
put steon and blood into this offering
and he has a little Palace that he's got
going and Bob wanted he zeroed in on it
when he came in the room he zeroed in on
it he was like oh that thing's got to
get
blessed I don't know I think he just
wanted to touch it I don't
know well you know you're you're sort of
the opposite of an you I I heard you use
the phrase Exorcist killer but you're
kind of the opposite of an exorcist and
I was trying to think of a word for that
and um it's like an an
intst yeah bring them in right you
invite them in right instead of pushing
them out you call them in yeah yeah yeah
that's I guess there should be a name
for it yeah um I mean invocation is the
you know the the common word for it but
right to bring the the beings within
yourself yeah you know they used to use
that too that has a beautiful history to
invoke in In classical Roman religion
was to go to a city that you're about to
take over and you bribe the gods to come
with you back to Rome and that if they
will assist you you'll get all of their
stuff and you can forget this Podunk
shitville you'll be in Rome on one of
the Seven Hills baby
right right and why were they doing that
they were moving the Divine Powers again
these are people whose Traditions are
able to see the invisible yeah they're
coming up with prophetesses who were
telling the future so this is you know
the danger of revealing what is in the
oracles was not that Rome would
collapse right it wasn't no it was that
the the the um the polus would be
terrified it was the it was the danger
of exploiting the glory of bringing it
to its ultimate rallying point where it
just smashed the rest of the world it
was a it was a terrific ending and they
didn't want that to be in the common
imagination it was the apocalypse and
how do you how do you um how do you
ignore the fact that the Apocalypse of
John
is using the very same
vocabulary that these oracles are using
how do you ignore that kind of thing you
can't man you can't ignore those
Traditions they're harnessing the same
mystery power and they're talking about
it I love it if you're one thing I I
like to say that people it pisses them
off and that's why I like to say it but
it's a reality if you have not
participated in a death and Resurrection
episode um you have not become any sort
of Redeemed Christian no you have not
you've just followed some kind of Faith
that's allowed to convince you to think
that you were but if you have not truly
been born again um according to the
Mysteries themselves you're doomed to
Leafy you're doomed to Ley
enjoy right CU it's like Cicero PRI and
post free free initiation post
initiation right you didn't make it to
the post sorry you get funnel back back
in to the system you need some more
punishment right apparently you didn't
learn your lesson right Praise
Jesus the Christ and by the way the
Christ is a sex drug welcome welcome do
you mean do you mean that true mystery
religion that's CA
and that has this power that you can
describe as magic or whatever you want
to describe it this mind altering power
you you mean this religion is
linked to a unity in sexual
intercourse that is meant to bring you
to
life oh think about that for a minute it
sounds natural like that's how it should
be no no it's not a r believe the guy on
the clouds who's gonna come back and
screw us all right let's follow him
instead we don't care how much he lies
right he was arrested with a naked boy
we don't care right oh some people they
do wrong things but they do it for the
reason we want to do it that's Maggot
Brain is what that is and that's our
unfortunately that's our era I think
we're the era of Maggot
Brain so the there's nothing um there's
nothing particularly radical about your
demand for the reintroduction of
AOS the women who I speak with they're
all I mean I'm gonna in in just a few
minutes I'm going to be intering uh
interviewing Dr Joanna kuyawa who
studied this for her entire life and
career and has had her own you know
non-ordinary experiences around this
it's not radical it's only radical in
the face of Christianity and Islam and
even in again you know like if we got
past the surface of those monotheistic
religions we would find AOS underneath
and if and if the surface is sustained
then what you get is kind of perversion
right then you get a problem because
what you what they've done is they've
sort of um made kind of the wrapping
paper of lies on the surface and so the
OS has to Bubble Up from under
underneath right somehow you can't
always do it can't evict it yeah you
can't get rid of it how are you going to
get rid of it so what what's gonna
happen is you'll it'll warp right it'll
warp underneath those taboos yeah it's
too bad the Egyptians were smart enough
to get rid of it within a
generation right otherwise it would have
completely altered Egyptian history that
monism um just like it the ISM that
spread in the west altered Roman history
um yeah I love it it's a it's a and you
know there are people out here out there
who were saying these very things and
they happen to be Pagan mogues like
Julian the
apostate right have you ever read
Julian's work on the great
mother no I hope to oh God you love it
you love it it gives a it gives you a
whole new understanding just to hear it
from there breath and he was actually
involved in a right um of hecky that was
you know he was trying to bring back um
the mogy he was trying to bring back the
vision and one of those ways of doing
was the motivation of the stone right to
get the um Stone representation of the
deity to move and speak right and he was
involved this remember they're using all
sorts of kinds of incantations that
involve or all sorts the kinds of drugs
so but reportedly these fumigations
reportedly um it worked and they got the
stone to speak right that guy Julian is
the guy who's warning everybody else um
the uh monists are going the Christians
are going to take over and when they do
they're going to destroy all of this
knowledge that we have in the libraries
guess what they did
guess what they did and they so he tried
to stop them by saying Christians can no
longer teach but they murdered him like
a year later so um you know that's the
way it is I don't know if you noticed it
I was in that interview with Danny um
they
said uh the one that just came out we
were looking at the townwood with the
passage the famous passage about the
infants having intercourse with infants
and um one of the passages that I
noticed that was above it that they were
looking at said um let anybody who
interferes in reading these scriptures
or whatever it was um let them to be
guilty of a crime of death punishable by
death right do you see what happens with
the flow of information it's control its
control is directly the stuff you're
talking about that you know you'd think
would be like spiritual and exempt from
control it's not it's not the demon
possession the fact that they're taking
people who are melancholics that are
depressed and Galen is openly
prescribing drug treatments for those
possessions in one case um recommending
the joining with a
priestess right which kind of makes
sense if you're depressed if I was when
I was a kid if I when I was going
through depressive mood swains and stuff
like that if ID had a priestess that I
could have spent you know some time with
you know what I mean Jesus I probably
would have been happier too yeah you
know damn I'm with you yeah almond I'm
gonna have to go because I have another
interview to do today yes but I am um
absolutely enthusiastic about your work
and the chance to to speak with you and
learn together and see through some of
the veils of nonsense of modernity and
history oh God absolutely love it man I
love the conversation I'm so glad that
it was a conversation and not just tell
me this and tell me this and tell me
this and tell me this I really I I
really would rather interact with you
than sit here and you know try to I
don't know throw out some lecture
 so thank you it's been a good
this is a good interview and by the way
just to let your audience know you have
totally in that article that you wrote
you have totally captured the situation
you did your research and it was
straight up so I appreciate that I
appreciate that let you get to your
interview that was an absolute joy for
me and I you know your um your presence
in your spirit your virtue your
ethos it is an amno noetic right it is
it is catalytic oh I love that it's
forgetting right and just deep respect
and appreciation for that brother so
muchis that's what we need a
prescription for yeah God I love it I
love it let's make the medicine together
yes exactly look exactly oh my God it's
breaking the Renaissance is coming okay
get to your um Maria gambis right I
interviewed Maria Maru but today I'm
gonna be talking with Dr Joanna kuwa oh
kuwa it's Dr kuwa yeah I've heard her
name frequently frequently frequently so
awesome enjoy have fun yes again very
soon my friend and thank you to you and
to chewy and to this the dead girl and
the beings that inform your
spirit all respect definitely to the
dead girl The Muse yes oh I love it so
beautiful okay um have a good one and
enjoy your next interview
again soon
