this might be the most linked video I've
ever received potentially like like ever
I've been actually using a lot of Devon
I've been trying to use it as much as I
can I've just entered my second month of
subscription I've paid ,000 now to Devon
and I've probably given it a 100 tasks
offline and so I have a pretty good idea
of what it's capable of and what it's
not capable of at this current Point
Devon is an AI that was advertised to be
able to replace every that was a little
my bad my bad on that one uh everybody
if your ears are currently bleeding I I
went full way to dank okay uh yes by the
way this is like the worst thing that
Devin did is that it positioned itself
to take over software Engineers like I
just don't understand what's wrong with
AI companies cuz think about this for a
second one do you think it would be good
if they said hey we're going to take
over every software engineer that's a
slow long process I mean there's entire
Hardware things you'd have to figure out
like that integration process would be
gigantic now imagine this hey we will
make your devs 20% more efficient for
only $500 a month you know how many at
least American UK other companies would
purchase something to make devs 500 or
20% 30% more efficient 30% more
productive right like just imagine if
Devon positioned itself as an efficiency
gain for devs as opposed to a
replacement of it is insane that
marketers can't figure this out it I I I
I'm literally baffled by this entire
thing absolutely baffled that this is
not this is just not the the way they do
it it's not sexy for VC's I think it
would be sexy I think there's tons of
VCS that would find this completely sexy
and go wait a second it's still Ai and
they're marketing to be attached to
every software engineer that could be
$500 million a month that could be
multiple billions a year as part of a
part of income by attaching itself to
every single engineer why would you not
choose that why would you choose the
idea of attempting to replace it because
if you fail you get tossed the hell out
of a company but but hear me out let's
say you have a company of a thousand
Engineers like a big engineering company
and 40% of your engineers say they love
Devon you don't think that company's not
buying a thousand seats of Devon of
course they're buying a thousand seats
of whatever they're buying a th000 seats
and 40% are going to use them and it's
just like bada bing bada boom you just
like not only have you made more money
per engineer you have less Hardware
pressure it's just I don't understand it
why would you do this what is your
thought process why aren't people just
thinking clearly about it why was the
volume of this video entirely too high I
don't get it I've made stupid bad
decisions in life software engineer in
existence as a complete AI tool for
coding and while it terrified software
Engineers when it was first announced
what is this going on what is this am I
watching
Inception people quickly started to
realized that it either didn't work as
intended or didn't work at all in fact
the only thing actually surprising was
that the company behind Devon AI
cognition managed to reach a $2 billion
valuation within 6 months so how exactly
did cognition okay we got to stop we got
to stop with
the sh by the way the people that the
people that were afraid of Devon or the
people that said Devon completely didn't
work I think they're both full of crap
i' again i' I've probably done about a
hundred requests through Devon now um
and there's some good things there's
some things that I think are actually
positive about Devon uh there's a lot of
things I find uh very frustrating about
Devon so we're kind of in the middle and
also I think this voice has to be AI
such a huge valuation with a product
that was half faked how does cognition
even exist
in March 2024 by the way it's not
surprising how cognition exists they
made a play at a very large market for a
cheap enough price and they already know
that there's going to be one or two devs
that'd be kind of running this thing
they'd be able to run like four or five
or 10 devans concurrently fixing various
things and they would just be the ones
kind of churning out the last 10% um and
so it's very obvious what what the goal
was the go the goal or VC saw this as
probably the most complete full pipeline
AI in in existence and that if they
could get in first they're going to make
a lot of money and if they can become
the full thing for a lot of developers
then it would be worth like you know a
hundred billion do I don't I don't think
that's what it is also please those
transition sounds are they're they're
they're they're getting me cognition
Labs claimed Devon AI could replace
human software Engineers within weeks
they raised $175 million and reached a
$2 billion valuation this scared the
pants off every software developer in
the world and facing
imminent type one in the chat if you
were scared  my pants wow okay Max
integer jobless Anarchy no one knew what
to do until results started showing that
Devon wasn't all that it was propped up
to be the I honestly think one of the
biggest problems that happened with
Devon there were certain Engineers I'm
not going to name names this time
because last time I named names received
several angry messages but there are C
certain Engineers that were
exceptionally propping up Devon as if it
was fantastic weeks analyzing every
frame of cognition promotional videos
revealing a carefully orchestrated
deception their investigation exposed
specific manipulation heard about this
first the live coding demonstrations
were heavily oh yeah they're heavily
edited and they dude did you see those
live coding did you watch them like did
you watch them when they actually
dropped they're not even showing you the
good ones cuz this is clearly done by an
AI but did you watch the the ones that
were really hilarious it was like 1:20
in the morning it was not like a nice
March 9th 3:25 p.m. like a nice
oldfashioned workday time they were up
deep in the morning trying to get these
things and each one of the chunks were
like 45 minutes to 2 hours later
sequence where Devon appeared to debug
code in minutes time stamp analysis
revealed 47 minute gaps between cuts the
YouTuber overlaid the original video
with get commit time stamps showing how
a 10-minute fix actually took over 4
hours the channel also discovered that
Devon's celebrated bug fixes were staged
in the demo video Devon appears to fix
complex integration issues but the code
repositories history showed these bugs
were artificially introduced just before
recording as one section revealed Devon
was fixing syntax errors in files that
had created moments before equivalent to
creating a spelling mistake just to show
you can correct it most damning was the
I didn't know that one see this is just
what I feel so bad about like why did
you have to sell it this way right like
why sell it this way there's so many
there could have been such a better
reception right like why why why I
understand that VCS want to make
infinite money and that they're horrible
people that they're likely develop deep
from lizard dna but you could also just
make a company and say this is the this
is the thing we're doing I assume assum
Deon was created in attempts to be this
thing and then when the boots hit the
ground they realized they can't create
the thing as well as they want they have
to kind of do these weird like editing
things but why maale models why maale
models I don't get it upor earnings
claim internet of bugs tracks down the
actual upwork job posting and client
feedback revealing that Not only was
Devon's submission rejected but the
client had specifically noted submitted
work appeared to be AI generated and
didn't meet basic requirements the $150
payment cognition claimed Devon earned
never actually happened oh I did not
know that okay so that I mean if this is
to be believed right the problem here is
that I I I need to see some sites right
the problem is is am I being Bamboozled
by what appears to be AI generation or
like I know like which AI is lying to me
I don't even know oh my gosh I'm being I
am being thwarted in all dire was
straight forward set up a computer
vision model on AWS the solution was
right there in the read me file a single
line of instructions think of it like
having a recipe card for baking cookies
but instead of following the recipe
Devon tried to invent a new way to bake
cookies broke the oven then spent hours
trying to fix it the reality a simple
task that took a human developer 36
minutes took Devon over 6 hours to
complete and it still failed speaking of
thanks so much for all the support on
the channel lately it really means a lot
and I want to give something back to you
guys so do you need a job that sounded a
bit weird but whether you're a ux
designer app developer freelancer or
just a curious viewer I want to get to
know you guys share some ux and UI tips
and are all these clips matching up with
what is being said or am I just like am
I going crazy or all the lips actually
matching up with what is being said
anyways keep going maybe even get a gig
Discord channel for us and want to make
this the place to be for front-end
professionals and I'm having talks with
people to get some Employers in there so
you can connect with them too and find
some jobs in the future I'm really
excited to get this thing started so I
hope you'll join me the channels frame
by frame analysis also caught moments of
human intervention Mouse movements
during supposed autonomous coding
sessions keyboard shortcuts no AI would
use and even a brief reflection of a
human coder in a darkened IDE window all
pointing to significant Human Assistance
during the demos the truth was simple
dude they got to show those I I want to
see that what do you mean there's a
darkened reflection like I I'm on I'm on
the team that this could be all
completely staged but you got to show
you got to put the you got to put the
you got to put you know you got to put
the things you got to put the got to put
the goods in here right I need to see
the goods cherry picking while cognition
Labs trumpet also can we be fair here is
any of this surprising is it surprising
that they would heavily edit stuff to
make it quick for a promotional video no
I think the only parts that would be
surprising is that they did not in fact
include time frames like while it did
this we were able to go over here and
fix some stuff and when it came back we
had to make some simple changes and boom
we were up and running I just don't
understand it 18.86% success rate as
revolutionary they conveniently omitted
the truth out of 570 coding tasks failed
every single task that required changes
across multiple files 95 in total it
also couldn't handle 230 tasks that
needed more than 15 lines of code this
generally kind of lines up with my Devon
experience which is that whenever I used
Devon if it's like a change to a
specific location it seems to do pretty
good or if it's like requested to figure
out a bug it tends to kind of like if
the bug is a specific line of code Devon
is kind of like a horseshoe it gets
thrown it gets close enough and then
you're like okay I can see exactly where
the problem is thanks Devon for the
close enough but I will just take it
from here so basically Junior no not a
Junior at all uh not a Junior at all I
actually find it I actually find it very
insulting people thinking Junior's so
useless like juniors are D they're my
favorite engineers in the universe to
work with are Juniors okay because
juniors are so exciting like they are
just ready they're in there they cannot
wait to program sure they'll come up
with crazy ideas and sometimes you got
to go hey slow it down now okay I know
you just worked 12 straight hours on
this idea the idea is in utterly insane
but dude you accomplish it that's
amazing let's just do the on line change
over here it's okay sometimes to cut
corners or maybe the corner you just
created was created out of fat like thin
air and we just got to work you know we
got to we got to walk it back a little
bit like that's totally cool I loved
working with Juniors the world goes
around on interns I am fully and 100%
bought in on that you know why juniors
are so excited it's because a lot of
times when you've been working for a
long time it's pretty easy for you to go
from job to job whereas when you're
brand new it's kind of like things kind
of rest on you performing well right and
so there's there's an entire I I I I
can't imagine anybody disagreeing with
this the next words out of my mouth but
there's an entire world that exists
where when you don't have pressures to
survive or become successful you tend to
just work worse and so Juniors who tend
to be like resting on this one
opportunity tend to work really really
well because they're actually motivated
to do something and I think one of the
hardest parts about Juniors is that when
they become successful they lose that
desire and it's not that you have to be
like you I'm not saying like just pour
into every single job you have I
actually think that's one of the biggest
mistakes I made was go too much onto a
single job but just that hungry
excitement you know what I mean like
that that desire and so it's just like I
I don't know why anyone just don't
compare it to a junior okay it's not a
junior they don't care Devon does not
care that's this is my big gripe with
llms in general is that llms don't care
they do what they're told maybe whereas
like a junior they care you make a
change they take that change and they go
oh actually it was off by one pixel so I
actually just went into the code base
without anyone telling me and I aligned
it better and then I realized that
actually I think we should try this so I
made a secondary example that looks like
this what what you think should we
consider this option instead of this
option and you're like hey you care I
love it that you care I love that you
care no but I love what you care I love
that you care you know and and llms will
never care they don't care that's not
the point they can't care they don't
have the ability to care because they're
not they're not it's not the same and
anyone that tells you oh humans are just
like LMS they're just they just they
don't know anything okay difference in
kind versus difference in order don't
get it confused just walk away the only
tasks it managed to complete were simple
single file changes the kind of work
developers already accomplish with free
tools like chat GPT even existing Tool
Man the AI world sucks like GitHub
co-pilot which doesn't claim to replace
developers helps complete 30% of
developers code on average and costs $10
monthly way cheaper than Devon's
overpriced underperforming system the
success rate when examin it is it is
fair to be different co-pilot is meant
for you I mean first off three things
three things one one co-pilot stop using
it as pilot okay people I watch people
sometimes just use co-pilot as if it is
the pilot stop that okay just side note
edit editorial note two co-pilot the
nice part about co-pilot is it's
interacting with you at a moment and its
completion Windows really tiny so yes it
makes sense that it's probably $10 a
month and let's also be fair how much do
you want to bet that co-pilot is a
complete loss leader to get people into
this entire ecosystem my guess is that
what Microsoft really wants is they want
to own everything you own nothing and
you be happy they want you working on a
remote container using a remote vs code
committing code to GitHub while using uh
co-pilot for autoc completion they don't
want you actually having anything and so
how do they get you in the door $10 a
month okay you oh guess what Netflix has
risen its price like how many times in
the last few years guess who else is
going to be rising prices you think this
is going to last forever you think this
free you think this freeness is just
going to be free forever my friends I
hate to break this to you it's not how
life works okay it's not going to $10
forever that thing will be $25 $40 an
hour or $40 a month at some point blah
blah blah blah number three Devon works
on a completely different axis it's not
working on like line by line what you're
editing its whole attempt is to be able
to analyze a codebase make those changes
commit him to get and then make a PR
right like this is a completely
different experience and Devon is
probably actually priced more reasonable
and what I mean by more reasonable is
Devon is less likely probably to break
my expectations because it's already
really expensive whereas co-pilot is
going to break your expectations they
will just become more expensive that's I
hate to break this to you that is the
life that it will be happening very very
different I can't believe I'm defending
Devon here on price okay out of all
things for me to defend Devon on $500 a
month feels way too expensive but at
least I know I'm probably not going to
get shot in the foot here in a moment
closely revealed not a breakthrough but
basic functionality dressed up as
Innovation this gap between hype and
reality wasn't just embarrassing it
affected real decisions companies
delayed hiring developers thinking AI
would Su good good do that do it
companies do it please companies please
do it I cannot wait for you to just
train wreck your code base and then make
the realization that a series of
shortcuts make long delays okay I'm
sorry Mary tried to tell you this in
Lord of the Rings you didn't listen this
is your own bed now you get a lay in it
now you get to hire twice as many
software Engineers to try to fix the
dumb  that you've decided to do okay
good have fun for the next 6 months
good investors poured Millions into
similar startups without proper due
diligence meanwhile actual developers
watching the demos immediately spotted
red flags that investors missed but okay
Devon AI was a failure a lie and a
mirage so how did a lie manage to raise
$2
billion VC's are
stupid VC's should not be stupid
one in an ideal world would assume that
VCS are revolutionary thinkers who are
able to see into the future and try to
induce from current state into the
future and be like this is what is going
on this is why they're amazing right
like you would think that that's what
they like that's just my default
mentality because I I still believe the
best in the world I still live on hope I
still am excited every single day so I
just I that's like my default mentality
but then I keep seeing all the
Investments and I realize that there's a
whole bunch that are just like play VCS
you know what I mean a human developer
completing the upwork task in 36 minutes
would cost about $30 Devin taking over 6
hours and failing would cost
significantly more just in computational
resources even you that's not a very
good answer um here hold on okay there's
things I don't like about this video
that uh I feel like is not being uh very
good right so it's 62 uh5 is the cost
per hour so $8 an hour times what 5
hours so it was $40 for Deon to fail at
this task but it could be done while it
could be done autonomously while you
were doing something else so it's like
which you know and I'm sure if you
bought more Devon you'd probably get
some sort of reduced amount right so my
guess is that if you if you're in the
Enterprise Universe you're probably
getting something like maybe 5,000 but
you're getting yourself like maybe 13
you know you're getting yourself a
significantly larger amount to where
maybe that only cost you a couple bucks
right and so it's like maybe maybe
there's like a different world that
exists that we're just kind of off on
you know what I mean yeah but we really
uh discount how much uh infrastructure
and power uh this thing needs to run in
the background yeah no no it's true what
I think one thing we don't ever talk
about enough I mean this is why Sam
Alman is saying that he needs to build
his own nuclear power plant nuclear
power plant for your for your startup is
like there's there's a part of that when
you say it out loud you go that's kind
of insane but I I do think people aren't
really realizing just exact like exactly
how expensive is the societal cost of
spending that much
in energy yeah and of course there's
going to be price increase there's
there's a whole slew of problems that
are coming societally I I think that
we're we're over we're just jumping in
so fast and I think that that's going to
cause a whole it's just going to cause a
whole problem right because if everybody
today tried to turn that you know that
like that service on that Service
couldn't handle it and so it's like
we're all kind of like trying to make it
go as fast as possible but it can't
really go as fast as possible as we want
there's a whole set of problems I'm not
even trying to get into that I'm not
even think talking about the feasibility
of it all uh you know I'm just talking
about the peer cost economics I don't
think is a really great way to do it
which is if Devon got you 80% way to a
solution but you could do something else
at the exact same time that's a bonus
just sell it that way anyway sorry model
each successful task would cost hundreds
of dollars 10 times what you'd pay a
skilled developer on upwork in 2024
Venture Capital firms were operating in
the shadow of open ai's success GPT had
transformed from a$1 billion company to
A90 billion Giant in Just 2 years every
VC who had passed on open ai's early
rounds was now desperately searching for
the next chat GPT leading to what one
investor called AI fever in Silicon
Valley cognition Labs crafted their
pitch to perfectly exploit VC psychology
in 2024 Devon isn't just another coding
assistant it's the world's by the way I
think I'm completely fine with that dude
if if VCS are dumb enough just throw
just an enormous amount of money into a
software project and these Bros get to
go out there and try to build that
software project to the best of their uh
ability like hey guess what you you you
guys made the game that's your fault you
made the
game they won like what do you what do
you want from me you know what I mean
it's like what do you actually want from
them I think they did a great job take
the bagy prime div here I miss you and
you're you're 500 bucks a
month thank you I miss you too and I I
but I don't miss I I I I don't have to
miss my $500 a month cuz I have it first
complete AI engineer wasn't just a
tagline it was calculated to tap into
Tech's biggest pain Point engineering
costs their claimed that Devon could
reduce 100 person engineering teams to
just 10 promised to solve the industry's
most expensive problem with average
software engineer salaries at
$150,000 this suggested potential
Savings of 13.5 million you know every
time I see b roll I just have to look at
here and I'm like what the  is this
guy even
doing why are there why are there orange
things going to Blue things like what is
this I assume this is like a SORA a SORA
video at least like the hands are
somewhat okay here same screens I know
dude bro is dual monitoring to the same
screens except for this one's slightly
ahead in the future compared to this one
this already doing now this doing the
suggested potential Savings of
per the market math was equally
seductive the global software
development Market stood at $500
billion 1% of that would mean $5 billion
in Revenue by standard VC calculations
which valued AI companies at 12 times
Revenue compared to three times for
traditional software this Justified a 60
billion valuation suddenly deon's $2
billion valuation seemed conservative
this
that that's not
true there's not like a 3X look at this
look at this this guy that's not true
that's not true 3x look at this this guy
150 what's 158 uh we'll go 159 time 3
159 time 3 is four four or time four my
bad there's four quarters classic 34s in
there uh what is this thing this thing's
worth 2.29 so if you take that and
2.29 divided by this uh yeah that's
close enough uh what is that that's
that's 5.7 look at Coca-Cola let's let's
take a little look see at Coca-Cola what
about Coca-Cola stock uh KO stock what
is KO stock sitting at Ko stock sitting
at the market cap of this what is its
income it's income is only this so it's
income is like 40 some billion yeah so
this one's also sitting probably closer
to about
5x you know 12x is because they're
growing right PE is not a valuation uh I
know well that thing that thing is the
market caps the market cap would be like
how much is the whole actual thing I'm
not saying PE price to earnings would be
not that I didn't look at the
PE um sales price is different than
market cap yeah I mean fair if you're
buying sort of it's it's sort it's sort
of different it's kind of they're kind
of intertwined on private companies it's
less it's like private companies can't
really like align that way right but yes
I see what you're
saying because it just doesn't have a
market to actually align to that market
cap is stored in the PE it is it's
actually stored in the PE all right
sorry let's keep going valuation logic
was playing out across the AI sector
character. aai reached $1 billion
valuation with basic chatbot technology
generating minimal revenue and dude
character II was like L literally just
just chat
GPT like it was it was just chat what is
character AI character AI is where you
could develop a character and then it
would be this character for your role
playing games which then that 14
14-year-old boy or 15-year-old boy or
16-year-old boy fell in love with
Denarius targ daus Targaryen did I get
that right uh and uh crazy lady crazy
lady with the dragon and ended up
committing suicide to go home to her and
all that right like real real crazy
stuff's going on so character AI kind of
crazy you know what I mean yeah kind of
crazy stuff anthropic secured $4 billion
for Claude despite its marginal
improvements over gp4 in this
environment VC's that that one at least
makes sense right like cloud makes sense
because you're betting that there could
be more than one market
leader kind of optimizing for two
different things so you could still get
that like 12x 15x 9 to 90 billion growth
right like CL like Claude bet actually
makes sense if you think about it at all
it makes perfect sense to do that one
wen't investing in current capabilities
they were betting on potential Market
capture in an industry desperate to
reduce engineering costs traditional
diligence processes were compressed or
ignored entirely one Anonymous VC
partner admitted after missing open ai's
early rounds firms were throwing money
at anything with AI in the pitch deck
techn I don't like Anonymous stuff I
think that if you if if if if you have
something to say I just don't think
reporting anonymously is very great
right I just don't evaluations that
take basic questions about product
viability were overshadowed by fears of
missing out on the next big thing
marketing played a crucial role in
maintaining this momentum cognition Labs
expertly used Ai buzzwords and carefully
staged demos to create fomo among
investors they positioned Devon as a
revolution in software development
rather than what it was a buggy good
again I think this is great can we all
just not like how are people not stoked
about this they were able to create like
what do you want with your life we
create a cult like I mean does this not
happen for everything like every last
thing you make a game remember when Apex
first came out Apex first came out and
the wingman and the Spitfire were
amazing so what did everybody do well no
one could use the wingman because they
didn't have any skill uh but everybody
used the Spitfire and they would just
sit there and mow down people over and
over again like I mean every single game
mechanic game mechanic would be
exploited immediately and why was it
exploited immediately because that's
what people do and so you make a game
mechanic where it's just like the more
buzzwords you put in there and the more
fomo you put in there the more likely
investors are supposed to uh what's it
called more investors are willing to
give you money what do you think the
outcome of this is going to be
you welcome to your bed code Sleep By
the time technical experts could point
out flaws the funding rounds were
already closed for developers watching
this unfold the lessons were clear
technical Excellence often matters less
than Market marting and securing funding
Devon raised more money in weeks than
many profitable developer tools raised
in years several developers noted that
Devon's flaws were obvious to anyone who
actually wrote code yet investors missed
them completely honestly I think Devon
again the thing is is that Devon or not
again this is differently like it's just
like using chat GPT except for it just
places it all for you and makes a PR
like you're just paying for convenience
at that point if you can afford the
convenience of not having to find the
spot that needs to be debug like if
you're just a like honestly if you're
just a prompt a prompt Kitty and all you
know how to do is prompt like Devon just
is just Devon is just a con is is a
convenience thing right that's all it is
I like the term prompt Kitty by the way
because I think it's actually a
hilarious phrase prompt Kitty come on
prompt Kitty is a hilarious phrase and I
think we should I think we should
actually I think we should keep it okay
I think we should keep it I'm not
saying reality while Developers focused
on whether Devon could actually code
investors focused on whether they could
sell the story of AI replacing
developers to very different metrics of
success despite cognition lab's bold
Promises of a revolutionary AI software
engineer Devon's actual performance
revealed a tool that couldn't grasp even
basic software development principles
while they promised an AI that could
replace entire development teams what
they delivered couldn't handle tasks
that entry-level programmers routinely
solve the gap between promise and
reality became painfully obvious in
day-to-day tasks cognition claimed Devon
could autonomously architect and
Implement complex systems yet when faced
with a simple missing python package
something first year computer science
students handle daily de first off first
year computer science students don't
handle python packages daily okay this
is not a thing okay first year computer
science students
probably honestly probably programming
in JavaScript right now they're handling
adding 1,000 npm packages okay npx
create algorithms course wrote 50 lines
of unnecessary code instead of using the
standard pip install command this wasn't
Innovative it was inefficient and
amateurish the disappointment deepened
with database optimization tasks while
marketing materials boasted about
Devon's Advanced Performance Tuning
capabilities it completely missed a
basic missing database index a rookie
mistake no human develop would make see
again I don't I don't like those kind of
comparisons brother no engineer would
say rookie mistake to forget an index
okay hey we've all literally done it in
fact most people discover they've done
it after they Wolly realize how bad
things are going like that's like the
classic is where you go oh  it's
like did do our response times or a
second and a half what index did you
forget damn it I forgot user idid
and people are like what you forgot user
ID you're like I my bad the forgot I
forgot I forgot the foreign key see the
see the problem was is that I just the
joins really bad right it's just like
yeah I know the join is really bad it's
okay just go fix it come on just get get
done with it instead Devon spent hours
implementing complex caching systems and
connecting pooling code that actually
made the performance worse perhaps most
embarrassing was Devon's approach to bug
fixing for a tool Market as Superior to
human developers and debugging its
performance was almost comical during a
memory leak investigation Devon spent 4
hours rewriting entire systems and
adding unnecessarily complexity while
completely missing an obvious bug in a
basic Loop something a human developer
spotted and fixed in 5 minutes these
weren't isolated incidents but a pattern
of fundamental failures this I I I
honestly think that a lot of this is
just probably prompt skill issues is
you're giving Deon too big of task you
know what I like to give Devon task to
do just go make my UI look a little bit
nicer and yeah it kind of looks a little
bit nicer sometimes it doesn't really
look nicer sometimes it does like 50% of
the job than I do the other one it's
just like what are you doing don't don't
don't tell it to rearchitecturing
by the way Devon did make this for me
for those are wondering why this right
here this is if I'm connected to my
internal application so if we go um if
we go to right here and I take it down
you'll notice that that this connection
represents that my websocket connection
is down what is this icon I don't know
what that icon is but Devon made it
though Devon made that icon I I I
don't I don't even know what it means to
tell you the truth their development
teams from 100 to 10 engineers Devon
wasn't just a disappointment it was a
stark reminder that revolutionary claims
require revolutionary results the code
quality itself raised red flags when
asked to optimize a database query Devon
wrote any Junior developer would know to
Simply
use its approach to Version Control
demonstrated a complete lack of
development best practices Devon would
routinely modify hundreds of unrelated
files in a
hey rewriting the standard is a um is is
actually a pretty standard normal thing
to do also you talked about a database
and then you talked about processing a
file so I actually have no clue what
you're talking about like to be
completely
fair whatever just happened I got
actually confused
okay now now I'm confused single commit
combine code formatting changes with
logical modifications ignore established
get workows branch
andate unnecessary merge by modifying
core system files API integration tests
exposed more fundamental flaws when
tasked with implementing ooth
authentication Devon wrote to what level
did you ask him to implement oath like
writing your own oath library or just
integrating with the simple one huh
that's a lot of instead of using
standard libraries stored sensitive
credentials in plain text failed to
implement basic error handling and
created security vulnerabilities by
mismanaging token refresh performance I
mean I Hae the death I hate to break
this to you it's just learn from the
best on
GitHub like to be fair all it's just
learning from the best of us people
that's all that's happening okay you
think it came up with that novel
Solution on its
own equally problematic in one case Deon
spent hours implementing complex caching
mechanisms for a simple web service
while ignoring basic optimizations like
database query optimization resource
pooling response compression and basic
HTTP caching headers these issues
weren't isolated incidents but reflected
systemic problems in Devon's approach to
software development raising serious
questions about its practical utility in
real world development environments most
telling was Devon's handling of
documentation modern develop okay I it
just you've given us huge tasks I really
I mean I Chad G Chad GPT couldn't do
this I'm not I I'm not I I I'm positive
cursor couldn't do a good job with this
right like I don't think any of these I
don't think any of these llm
systems would do good if you just
do would would do good if you did that I
said GPT sorry jippy my bad I you know
normally I say jippy just cuz it's so
convenient I don't know what happened
there right like no one's going huge
tasks dude it's just not good
right development relies heavily on
reading documentation and understanding
existing code bases yet Devon
consistently ignored read me files
existing comments and API
documentation learning from the best of
us you know it's just crazy it's just
crazy how many comments are on the
internet saying that hey guess what the
documentation is wrong and then learning
from all the text on the internet it
goes ah probably shouldn't listen to a
read me file it's probably out of
date wow essential resources that
developers use daily it's like having a
cook who ignores recipes and food safety
guidelines insisting on Reinventing
cooking from scratch every time if you
liked this video please check out our
other video on the day Trello almost
died until next time or Trello yeah the
video script is Agent it feels like the
video script I think I think one of the
poor Parts about that entire uh that
entire experience is that I don't think
that they're wrong I think that I think
that video points out a lot of good
things which is that it does really
appear that Devon didn't do a good job
managing expectations or really showing
what people should be expecting when
they come to Devon and so people just
came into it thinking it's going to do
anything and everything and then guess
what they're not happy about it is this
a shocker it's not a shocker like this
is just classic unmet expectations this
is the reason also this is the reason
why co-pilot was so amazing
remember when co-pilot came out your
expectations of autocomplete were very
small then co-pilot comes out and it
just it's just like thrown out else
statements and all this kind of stuff
and you're just like wow this is crazy
this is amazing right like because your
expectations weren't there dude just I I
don't see how I just I really wish I
wish I could I wish Devon would just put
me on the board Devon put me on the
board and just have me go stop
it stop it hey no that
stop oh that one also stop and just let
me do that for
like three months and then I think it'
fix a lot of things like that's all you
got to do is be like Devin if you got a
small bug to fix it could take an
attempt for you why run why running
cereal when it could go on Parallel hey
maybe it will get you 80% of the way but
would you rather fix 20% of a bug with
an initial investigation or 100% of the
bug where you going to do all the
investigation you know I feel like one
of them is a very compelling argument
and one of them is just not an argument
at all because then it's immediately
destroyed the second you try to do
anything and then you go wow this is
completely not meeting my
expectations anyways
the
name is I cannot believe I'm defending
Devin in any level at all but here I am
because that's how bad the AI world is
why are there just no regular normal ass
takes on AI why does everything have to
be the just the most bizarre
exceptionally anti- aai take or
completely 100% fully positive like why
like why why not the middle ground why
is there no why what the hell's wrong
with you why is everything Doomer or
Doomer the other way a Jen
