we're still um slowly slowly inching
um uh towards developing some sort of
informational system for the
droplets um and so this is um you know
still bit far away let's say but uh uh
my dream has always been if we can uh if
we can make these animated
droplets um do something um then we
could also try to encode them with some
sort of information which means this
case it's going to be chemical
information just compositional um so
there's nothing new there people have
been thinking about this for for quite
some time but the idea is how can we
actually do it and then measure the
outcome of this uh let's say uh one way
of thinking about is programmability so
uh We've published a few papers which
kind of sniff around this topic which
means like um making droplets with
different colors and then monitoring
their behavior so really exploratory
work where where yeah we're just trying
to um set some sort of experimental
platform that we can use then to push
push push I'm hoping now that we've
we're getting some traction it's it's
really been quite a few years because my
I mean my background is in genetics I
have a PhD in genetics and I I don't
touch genetics you know and uh it's it's
but it's inside of me let's say and uh
and I've long abandoned DNA actually um
and not because for no other reason
except this because I'm curious about
other kinds of systems that may be much
less sophisticated than what we are
dealing with in biology so that's why
I'm pursuing these super simplistic
sometimes ridiculously simp simplistic
chemical systems and um yeah so uh we're
still working with those Mike um that's
the sort of more um uh intellectually
demanding kind of projects but um to pay
the bills uh we've been working now with
finally applying some of these
Technologies to um some sort of
technical outcomes that could be let's
say have some sort of societal societal
impact so we have uh the one of the
reasons that I'm here in Pennsylvania is
I'm kind of retreating a little bit from
all the demands of two large European
projects that I'm I'm currently
coordinating so so I need a little bit
of head SP because it's been um really
high um administrative burden as you
probably have heard from these European
projects and um so we are applying now
some of these artificial cell
Technologies to um to cancer diagnosis
early cancer diagnosis and um organoid
development two different projects so
with really you know sort of focused
outcomes not exploratory So Much Anymore
um because we feel like we finally push
the artificial cell stuff to a certain
place where we can show yes we have
programmability we have functionality
okay now what are you going to do with
this kind of technology so that's been
keeping me super
busy yeah uh super interesting so um
you've you've got them they they can
they can live in an in the same medium
that that living cells like they operate
in in some kind of
aquous cell culture Media or how does
how does that work yeah that's the first
step of course is compatibility so um
our initial our
initial boray into this was that soon as
we mix the artificial cells with the
living cells the living cells die yeah
um let's uh the extreme situation was we
were working with um pH of 12 so you can
imagine the incompatibility there
already and then there was also a
chemical part where the the chemical
substance was actually shown to be
poisonous to the cells even at at um
physiological pH so all of this stuff
had to be worked out in that case what
we had to do was just
protect protect the living cells from
the artificial cells by putting them in
a um hydrogel which is a typical way
people do this um it's biocompatible and
that
actually made a very very nice interface
between the artificial and natural
systems that allow them to let's say
coexist but also to chemically
communicate with each M because it's you
know it's a permeable barrier that we're
using so so that yeah that that worked
but now for these new projects um we are
we're sticking to physiological pH right
from the get-go because otherwise we're
not going to get very far and so yeah
that's the first thing so can you can
these things form are they stable in um
growth media um and those are the things
we are currently pursuing it's basically
we're in the first year of the project
first seven months of the project
so we're still getting set up but um
yeah that's the idea the compatibility
seems like it's going to work out um
there there there is prior art in this
sense where people are using for example
you know nanop particles and antibodies
and things like this and not too far
away from what we want to do actually so
we can use those um those systems to
guide us how to how to set up the
artificial cell system to work in a
productive way with the natural systems
and we're hoping that um with this let's
say the programmability dimension that
we can do some sophisticated
interactions with the living cells that
might not be really useful when you're
just pouring stuff into growth media
right so you're pouring a growth factor
into growth Media or those kinds of
things so we're we're hoping that we can
make something that's more precise and
specific let's
see yes very cool um I I have two two
thoughts about about that for potential
collaboration one is that um if you if
you if you do get them very compatible
with living things we have we have
anthropods so it would be interesting to
try to co you know confront them them
with each other right and what we also
have is xenobots and the xenobots are
far more tolerant of um things like PH
range and weird chemicals much more so
than than Maman cells so you know one
thing you could imagine is I'm almost
thinking of like a like a like a
synthetic touring test where right we
put them in we we look at the the
interactions and you know what what can
we pick up and then you can you can sort
of probe at least on the zabot side you
can you can probe do they know you know
you can look at transcriptomics you can
look at um calcium signaling
measurements and see okay how you know
what happens to them when they're
confronted with the synthetic kind of
agent yep I I wonder then on on that uh
on that note
so one of the things we're trying to do
with one of these European projects is
uh you know we're working with we're
working with people who are doing
organoids which we are not experts in
but we we're we're collaborating with
these people um and so yeah the idea
would be to understand the um the
information exchange between the two
systems for example doing you know
transcript omics like you're suggesting
so really getting into the into the
details um yeah so
what would be um what would be a an
interesting augmentation or Improvement
to your system that maybe an artificial
cell could deliver to have some ideas of
what where where could you go well one
one thing that we're very interested in
is to ask the question of um what do
these constructs know about the world
they're interacting with so you can you
can read that out through signatures of
of of gene expression and
transcriptomics but also I really like
um uh uh readouts of calcium and voltage
because you can apply all the metrics
from Neuroscience right where people
measure integrated information all these
these different kinds of things to right
to see okay so so what what what you
know can we can we like like neural
decoding can we read out a signature
that that corresponds to the the system
having had a specific experience and
what we do nowadays is we give them a
memory of we we um have them encounter
something that they can sense and then
sometime later you know for hours 24
hours whatever say do you still right is
that signature still there how long do
you remember and and can we look at that
signature and tell what have you what
have you interacted with so I think what
would be very cool is to have for
example uh different kinds of droplets
your end right and see if the xenobots
can can uh if we can read out something
from the xenobots that tell us which
which one they've seen so let's say
there's I don't know three different
types of droplets or maybe active and
inactive or maybe ones that are bearing
some kind of synthetic biology payload
and ones that are not
and have them interact with each other
and then can the because because we're
also very interested in having these um
synthetic constructs be like the front
end of a sensor system so right so that
they're like you know in a in a they're
like the retina for for the brain right
they do some pre-processing and then
they a maybe it's AI or maybe it's
something else behind them but it's the
biological system that's front that's
that's that's appropriately cor graining
measuring and then passing on some kind
of processed information to us so I
think that would be pretty cool to to
have to have that system confront your
um you know much more synthetic system
and see what they know about each other
it might even in the I mean you tell me
is there something we can read out from
the uh from the droplets where we can
say what they've seen you know right
yeah uh right now uh that's a bit far
away in my opinion with the droplet
system sorry with the um let's say with
a synet though with a synthetic system
as you know that people have built for
example these um biological circuits
that have memory right so there's some
yeah so that that has been shown that
could be useful to consider as a
possible way of for first sensing and
then storing some
information so that's possible now with
the really really simplistic systems
that I work with that's more of a
challenge it doesn't mean that doesn't
happen um and the kind of let's
say I don't know memory that I could
tell you that we've at least detected is
that we have if we have a an animated
droplet so it basically the what it's
doing at time t plus one depends on time
T so there's a bit of a memory let's say
which I think is stored in a sense in uh
in fluid dynamics of the system um and
the fluid dynamics because we've seen
droplets interacting with with each
other that that fluid Dynamic
information can be passed between
droplets um that is something very
different than what biological systems
do with some limited cases I mean there
are some yeah there are some limited
cases like I think the there's some nice
uh argument that the cyia on the surface
of the of of cells actually is is
coordinate has coordinated movement due
to the primarily due to the surface
Dynamics the fluid dynamics of these
things so it's not just it's not Gene
control or something like this yeah um
so so there is some yeah there's some
biology that seems to let's say uh uh
exploit these kinds of fluid dynamical
principles mean I think there's I think
there's way more than we give credit for
because you know the field of
morphological computation right I do
know it so so I I I think I think the
material is doing way more of the
processing than we typically think um
yeah yeah yeah and and that leads into
something else that I was going to
mention which is one one thing that that
I would be really interested to do with
with your system is okay you can bake in
certain computational circuits of course
and like the traditional sbio approach
of like designing something that does
some kind of computation but one thing
that we've been really focused on
recently is um using this poly Computing
framework that the Josh bongard and I
have been working on where what what
we're searching for is a perspective a
mapping from which the thing that the
system is already doing is a computation
in other words you don't modify the
system to do a computation you ask
yourself how clever can I get to see
what it's actually doing because it
might be a million different things and
so we've we've developed some some
incredibly minimal models both
computational and and uh and and
physical that do some really interesting
stuff that is nowhere in the algorithm
or the mechanism or anything else that
you've that you've faked in there are
there are these you not not just
emergent complexity or eer
um unpredictability but actually
emergent problem solving and I think it
would be cool to try to apply some of
those tools to the minimal uh uh
droplets that you already have to say
even without putting in any uh any
circuits here's what these things
already know how to do you know yeah I
believe there's yeah I believe there's
some digging to do there like you um I
agree with that um and so you have some
tools already we do you have
that what are you thinking of well uh
there's a couple of things we could do
if you have either videos or better yet
um centroid tracking data we have that
right and and and especially in
Singletons I remember you were doing
some group uh you know some collective
stuff which which I thought was super
interesting um we can apply we can apply
some of these methods and and we have
collaborat so there's a whole there's
basically a whole kind of uh group of of
people uh here that are applying
different kinds of they're all they're
all developing different metrics of um
how to capture how to capture and
quantify collective intelligence so you
know kind of like like IIT is kind of
the big you know the big one but but but
other other metrics of trying to say you
don't just have a pile of pieces here
what you have is some sort of emerging
hole that has goals competencies
memories whatever that the individual
don't have right so so what would that
look like and how can we develop
mathematical tools so there's a variety
some of the some of them are in Europe
some of them are here in the US there's
you probably half a dozen people and we
all kind of share share data to try to
uh try to uh quantify these things in in
all kinds of all kinds of systems I see
so you're basically have yeah a bunch of
different test systems different test
systems um you have a living and
artificial systems I guess and you're
just trying to then apply these kinds of
tools I see I see I mean that's so so
that's the kind of um lowest barrier
things to try first is just to analyze
data but but also and I'm sure you're
already doing some of this e
experimentally one of the things that
we've been doing is just taking systems
and taking a guess a hypothesis about
what it is that the system is trying to
do and obviously that's a very that's a
that's a very loaded word but but what
you then do is is once you've made that
hypothesis you put barriers between it
and whatever you think it's trying to do
and that might physical space it might
be in energetic like in metabolic space
it might be in in the case of cells we
do it in transcriptional space or or
physiological space so put a barrier and
then you watch what degree of Ingenuity
the thing has to get around your barrier
and and then and then and then we often
get a lot of surprises this these
systems you know they they often turn
out to be a lot smarter than than than
we think they will be and then and then
that enables you to kind of refine your
hypothesis about what what you what what
space it's working in what you was
trying to do and how smart it is to get
there so there's like so we can think
about you know um have you done have you
done things like uh I I remember mazes
right you've done you've done mazes yes
yeah yeah um so there's a variety of
other uh assays that that we can think
of where where right where we can
actually probe the degree of uh tonomy
in these
systems okay okay this is great I
actually have a really basic question
that's uh just it came back to me which
you discussing when you have your
xenobots for example and they're moving
across and you're just you analyzing how
they're moving because of your um
architecture that you've embedded into
these things do you have an idea if they
want to
move they do move but do do you have an
idea as from your perspective you know
top from the top down do they want to
move these xenobots well here's the yeah
that's that's a good question so so
there's two ways there's two ways to to
think about that one is
um what the things that they're doing
are are only visible to us because we
liberated them from the other cells in
the body the other cells in the body are
typically preventing them from doing the
things that that the things that they're
doing so in one sense you can say that I
mean we haven't engineered anything
really I mean there there's a type of
zenat that's very hand kind of
constructed but but typically we do very
little you right it's you know it's it's
what the cells want to do on their own
and you can say that because what we've
done is lifted a constraint we've
released the right typically the other
cells in the embryo uh induce these
cells to have this like boring
two-dimensional um existence being the
outer surface of an embryo where whereas
if you if you get them away from that
this is you know so so one way to say it
is this is what they wanted to do all
along it's just under normal
circumstances the other cells con strain
them from doing it so that's that's
that's one way of saying it another way
to address this is is uh we've been
we've been really working on uh the
notion of stress as a driver of um
behavior and multi and
multicellularity and we have stress
markers that we can use and we've been
studying uh and this so this is this is
all unpublished but but we've been
studying stress markers and zenbot and
one thing that you can imagine is to
answer your question and and we we
haven't done this yet but we will is is
you can imagine taking a zabot uh
physically constraining it so that it
can't move yes measuring the stress
marker comparing it with the Ken and
saying actually preventing it from doing
the certain Behavior just like with
motion constriction in in in you know in
rodents and so on when you prevent them
from doing the things they want to do
their stress goes up right the their
their agency they can they can detect
that they're not able to control you
know their their behavior and stress
goes up that's nice so so we could we
could do that uh you know and you can
imagine there's all kinds of caveats and
and um criticisms that that would come
from with that sort of experiment but
you know uh we we there's all kinds of
controls that you need to do and and
things like that but yeah that's another
that's another um another aspect of it
so I think that to the ex you know for
me the the kind of philosophical
framework that we've been working with
to the extent that anything wants to do
anything including us these things want
to do the things that they're doing uh
it that doesn't that doesn't mean they
have you know high order meta cognition
where they know what they want to or
anything like that but I think any any
reasonable model of how anything can
want to do anything would have to deal
with these minimal minimal systems yeah
I like the question and I like your I
like your approach about the stress
response that's nice um I'm uh I was
thinking about um a study by uh eami in
Tokyo where he was growing um neuronal
cells cell culture on top of a seos
platform which was part of a robot with
with
wheels so robot with wheels and uh
proximity sensors and put it into a big
arena and then they look to see what's
the movement of this robot it's not
program to do anything let's say and uh
and then in their analysis it would go
around and it would like you know there
are barriers the walls and it would go
know near the walls and then it would
turn and go away and their their
analysis of this was that the the cells
did not want to be
stimulated but I thought that was an
interesting uh how should I say
interesting perspective and I mean there
are there are criticisms one might say
and all these things that's fine but
it's interesting perspective to think
that neuronal cells and this in this
particular case the way it's set up it
appeared that they would avoid going to
the walls because they didn't want to be
stimulated yeah so that's why I was
wondering about your system if you had
some uh idea what what the system wanted
right I I yeah I mean this is this is
the most of this is unpublished and and
there's still a ton of things to do yet
but
I I I do feel like that is a a very
tractable question to to address systems
and and another thing that we're working
on is um instrumenti them so that they
have control over their environment so
that certain certain kinds of movement
and certain kinds of calcium patterns
will cause the you know stimuli or or
you know chemical electrical Optical
whatever and then we can let the system
speak for itself right so now you tell
me what you want if you know if you're
if you're behaving in a way that gets
you more like stimulation well then then
right what more can you ask for so right
these closed loop kind of so so like
we're building these kind of close loop
things um yeah I think you know one of
the um the reason I say is is that that
we should we we really like we haven't
focused on really engineering them much
uh in terms of Sy bio circuits or
anything like that because I feel like
the pool of things that they already
know how to do out of the box without us
doing anything is massive and we haven't
even begun to scratch the surface and
before I anything I W to uh you know I
want to see what they can naturally do
and and I'll give you an example of a
super stupid like um simple uh model
system for this that we developed
recently which is um P purely
computational you know um sorting
algorithms right like bubble sort uh you
know selection sort that kind of thing
right so the algorithm itself is about
six lines of code it's fully
deterministic completely transparent
there's no new biology to find there
there's no material physics it's just
like it's very simple you sort an array
of numbers and there's an algorithm and
it does that right so we made a we made
us a version of this that's um uh well
well first of all uh and and these
things have been studied for many
decades right you know every computer
science student studies these and we we
we all feel like we know what they do
because it's it's it's simple it's
transparent it's deterministic we you
know we feel like we know what to do
okay so first first thing we discovered
is that if you if you plot movement in
sorting space so sorting space is just
is just the question of how how sorted
are they and so initially you start off
down here because it's random but then
everybody gets to this one point at the
end where everything is sorted right all
these algorithms if you if you crank
through them enough they're guaranteed
to sort the string of numbers so so it
you know sort of goes goes up like that
so so one thing we did is we did
something crazy is we put a barrier in
its place what's a barrier a barrier is
a number that refuses to move so you
want to swap the five and the seven but
the five is broken it's it won't move
now the algorithm doesn't know this the
algorithm the standard algorithm does
not ask did the move succeed right it
assumes that your reli that your
Hardware is 100% reliable and when it's
say SW it it assumes it's swapped then
you go on your Merry way right there's
no there's no context checking there's
there's nothing we didn't put in
anything like that all that happens is
if you say Swap and the cell is and the
and the number is broken it doesn't swap
that's it and then you go on what
happens so what we what we found is
something remarkable what we found is uh
something that uh in in either animal
behavior or in autonomous vehicles you
would call delayed gratification what
that means is when it gets to a barrier
that it can't uh get past what it's able
to do is to get further away from its
goal go around and get to where you need
to go now right like two magnets across
a piece of wood aren't going to do that
right the magnet's too stupid to to
because in order to go around you have
to get further and all the magnet knows
how to do is the gradient right so it's
not that's right but but you need you
need minute it's a next level of
cognition to be able to say I'm going to
take a loss now in order to recoup gains
later on right I'm willing to steping
against M gradient well it turns out
this this this um uh these sorting
algorithms can do that it's not in the
algorithm there's nothing in the
algorithm that says right if you run
into trouble
backtrack nothing that this a completely
surprising emergent feature of this yep
amazing I'm surp I'm surprised by that
outcome I was shocked I was absolutely
shocked to see this and then what we did
was we we created a version of it where
each individual number had agency so it
doesn't it's it's not that you have a
top- down planner that's moving things
around but every single cell is
executing the algorithm on their own and
they just want every cell wants the
right neighbors so if I'm the five I
want a four to my left and a six to my
right and then I'm happy that's that's
it and so and then you use any of these
algorithms to and so so you know it
works and they sort themselves but what
we found is that not only do they sort
themselves which is what the algorithm
says they should do in between be before
they're done they do this other thing
called clustering which is again nowhere
in the algorithm it's a completely
mergent thing so if you ask what do they
want I would say that you know how um
people often say you know when when
people try to define the difference
between machines and living things they
said well machines only do what you tell
them to do living things do their own
thing what what looks like to me is that
even these incredibly minimal things
there's the thing you make them do which
is what they algorithm says and sure
enough they they eventually do sort the
numbers and but then there's these side
quests that are like things they do that
you never told them to do and they're
doing that kind of on their own and and
and we're not very good at guessing what
those can be but if we're uh creative we
can find them and those are the
spontaneous things that that this is
what like like the wanting at that low
level looks like you know um so I think
for all of these minimal physical
systems and our minimal biological
systems we should be looking for this
stuff we should be setting up assays to
say in addition to what we think you're
going to do based on what engineering
we've done what else are you actually
doing what are the other goals that we
never baked in you know that's right yep
yeah I think and you you have contacted
me about for example definitions of life
and things like this and uh you know um
of course we all we ruminate about these
things and I think one of the
interesting things that you're now
talking about is that we have this in
biology it seems like it makes sense to
have numbers like population sizes
because of these kinds of factors that
you're talking about it seems to me like
I was always fascinated that when you do
like um a chemotoxic experiment with
bacteria so you put the food on one side
and then the bacteria they they you know
as a population they migrate towards the
food but there are always some that
migrate the other
way and I think this is this is a
fundamental thing about biology um
that's very very important to understand
what biology is doing which is different
may be different than what um engineered
machines are doing but maybe when we
have engineered machines on mass which
is what we're getting now we start to
see this emergent behavior of the
machines doing the opposite thing or
going the other way or not following the
the trend let's say um and so and so
that that way the how should I say
probabilistic
um uh Dynamics become super important
for the evolution of these systems and
that's what you get when you start to
get larger and larger numbers I think
yeah yeah yeah yeah I think I think it
gets it gets scaled up of and and and
really um the emergence goes up you know
the migration funny thing about
migration have you seen um this was well
over 10 years ago the the the Sun and
Zhao paper where they they show that in
an electric field single cells migrate
towards one end but if you chop the cell
into pieces all the pieces migrate in
the other end so right so it's pretty
cool so so all your components want to
go this way but when you put them
together the collective wants to go
wants to go that way okay I'm making a
little note here I want to check this
out later I'll send you I'll send you a
link yeah uh and and I you know and I
think that's that's a kind of a profound
um principle of collective intelligence
right is that is the collective does
things that the parts don't want to do
that's the whole the whole point yeah
that's and that's part of the yeah
that's part of the point right right
right right
so you know I uh I teach this course in
um uh genetic engineering basically so
we go into all the details and I I I
really like to go into the into the
papers that detail where things go wrong
you know because that's where the
interesting stuff happen or things
things go wrong for sure but things that
go in a way that you don't expect um and
uh yeah was oh I just I just lost
the the thread of what I was going to
say about that damn
it I don't know what happened to that
thought it might come back to me excuse
me I mean one one thing that I always
think about with these with like
traditional sin bio is that a lot of the
synthetic biologists I know are very
frustrated with the medium because you
design this beautiful circuit it's
supposed to do the and then you put it
in the real cell and H you know the cell
either fights you or it turns off some
of the right some of the stuff or
there's there's there's something going
on that screws up your your your plan
right and what they really want is a
nice Blank Slate you want something that
doesn't do anything other than what you
you know what your circuits are are are
telling it to do yeah right and and you
know our approach uh especially on the
biomedical side is to go the exact the
opposite direction and to say I I want
the minimum I I don't want to tell you
much I want to take advantage of the
things you already know how to do and
try to sort of behavior shape you in in
that direction in fact um I have a new a
new postto in the group atusa parsa
who's uh she comes from Josh bongards
lab and and she was kind of she she was
the driver behind um the the the poly
Computing work on the vibrating
particles that they had and she she and
I are going to do a a contest in uh in
aife at the aife conference and it's
going to be a poly Computing contest in
the following way uh you sub you submit
a system of some sort a minimal system
and you win if none of the other uh
participants in the context can find
other things that it's doing besides
what you want it to do right you you you
win by by submitting that only does one
thing and of course the other people are
trying to say no actually we can see it
doing this other thing right yeah and I
suspect that I suspect that it's going
to be really hard to to to come up with
something that only does the thing that
you think it's doing my my gu is that
even even very minimal systems are doing
many things if if we're open-minded
about um that's right yep I believe so
yeah yeah and that was
um yeah that was a perspective that I I
lost track of before and I was going say
that
uh I'm wondering as
we understand better the kinds of
systems we're designing as let's say as
Engineers I don't know if you have
background in engineering I don't uh but
uh computer science originally but okay
uh so I'm wondering if we start as we're
engineering for example even these
algorithms that you're talking about
that have somehow found a way to to back
off from a goal and go around right um
so
I'm wondering if
um as we're making and then analyzing
our um artificial systems more whether
they're going to really just
spontaneously start behaving like what
we consider to be biological systems
because right now even I teach that
there's a dichotomy between these
artificial systems and natural systems
and they have these fundamentally
different properties in some ways and so
it's very difficult to engineer them
like you said engineer them to properly
behave like a machine
um and we have good examples where they
work and we have good examples where it
doesn't work um but I'm wondering that
maybe it's the other way around now that
as we understand our machines more right
that we start to see that these systems
are just behaving like a biological
system that there is a there's going to
be less of a separation between these
two two Realms um as we understand them
better with these kinds of tests that
you're talking about yeah yeah I 100%
that's that's what I've been aru arguing
strongly lately and um and a lot of
people really don't like it because on
the me you know the on the mechanism
side people really like this idea that
there are these machines and you know
and then and we can know we know exactly
what they do and on the organist's side
they like the idea that we have these
Majestic living things that cannot be
reduced to machines and whatever but I
right I I think that dichotomy is is
totally a dichotomy AC among our
formalisms not among the things
themselves and I think we've decided to
use these formalisms and we're very
stuck on when they are and aren't
applicable in ways that are not borne
out by the science anymore right right
and so I just in fact I just had um I'm
so I'm writing a piece on on on this on
living things and machines and whatnot I
had uh our graphic artist draw make a
make a make a you know an image that I'm
going to use you know mre's famous
painting this PE this thing is not a
pipe and it's a picture of a pipe yes
yes yes yes so so so so he made me I had
him draw a picture with a with a t
machine that says machine to touring
like this is not even not even the
touring machine is a touring machine
right like you can you can have this
formalism of a touring machine and it
has all these limitations of course it
does but the formalism has the
limitations that's not to say that the
the real thing is not captured by that
formalism and I I think it's really
funny that in the case of living things
a lot of people are willing to say look
the laws of chemistry do not capture
everything that's going on in this
incredible thing but suddenly when you
come to uh engineering they say oh no
the algorithm fully captures what this
thing is doing why would you say that
why why would you assume right that in
one case there's this there's this stack
on top of the chemistry that gives you
new new things but in this case you
somehow decide that your formalism is
capturing everything that that the
system is doing right so I completely
agree with you I think that uh there's
not that much difference BEC
specifically because these these things
that we love about living things I think
they show up super early as your as your
work show right it really doesn't that
much to start a lot of things show up
early a lot of early yeah yeah that's
right yeah so I'm I'm wondering then uh
uh how should I
say what does this mean for the for the
scientific method right well the
scientific method as far as let's say um
hypothesis driven scientific method um I
mean I I of course I like your approach
because I have a similar approach that
we basically have these systems and we
just we try to learn Le from them we
observe and we learn from them um and
eventually I think it's important to
course turn around and come up with some
hypotheses that we can then test in the
laboratory um so I'm wondering what that
means as far as the the scientific
method yeah um the scientific method is
the one I think that uh how should I say
capitalizes a lot on these formalisms by
necessity perhaps yeah I don't know what
is your what is your perspective as far
as as a scientist going forward what
what what is how is you how do you
juggle these things how do you feel
about these things yeah so so so here's
here's an argument that that I find
myself having with with people a lot um
I'll I'll show them like look here's a
simple model of a gene regulatory
Network for example and uh look it has
this it has this amazing property of
pavlovian conditioning uh where where do
you think that comes from and will say
well it's just a fact that holds just a
fact that holds it's it's one of the
like you know kind of like the stuff
that Stu Kaufman discovered in the 90s
right there just these properties of
networks it's just a fact that holds
about the the the world right and so now
we have fine now we have two choices we
have what is the more common choice and
I think it is actually a very
pessimistic Choice which is these this
there's a random grab bag of stuff that
holds and sometimes we encounter it and
then we're surprised we say emergence
fabulous right and and right so on that
view the scientific method has a lot of
problems because we don't have a
systematic way of finding these things
it's just going to crop up from time to
time and and look at that it holds or
what I think is is the more I can't
prove that it's right but it's the more
I think it's the more optimistic view is
to do what the mathematicians do the
mathematicians who who have tons of
stuff like this right the truths of
number Theory and the you know the facts
of of geometry and the uh and in
computer science all the things you know
why the nand gate is special and all
this stuff they they don't think this is
just a random grab bag of stuff that
holds they think they're exploring an
existing space so like Plato and
Pythagoras said right there's a there's
an ordered space with a metric and in
fact you can see it i' they make this
thing called the map of mathematics and
you look at the map of mathematics and
you see okay here's you know here's the
you know number Theory and here's the
topology and here's and and and it's not
arbitrary they they they are close to
each other which means that you can
systematically having found one thing
you can now systematically study the
space around it and use all these things
that you build and these things that we
build we can use them as U periscopes
into that space right that it's not just
a random collection of things that we
may or you know occasionally find we can
start systematically explore that these
things now yes right now specifically
right what what I really think is
important for us when we're interfacing
with Biology is biologists like two
kinds of um where does it come from
right sources they they like two they
like heredity and they like environment
right those are the two big the two big
things when you're dealing with things
like certain truths of mathematics or or
the facts around shapes or networks or
any of this emerging stuff is it
heredity no is it environment also
because because all the features of the
physical Universe could have been
different and I realize this is a
controversial stance not everybody takes
this but if you were to tweak all the
constants around the Big Bang it would
still be the case that the prime number
distribution is what it is and and right
and all of these things hold so so
there's a third thing it isn't just
heredity and environment captured by
physics there's a third thing which is
not captured by physics at all but it
sure um informs the physics it
constrains the physics and it it gives
Evolution this this incredible toolkit
of free lunches right like like like
this this is another example I've I've
used um imagine you have an evolutionary
system where the most fit thing is a
triangle a particular kind of triangle
so you do a bunch of generations and you
find the first angle and then you do a
bunch of generations and you find a
second angle well miraculously now
you're done you don't need to look for
the third right that's not philosophy
that's very practical Evolution just
saved 33% of its time because because
you get that for free where does it
didn't come from your genetics didn't
come from your environment it's it's a
it's a magical um thing you can exploit
and I think Evolution exploits the crap
out of this stuff and so believe right
so so what we can imagine then so so
this is how I see it I I see it that
there is a third Source these patterns
and I think they can be quite complex
and I mean there's a whole other thing
we can talk about because I think
they're I think some of them are
agential and I think some of them are um
kinds of Minds in Den sense they're not
just like triangles and things like that
um but but what I think um Evolution
produces our pointers into that space I
think what evolution is actually doing
is producing physical objects that serve
as uh as as as as as as a kind of
pointer into that space that lets these
patterns come come through um James I I
think called the or was it uh wasn't
James it was um Whitehead called them
ingressions they Ingress into the
physical world right you you the
physical thing we buil is a is a is a is
a portal through which uh these these
you know these patterns come come
through and what we can do then so so
then here is my long-winded answer to
the thing about the scientific method is
that I think our scientific method is to
map out the space that's that's that's
right makes sense we make these things
so we have embryo and the embryo shows
us a very reliable pattern but that's
not the only thing that the quer can do
and so the zenbot and the OT and the and
the and all of these different things
and and the things that you build are
allowing us little glimpses of of
corners of that space and that's and
that's the scientific method is to
systematically explore it not just to
sort of hang around until things emerge
and we're surprised by it that's right
that's right yeah yeah yeah yeah that
makes it useful and that's um yeah
that's very coonan isn't it yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah I see I see yeah so
there's still there's still a lot of
work there's still a lot of uh jobs to
be F to be filled in the scientific
method for sure I like I don't think
this is a mysterian position at all
because that's what a lot of people
think is that well as soon as you've POS
postulate this non-physical space well
now you're done you know now you're done
no I don't think that's true at all this
the point isn't to accept it as a
mystery the point is to use the the
physical pointers to explore it uh which
which I think we can and I and I think
we're going to get t surprises um and we
we should be making a map you know we
should be we should be making a map of
this thing like the mathematicians do
that's right yeah I really like this
idea yeah I see I see so it does it it's
it it does seem like it's a bit of a a
mismatch of uh science engineering and
religion
actually there is this almost a
religious component which is an
interesting one yeah yeah well well yeah
the you know a lot of a lot of
scientists will will claim that they're
physicalists in the sense that right
that the laws of physics exhaust
everything that there is to know about
the world but but but they all use these
truths of mathematics of logic of
computation and they're not those are
not derivable from any of the things
that physics deals with they right
there're I mean our perception of them
is model modulated by our nervous system
and all that but but but the but these
patterns themselves I mean another thing
is um uh some of these crazy uh I don't
know if you've ever seen these Halle
plots that uh that that can be drawn
from there it's a it's a kind of fractal
that is drawn from a a simple formula of
complex numbers the formula could be
like you know Z Cub plus 7even that's it
right like like like five characters or
so or so that's it the pattern that you
get when you plot the when you plot the
the pattern you get this incredible
thing it's very biological looking it's
crazy of detail and and and there's
stuff going on
where where is that pattern you you're
not going to find it in the physical
Universe there's nothing about the facts
of the physical Universe tell you what
that pattern is going to be right and
the if you try to think of it as
compression like I had this incredible
pattern I compress the to five are you
kidding like what what what what
compression method do we do we have that
will that will actually do that clearly
you're getting more out than you put in
there there you know there there is no
you know there's there's no way about it
so we can be you know we can we can we
can love physics and all of that but I
think it's very clear that that is not
the only source of information
in in our
world I just don't know how you get
around it I think I mean I think the
mathematicians have taken this seriously
for for a long time and I think we have
to now too it's not good you know people
will say uh well I like aam's Razer and
I like to uh simplifying this this
platonic space is too you know too too
crazy I'm just going to say it's
emerging well what does that mean that
just means you're committing to being
surprised every time that means it's a
my that like that's the Mysterion
position to me is to say that um we're
just gonna you know it'll these these
things will just randomly pop up and I
don't believe that there's a that
there's a structured space behind it um
can't can't disprove that but it's it's
that that seems to me like giving up on
the on the whole project of science
which is you assume that there's order
behind it yeah I yeah I can't I can't
really understand that you know that
argument um there are many examples of
emergence in physical systems that have
been very well characterized right I
mean from from say one side of the face
space to the next and we have a good
understanding of why that
is
um is it true
that I'm trying to just think in real
time here is it true that we have
um we basically do we always have
emergence due to large
numbers it must be the case right well
uh I'm not sure no I don't think that's
true I don't think that's true because
well first and I'm not an expert in this
but uh but I think not either I think
there are quantum events that only take
a couple of particles and you already
you know like like hydrogen bonds and
things like this you you really only
have I mean I don't know if there are
particle that's a whole other thing
right some people are going to say there
are no particles it's whatever is
underneath them and then small numbers
of what right so it's kind of but I I
don't think it always takes large
numbers of things um okay okay I yeah I
really don't I don't
but but but then again we you know we
don't understand these pointers very
well into that space yet and so I do
think that having a large number of
things is a particularly good way to
yeah poke into that space right that
seems when whenever you do that
something interesting comes through so I
think that's a good way of doing it but
I don't think it's the exclusive way of
doing it I see so so skate scaling is a
tool that we can use of in our
experiment which we do use um that's
because it's useful
um okay but it doesn't necessarily have
to go that way I have to think I have to
think a bit more about that actually
yeah qu Quantum stuff is something that
eludes me I don't have a good grasp of
quantum level stuff right yeah but it is
a classic I mean just from what I read
it is a classic Model of of of of of
emergence when when you can have like
you know simple hydrogen bonds and all
the weird you know better than me all
the weird stuff about the water molecule
and sure that's just like super strange
and and so on it's super strange yeah
it's really interesting yeah that's a
good that's a good example of emergence
too by the way I like to to bring that
up for students yeah they can think
about that yeah cool all right cool um
okay so so why don't we um yeah I I
think it would be really good to uh uh
apply some of our methods to the
tracking data so why don't we chat um
online then uh about um getting hold of
some yeah either videos I mean either
video or or coordinate coordinate pairs
y yeah I have a currently have a student
over in the physics department who's
doing the majority of the work for me um
and uh which brings me to another top
I'll say in a moment so um when I get
back to trento I'm going to have a
meeting with him to see where he is and
then see what where we want to go with
this um that would be great thank you
Mike um the second the thing I did want
to to say sometimes I come it's very
rare but sometimes I come across a stud
student who's interested in the kinds of
things we're talking about is it
possible that I would then recommend
them to contact you or send them your
way if I have a good student that is
good student who's interested in these
topics would you be receptive to hearing
from them uh of course of course
absolutely yeah yeah absolutely I get I
get I get emails from a lot of people
and so if it's somebody that's vetted by
you then that's even better so yeah
absolutely yeah I yeah I do in office
hours when you know Zoom office hours
when people come on to talk about stuff
and uh yeah I'd be happy to any anybody
that you think is good I'd be happy to
talk to them
yeah okay because I have a I have a good
guy in the shoot here and he's young and
I I keep telling them you can't stay
with me forever you got to get out and
uh so so I'm gonna discuss that yeah
have them contact me yeah absolutely
okay that's cool Mike thank you okay so
um yeah I I see we're in yeah in the
next few weeks I'll get in touch with
you and see and see what we can do
that'd be that'd be super nice and thank
you for um let's say being open to this
kind of collaboration I appreciate it
totally totally yeah that' be great cool
man okay
