do we see reality as it is if you I open
my eyes and I have an experience that I
describe as a red tomato a meter away
most of us believe and most Vision
scientists believe that in fact there is
a red tomato a meter
away so that in the normal case our
perceptions are
vertical and it's also um but if we
close our eyes and and you have you know
an experience that you describe as a
gray field we still most of us believe
that in fact there's still a red tomato
a meter
away and it's standard in vision science
to point out that about a third of the
brain's cortex is engaged in Vision so
that when you open your eyes and just
look around this Fe the world here in
this room um billions of neurons
trillions of synapses spring into action
and their their activi is highly
correlated with the vertical perceptions
of a 3D world that that we experience
the idea is that we have all this cortex
because we have to do some kind of
construction process along the lines
that that Zig was talking about it's not
trivial to get to a 3D World vertically
so you have to do tremendous amount of
construction to get there um and so the
idea is that we we construct what we see
and in fact um it takes a lot of
Hardware in the brain to do that for us
and just an example fun little example
of this the um we construct all the
colors and shapes we see this is a flat
screen you see a 3D hat so you're
constructing a 3D that's not there and
you see a yellow rectangle there and a
brown one there but in fact they're the
same so you're constructing different
colors um as well in real time and we
know that this color construction is
correlated with Area Activity and area
V4 and V4 Alpha and so we have all these
tight correlations between brain
activity and the kinds of constructions
that are going
on now there's interesting example you
see probably some blue bars with sharp
edges going across the screen there are
no blue bars there are no sharp edges
and there's actually no Motion in this
at all all I'm doing is changing the
colors of black dots to Blue and some
blue dots to black but I do it in such a
way I do if I do it quickly enough then
your visual system kicks into gear and
it constructs a world of bars with edges
fills in the blue color that's not there
between the edges of the bar and then
sets the bar in motion so it's highly
constructive activity that we're engaged
in um but the standard view as as Z
pointed out is not just that we
construct but that our Perceptions in
the normal case are in fact a
reconstruction of the true properties of
pre-existing objects that really exist
in a real space and time so most Vision
scientists believe in local realism and
non-contextual
realism that's that's part of what we
what we believe believe in and I
published papers along that line
myself so we reconstruct reality is the
idea not just construct reality notice
this is a stronger claim than just
saying that we construct what we
perceive this is a much stronger claim
than that it's saying that not only do
we construct what we perceive but that
in fact our constructions are
reconstructions of the true properties
of a pre-existing reality so this is a
very it's a stronger claim than just
saying we construct what we perceive I'm
going to propose the weaker claim
instead of the stronger claim my my
adviser David Maher made very clear this
idea he said we very definitely do
compute explicit properties of the real
visible surfaces out there and one
interesting aspect of the evolution of
visual systems is the gradual movement
toward the difficult task of
representing progressively more
objective aspects of the world so his
idea is there's an evolutionary process
that's involved more advanced creatures
have have evolved to do this hard
problem of re recovering the true
objective properties of objects like
their
surfaces so I believe that who was my
advisor so why why would human Vision
reconstruct reality the standard view um
in in the field is an evolutionary view
the argument is
evolutionary um this is from the
standard textbooks that we use in our
department here for Graduate Studies and
vision science um evolutionarily
speaking the student is told in the Inu
production vision is useful precisely
because it's so
accurate uh so so the idea is that
accurate
perceptions um were favored by natural
selection because they're actually more
fit uh and the argument is actually
seems quite compelling those of our
ancestors who saw more truly had a
competitive advantage over those who saw
less truly and were thus more likely to
pass on their genes which coded for the
true perceptions and so after thousands
of generations we can be quite confident
We're The Offspring of those who saw
more truly and so in the normal case we
see reality as it is we recover
reality um but there's a clean
mathematical question here is it in fact
the case that natural selection favors
true perceptions vertical perceptions
it's a clean technical question we don't
have to wave our hands and the argument
I just gave you was a handwave it sounds
really compelling but it is just a
handwave and so you can use evolutionary
Game Theory evolutionary graph Theory
genetic algorithms and so forth to try
to answer this question um in in Game
Theory you have lots of different
strategies XI with different fitnesses F
yeah F and you can look at how they
compete and how who who survives and
doesn't or you can look at species and
and their their
fitnesses and so the key notion is
Fitness most people here know it I'm
just going to mention the key notion
because it's what I'm going to really
push
on what are the fitness payoffs offer
offered by a stake to various organisms
well if you're a lion and you're hungry
and you're looking to eat that's going
to give you lots of Fitness
payoffs but if you're a lion and you're
full and you want to
mate that gives you no Fitness payoffs
at all and if you're a rabbit in any
state and for any action that is not
going to give you any Fitness payoffs
and the key notion of Fitness in
evolution at the top level is Fitness
functions
do depend on an objective reality
whatever that objective reality might be
I'm using the Stak as a concrete for
example but it also depends not just on
objective reality but on the
organism lion versus rabbit its state
hungry versus sated and its action
feeding you know the for FS for example
any of the famous for FS so Fitness
functions are these complicated
functions they depend in part on
objective reality but they depend in
many parts not on objective reality um
and they can be all over the place so
for example suppose that there's a
resource in the world um that behaves
much like say water does for us uh small
small amounts of the resource if it's
too small you die of
thirst too much of that resource like
water you die of drowning and somewhere
in between it's just right you have the
Goldilocks effect and and many resources
in the real world affect us in terms of
their Fitness payoffs in this kind of
way this non-monotonic kind of kind of
way and so you can think about two
different kinds of perceptual strategies
and I'm saying this just to give you an
intuition about a thorm I'm about to
present you can have a truth strategy
for perception or a fitness only
strategy for perception so suppose that
you're an organism that has only four
colors for your perceptual system in
this simple case red yellow green and
blue and suppose that you're going to
devote your perceptual resources uh as
best as possible to give you the most
accurate information about objective
reality as you possibly can okay well
the objective reality in this case is
the amount of the resource from say Z to
100 okay so if you're going to deploy
your sensory information your sensory
system in the most efficient way to code
reality you'll use the top scheme um
that way if you have a sensory
experience that you describe as red you
know that uh the resource quantities sa
between 0 and 25 and so forth so that
gives you a best way to estimate the
true state of reality from that on the
other hand if you're interested in
Fitness you're going and you want your
sensory information to be deployed to
represent Fitness for you you're going
to do something very very different with
those colors you'll use say blue just
for this middle area of high Fitness and
you'll use for example red for um things
that are saved between zero and 12 and
A2 but also 87 and half and 100 and so
if I if I see something that's red um
I'm getting really important information
about Fitness I'm getting no information
about the truth and that's going to be
the the big story here is that there is
this trade-off because Fitness functions
are not nice mon onic F functions of
reality and in general for any structure
in reality that you might think of
groups Rings Fields whatever it might be
they are not homomorph homomorphisms of
those structures in reality you have as
an organism a tradeoff you can either be
tuned to the truth or you can be tuned
to Fitness but those two will in general
be opposite directions of tuning and the
key idea is going to be that in
evolution if you play any other game
than going for Fitness points you die
and so the idea is going to be that if
you play for this game of verticality
you will die and evolution will drive
that to Extinction so that's the I idea
of the theorem we actually ran
evolutionary game simulations with my
graduate students Justin Mark and Brian
Marian hundreds of thousands of Worlds
where we had organisms competing for
resources and they had these Fitness
only strategies versus Truth where you
could actually use Bas estimation to
estimate the truth and then and so so
forth and organisms that saw reality as
it is had a pathetic tendency to go
extinct all the time the organisms that
saw none of the truth and were just
tuned to Fitness were the winners even
many times when uh they had fewer
perceptual resources given to them then
the organisms saw the truth but this is
just simulation it's not a theorem so I
worked with Jon I proposed a theorem and
chayon prash who's longtime collaborator
of mine approved it and and it's it's
what we call the fitness beats truth
theorem um over all po possible Fitness
functions and aprior measures on the
state of the
world the probability that a fitness
only strategy strictly dominates the TR
strategy is at least cardinality of x -
3 divid cardinality of x - one where X
is the size of the perceptual space so
in the case for example we had four when
I had red green yellow and blue that was
the size of the space
as this size increases the probability
becomes ARB arbitrarily close to one in
the limit Fitness only will generically
strictly dominate the truth so what so
this this means that
um natural
selection is uniformly against veritical
perceptions If an organism ever happened
to appear with mutation that allowed it
to see reality as it is natural
selection would swiftly go about
stamping it out so perception of reality
goes extinct and so the idea is so what
kind of perceptions do we have and the
idea is that think about our perceptions
is more like a user
interface so uh space and time is your
desktop and physical objects are like
icons on the desktop so if I have a if
I'm writing an email and the icon for
that email is blue rectangular and then
the lower right corner of the screen
does that mean that the email itself in
my computer is blue and rectangular in
the lower right corner of the computer
of course
not the icons and the the information on
the desktop is not intended to resemble
in this example the objective reality
I'm taking to be the diodes resistors
the megabytes of software in this in
this example in fact the point of the
interface is to hide objective reality
because it's not what you need and it's
too complicated it gives you eye candy
like blue icons that lets you do what
you need to do and control objective
reality while you're utterly
ignorant about that objective reality
even if you're utterly ignorant about it
that's what a desktop interface is for
uh and that's what I claim evolution is
done for SpaceTime is our desktop
physical objects are the eye candy that
we use to tell us what we need to know
about Fitness so we can act the way we
need to behave none of it's true it's
there in fact to hi the truth because we
don't need the truth and truth is just
both too complicated and irrelevant
so the idea then is that when you if I
open my eyes and I have a experience
that I describe as a red tomato I am
interacting with an objetive reality I'm
not denying that there's an objetive
reality but it's utterly unlike anything
I'm perceiving so I've got digital rain
there just to indicate that same thing
if I have an experience that I describe
as a lion I'm interacting with something
but it's not a lion it's an utterly
different object objective reality and
for the Mind Body problem this has
interesting implications when I look
inside brains it heads and see brains
and see neurons I'm interacting with an
objective reality but it's not brains
and neurons and so brains and neurons
actually don't exist when they're not
perceived they're just symbols that we
construct on the Fly and that's why we
had a hard time with the Mind Body
problem we've assumed that neurons have
causal powers that they exist when
they're not perceived and according to
this it's false if our senses evolve by
natural selection so what about Symmetry
and I've only got argued From Evolution
what about symmetry does the Symmetry
argument somehow overcome this well so I
went back to Jon again on this one um
seemed to me that you can invent
Symmetry and Jon agreed so here's so
suppose you have an observer and the
Observer has it his own experiences and
his own actions that he can take and
then there's some external world I don't
know what it is but I'm no longer
assuming it's space and time but it's
some external world and so there's the
world the experiences the the group G of
actions that the guy's got
and then I have these kernels say
markovian kernels by which I can
act the idea is um I can act on this
unknown world through a kernel a the
world in then will in in turn act on me
through some kernel p as long as the
kernel
AP has X as a g-space so the G is a
space that's being acted on by whatever
symmetry group I've got down here in G
it doesn't have to actually act on W in
that way in fact W doesn't have to enjoy
any symmetries at all so it's so this
this is just the top idea of the theorem
I can act on a world through a colel a
of actions the world acts on me and P as
long as AP acts on my experiences in the
right way I will perceive symmetries in
my experiences and that does not entail
anything about symmetries actually being
part of the objective World it just I
just have to have that the relationship
of why P kernel to W is satisfy certain
fiber relations so it turns out it's
actually straightforward to prove a
paragraph the proof is Trivial it's the
invention of symmetry theorem again
chayon Pros proved it um like anybody
who wants this I can give you the
paper's already been published on this
one but I gave you the idea of the proof
so what it what it means is that the
symmetries in our
perceptions do not give us any logical
grounds
to infer anything at all about
symmetries in the objective world the
only valid inference is the symmetries
of our perceptions put a lower bound on
the cardinality of the set of states
that the objective world has to have the
the objective World test have as many
states as our perceptual States at least
but there's no valid inference from any
symmetries in our perceptions at all to
symmetries in the world in fact any
structure in the world this is not just
invention of groups it's any structure
it's completely so I show you a bunch of
here's just a concrete case I show you a
bunch of dots moving around you see a 2d
random thing but if I move them like
this you invent a
symmetry you see a three-dimensional
shape with a circular Symmetry and
there's no such thing you invent it and
I'm claiming all of your symmetries in
perception are of this type we invent
all the symmetries that we perceive and
of course the question is why why do we
invent
symmetries and I think that we have to
be
thoroughgoing evolutionists on this
there's only one game in town Fitness
anything else is irrelevant so
everything about the sensory system is a
satisficing solution to the problem of
getting us the information we need about
Fitness to stay alive and nothing
else so I think that space can be viewed
perhaps as an error correcting code for
information about Fitness so we think of
space as a pre-existing stage all of my
colleagues do as a pre-existing stage
stage in which the You Know Drama of
Life plays out I'm saying it's no such
thing it's a species specific data
format that's it it's a data format that
we use to represent information about
Fitness it's like an error correcting
code uh there's redundancy in space it's
not a true objective reality independent
of us it's literally we're living in the
day format that we use to have
information about
Fitness and so um we then use our
perceptual system really instead of
recovering true properties of the world
think of it as an error
correction error detection mechanism for
information about Fitness we're building
symbols about Fitness so here's a couple
here's an example I have these two guys
like this if I rotate them all of a
sudden you decide that there um there's
an error that you need to correct and
you insert a glowing
line so instead of saying that we're
recovering a true line there is no true
line think of it this way it's an error
correcting code for information about
Fitness you're trying to construct codes
that will allow you to do what you need
to do to stay alive Fitness information
only so these are error Corrections
they're not recovery of
anything same thing here here's the case
where you do it in 2D and and of course
you can do it also in 3D but now the 3D
thing you you're creating here is also
completely a fabrication why are we
fabricating it we're getting again codes
for Fitness not for truth but for
Fitness information and if that's the
case then you might find that space
itself has unexpected property if if
it's not a pre-existing
three-dimensional
reality it it's just a data format then
maybe there are certain things that will
that it will do that it surprises for
example here's one surprise if I ask you
how much information could you store in
the volume of that volleyball you say I
can stick a terabyte hard drive in there
maybe two terabytes and but then there's
the question how how if you keep
compacting those drives you get to the
ultimate what's the ultimate amount of
information you could store in that
volume of space and the physicist in
fact stepen Hawking answered the
question it doesn't depend on the volume
in fact volumes don't hold information
depends only on the surface area that
bounds the volume the amount of
information that you can store in a
volume is independent of the volume and
what that means this is called the
holographic principle in in physics and
that means the following suppose you're
a computer designer you're going to
build a memory and I say well uh you can
have this big sphere here and and you
can use that or I'll let you have these
six smaller spheres that just pack
inside of it which would you use if
you're trying to build the the computer
memory with the most memory we might
think well it's the big sphere and you'd
be wrong the universe doesn't work that
way space does not work the way you
think it all it you would actually do
better you get 3% more memory if you use
the six smaller spheres now do that
recursively take each of those six
smaller spheres and pack it with six and
do that 20 or 30 times now you've got a
structure that has essentially no volume
and millions of times more memory
capacity that's what space is like
that's really confounding if space is an
objective 3D World that exists whether
or not we perceive it it's not
confounding if space is simply a data
structure with interesting properties
that we have employed to get us
information about
Fitness so Gerard D who was one of the
first to propose to discover this he won
the Nobel Prize to discover this he said
the fact that the total volume inside is
irrelevant may be seen as a blessing
since it implies that we don't have to
worry about the metric inside the inside
metric could be so much curved that an
entire universe could be squeezed inside
our closed surface regardless of how
small it is now we see that this
possibility will not add to the number
of allowed States at
all then he says we suspect that there
simply are not more degrees of freedom
to talk about than the ones we can draw
on the surface so the idea of space that
we have in vision science is completely
confounded by these kinds of results of
the holographic principle in
physics and in fact many physicists are
already saying um including Nema arani
Hamed um David Gross Ed Whitten they're
all saying the same thing that SpaceTime
is doomed it's not a fundamental reality
it's not a fundamental Concept in
physics itself we have to let go of it
partly because trying to get general
relativity and the standard model of
quantum physics to play well together
you have to let go of SpaceTime it will
not work and so Nima arani Hamed said
this in lecture SpaceTime is doomed
there's no such thing as SpaceTime
fundamentally in the actual underlying
description of the laws of physics
that's very startling because what
physics is supposed to be about is
describing things as they happen in
space and time so if there is no space
and time it's not clear what physics is
about and that's where physics is right
now um it's SpaceTime is not a
fundamental reality and and the
symmetries that we perceive in SpaceTime
are not giving us any indication of the
nature of objective reality from an
evolutionary point of view they're just
simply a user a species specific
interface for information about
Fitness but there are
other intellectual disciplines that have
already been telling us cybernetics had
already been telling us this a long time
ago the black box theorem from Moore if
I have a black box and I can only see
certain degrees of freedom on the
surface dials and knobs on the surface
and I ask well what's going on inside
the Box um it doesn't matter how many
symmetries and how much structure I see
in the surface morum says um there is no
way for you to to ever infer what the
program states of the Box are it's
impossible that's in other words it has
the it is the failure of the invention
of symmetry you know idea that that Cher
and I proved but well before we did that
you can't look at the the dials on a box
our sensory system our perceptions and
ever expect to get the structure of the
world that's just from cybernetics
blackbox Theory and then in Markov
blankets when you have you know Markov
Bas nets for example you have this
notion of a Markov blanket so the Markov
blanket of a node is um all of its
parents all of its kids and then all the
other parents of its kids and it turns
out um when you take when you look at
the entire Bay Network and you divide it
into um the node on this side the mark
of blanket and the rest of the
environment the mark of blanket makes
the the node conditionally independent
from the entire rest of the environment
completely what that means is if this is
my sensory system and this is the node
um what what I can see here my
perceptions give me no ability at all to
make any inferences about the structure
of the environment end the story so so
we have it from blackbox theorem we have
it from Markov blanket stuff we have the
invention of symmetry theorem and we
have the fitness spe truth theorem and
then we have what I would call the
generalized holographic
principle that inter system boundaries
are information
channels and there are no other
information channels between systems um
and more more specifically I just go
down to here
um no more classical information can be
transferred between two jointly closed
physical systems A and B than can be
encoded by the igen values of their
interaction hamiltonian haab this is a
general I claim a General principle
so what this means is all you can read
is the interaction hamiltonian that's
all the information you can ever get and
that never allows you to infer anything
about the structure the mariology of
what's on the other side of the system
it's just it's just not
possible
so so as Zig just talked about many
people in our field believe that um
verticality is an essential
characteristic of perception and
cognition that it's absolutely essential
that perception and cognition without
verticality would be like physics
without the conservation
laws but verticality violates Moors law
in for blackbox
Theory um the fitness beats truth theem
it violates the invention of symmetry
theorem the notion of conditional
Independence that comes out of marov
blankets the holography principle in in
physics and then the generalized
holography principle it's violated by
all of these
things I think we have to take a complet
evolutionary view there an organism has
tons of Fitness functions it's trying to
deal with can't deal with them all it's
got finite memory finite computational
abilities and so it has to have a
satisfying solution to the problem of
understanding Fitness so it uses data
compression where you will data
compression error correction that's
where symmetry comes out if you look at
the theory of data compress compression
error correcting codes symmetry is
everywhere and I think that's exactly
where symmetry comes into our
perceptions
um Mis misreading Fitness makes you less
fit if you have errors about Fitness and
so there will be error correcting codes
and again you'll get symmetry there um
and then physical objects and like
tables and chairs in the moon are not
pre-existing objects that we recovering
their true properties their symbols that
we
invent to give us codes about Fitness
information that we need and actionable
ways of getting that Fitness and they're
telling us nothing about the truth it's
just like the blue icon on your screen
it tells you what you need to do to open
your email and edit it and so forth but
the colors and the shapes and so forth
are are just conventions they're not the
truth
so and so shapes in you know physical
objects in space SpaceTime itself are
satisficing solutions to the problem of
getting the fitness information we need
to be a little bit better off than our
neighbors and my final slide I I like
this quote from Arthur Edington I was
held back by the common feeling which I
now see was not philosophically well
grounded that it was necessary to leave
at one at least one objective Peg on
which to hang all the subjective
cloaks certainly an objective Peg is
necessary but we do not need to suppose
that it's disguised itself to resemble
the cloaks and I agree with them
