what we call the physical world is
nothing but a headset inside
Consciousness so to to just see how
dramatic the change is most of us myself
included have think of ourselves as tiny
little objects in a vast SpaceTime
billions of light years across you know
the the nearest galaxy is 2.4 million
light years away and that's the nearest
galaxy and and they they go off so I'm
just this little tiny tiny trivial
little chunk of matter in this vast
billions of light years across Universe
SpaceTime that's that's the way I
thought and and now what I'm realizing
is it's the other way around SpaceTime
is a tiny little data structure in my
Consciousness and I create it on the fly
as I need so that's how outrageous what
I'm saying is to be very very explicit
and and maybe to shock people I'm a
cognitive neuroscientist but I'll say
this neurons do not exist when they're
not perceived because nothing nothing
inside SpaceTime exists when it's not
perceived SpaceTime itself does not
exist when it's not perceived it is only
a data structure that exists when you
created in your Consciousness that's
what the that that's the shocking and
that's what I've been having a difficult
time emotionally wrapping myself around
intellectually I'm there the math has
completely convinced me our best science
convince me this is true we'll see when
my emotions come along for the ride
Donald welcome to the show thank you
very much Neil thanks for having me what
would you say the central question
that's been driving your research the
past few decades has
been ah well I guess a couple little
intertwined themes one is do we see
reality as it is because I my background
is in visual perception and perception
more generally so that's a really
interesting question what is the
relationship between perception and
reality and the other in interacting
theme is um what is consciousness and
how is conscious experience related to
Everyday Life in the physical world um
and and Neuroscience so those have been
the the two big themes that I've been
pursuing and they they turn out that
they seem to be interacting uh the
answer to one seems to the answer to the
other you're uh you're pursuing a couple
of quite easy questions there I have to
say um what's underneath this uh this
search before we started recording you
mentioned you know you come from uh
quite a relig when you you grew up in
quite a religious background was what's
been underneath this this desire for for
truth and this
search yes I my father was for several
years a fundamentalist Christian
Minister um Holy Ghost you know Holy
Roller kind of kind of thing and so I
was exposed to that uh and but then in
in at school I was being exposed to
science classes and they were saying
contradictory things Church the Earth
was 4,000 years old in science class it
was millions or billions of years old
and and you know there that's not easy
to reconcile and so I realized that
there was this big conflict and as a
teenager you know it's hard to at least
for me it was hard to figure out how to
reconcile these two things but I decided
that I I needed to do that and I wanted
to
understand you know the nature of
Consciousness and the nature of human
beings what are we just machines that
that came to be the question that I
formulated for myself are we just
machines or is there something more the
spiritual Sid seem to say there was
something more the science seem to say
we're just Mach Mach and so I thought
that's if the science convinces me that
we're just machines then then maybe the
spiritual stuff is you know there's not
much to save there but if there's
something about us that's beyond
machines then that's then that's
interesting doesn't mean the spiritual
side that I was taught was right but it
means that there could be some parts of
it that could be saved uh and so that
was the question I was asking myself as
a teenager are we just machines and I I
was taking programming classes this is
back when programming was
fairly brand new I started programming
in
1974 uh and and so that was we had to
use we didn't even have Punch Cards we
had to use cards that we bubbled in by
hand with with pencils and and so forth
so but I wrote progress so so I was
aware of the of the programming and then
I worked at Hughes aircraft as an
undergraduate at UCLA I worked at Hughes
aircraft programming military
microprocessors in machine code uh again
starting off with Punch Cards but
eventually the miracle of floppy discs
came around so I was I was into the
computer and I realized that it was
artificial intelligence was what I
really needed to understand could we
build human AIS that were equivalent to
us that were that were us and and so I
found out about research going on at MIT
in the artificial intelligence lab and
with David Maher and and of course
Marvin Minsky was the head of the lab
and it was an incredible group there so
I was fortunate enough to go to MIT and
uh
1979 being the artificial intelligence
lab and and also the um was now the
brain and cognitive science department
so I was looking at the human side with
the neuroscience and the Machine side
with the artificial intelligence uh as
were many other people right that's what
MIT was doing and so I I was that was
how I began to try to you know tackle
this problem are we just machines and I
I you know intellectually you have to be
honest yeah you just have to say I don't
know and let's go wherever the science
um and logic lead us we you know what
one thing I could not do was something I
had been taught in the spiritual in my
particular spiritual training I'm not
saying this is true of all spiritual
training but in my particular spiritual
training was we were taught that we had
been told the absolute truth and you
should not listen to anything else and I
knew that that couldn't be right that
that that wasn't right so I needed to
take a more open mind and say sure I
need to listen to what the spiritual
side says but there's no absolute truths
here and and you know it's so so that
was the one thing where I clearly
departed from what I'd been taught and I
think it was absolutely critical to you
know you have to think for yourself um
and and go wherever um the evidence
reason and logic will take you and so so
I did that and did my PhD at MIT on a
specific problem uh you know you can't
just tackle the big big questions you
know you're not going to get your your
PhD because you won't get anything done
so so I tackled the question of how do
we see in in 3D and recognize objects I
tackled one aspect of that seeing in
three dimensions and and recognizing
objects which um is of course still an
interesting open problem you to get
self-driving cars that's what we need
are you know computers that can see
through cameras and and see in 3d and
recognize what they're doing so they
don't run over people and don't run into
parked cars on the road and so forth so
so so I was grappling with that problem
in my dissertation
but what I realized was
that doing that gave me a real deeper
understanding of the mathematics that
underlies perception right most of us
have no idea what's going on under the
hood when you just open your eyes and
look around you you know it looks like
well you just take a picture of what's
out there how hard how hard could it be
you know it's a camera takes a picture
what give me breaks there's nothing to
it well if that's all there was to it we
would have self-driving cars already
that could see and wouldn't we wouldn't
be having the slow roll out of of
autonomous vehicles that we're having
much much slower than people expected
it's really really hard and and then
when you realize that you know you have
billions of neurons and trillions of
synapses that are involved just in
Vision again it's you that's not just a
camera that's that's that's pretty
expensive piece of Hardware that's
that's working there so so that wakes
you up to what's going on that it's it's
not just a picture taking process it's a
const in some sense a construction
process you're getting an image at the
eye which you know your eye has maybe
130 million photo receptors so you can
think of it's like a 130 million
megapixel you 130 megapixel
camera and but if you look at the output
of the camera is just a bunch of numbers
you don't see you know a person riding a
bicycle and and tables and chairs you
just see a bunch of numbers it's this
bright at this location it's this color
this location you've got to take all
those numbers and turn it into a a a
visual world that that you can actually
navigate so that's the real trick and so
I came to terms with how much is going
on there that is construction process
not just a mere photographic process and
then that raised the question oh if it's
a construction
process how accurate is the construction
is it a reconstruction of reality or is
it a denovo construction that maybe is
unrelated to objective reality and the
latter seemed unlikely to me but you
know I just needed to prove it and I
just needed to understand okay so of
course the idea was we reconstruct
reality that was what I was taught
that's what we believed at MIT that you
it's a it's a construction process but
it's a reconstruction of reality but
then as I started you know thinking
about Evolution and other things I began
to wonder about that it's
like you know Evolution does things on
the cheap fast and cheap you know you're
you're trying to save calories and save
time so you're going to use heris STS
and shortcuts you're going to
cheat um and so maybe the idea then was
well maybe we cheat sometimes but most
of the time on the import stuff were
reconstructing
reality so I thought about that and I
went back and forth and I finally came
to the conclusion that it seemed
unlikely with what I knew about
perception research and from the AI
point of view that any of our
constructions were the truth but in 2008
I decided I need
to settle this with
Evolution I need to actually ask a
technical question what is the
probability that evolution natural
selection has shaped any sensory system
of any organism to ever see any aspect
of objective reality truly what's the
probability of that clean technical
question
and when Darwin formulated his
theory in the 19th century he didn't
formulate it as a mathematical Theory so
Darin couldn't have answered that
question with mathematical Precision but
John mayard Smith and others in in the
1970 took Darwin's ideas and used
Evolution Evolution what they came up
with was evolutionary Game Theory they
used Game Theory and evolution together
to create the field of evolutionary Game
Theory a very very powerful mathematical
Theory so Darwin's ideas are now
mathematically precise and so we can now
ask this the technical question what's
the probability that any sensory system
has been shaped to see the truth some
aspect of the truth at all and I I went
into it thinking
well probably there there'll be problems
because you know it getting the truth
takes a lot of time and a lot of
calories so we're probably going to be
doing things cheaply and quickly and so
we'll probably be you know approximating
the truth but not really getting the
truth that was sort of what I expected
going into and I got a couple wonderful
graduate students Brian Marian and
Justin Mark to to work with me and some
others I mean jayton pros and others
work with me Manish Singh so it's not
just me I was a bunch of group of people
with mathematics and we and we went at
it and what we
discovered when we actually did this the
mathematics and the simulations was sure
yeah you know there are selection
pressure to do things fast and
cheap and and that will compromise
reality you know but that wasn't the
real what we discovered was this the the
payoff functions when you in evolution
it's you think about it as like a game
and as you're playing the game you're
competing with others and and the point
of this game is to as reproductive
success right you're you're trying you
don't get to the next level of the game
yourself but your Offspring your genes
go to the next level of the game if you
succeed and and so
the the idea was that there are these
payoff functions that govern effectively
how many points you get in the game of
life and if you get more points than the
competition then you have a greater
probability of you know having Offspring
in the Next Generation so so it's the
payoff functions that are the critical
thing and if if you're going to be
shaped to see the
truth then the payoff functions must
have information about that truth if
they're going to shape you so that that
became the clean technical question
what's the probability that a fitness
payoff
function uh has information about
structures that could be in the world
like now it gets a little mathematical
like like total orders partial orders
metrics topologies measurable structures
there are all sorts of mathematical
structures that you could imagine that
the world has and in each Cas in case
you can ask the technical question
what's the probability that a randomly
chosen payoff function um would
actually um have be what we call
homomorphism or contain information
about that structure and the answer is
zero the probability is zero in case
after case you look at it the
probability is is zero and and in fact
um even for things that are sort of
close to homomorphisms in many cases the
probability is is Vanishing vanishingly
small so so that that was a shock to the
system we haven't been shaped to see the
truth
and that shock then has reverberations
for the problem of
Consciousness because what it means is
what we're perceiving when we perceive a
a spatial temporal world 3D of space one
dimension of time and we're seeing
physical objects in space and time and
so forth we're not seeing reality as it
is with probability one we're not seeing
reality as it is that's that's what that
that is if you buy Darwin's
theory
and that means that SpaceTime isn't
fundamental SpaceTime is just a form of
our perceptions and physical objects
inside SpaceTime aren't fundamental they
also are
just the way I think about it now is
it's like a virtual reality headset that
Evolution gave us to play the game of
life right if you're if you're trying to
play a game uh like VR Grand Theft Auto
or something like that with with your
friends what you're really doing in this
metaphor is you're toggling millions of
voltages in some supercomputer right but
if you had to do that if you had to
toggle the voltages in the precise
sequence you couldn't win the game you
would lose the game someone who just has
a a virtual reality headset with a you
know steering wheel and dashboard and
gas pedal and so forth is going to win
over someone who sees the truth and is
toggling voltages and so so I think what
evolution is teaching us
is what what we evolved was not an
insight into truth but a a VR headset
SpaceTime is our headset so instead of
Consciousness and its physical substrate
which is which most conscious you
researchers are thinking about is
consciousness and its physical substr TR
I think about it as Consciousness and
its physical headset and that's a
complete change because if if the brain
is the physical substrate of
Consciousness that means the brain is
fundamental something not conscious is
fundamental and Consciousness is arising
out of it but if we take evolution of
natural selection seriously then the
brain is merely an icon in our headset
it's not the truth and it has no causal
powers so so I'm a cognitive
neuroscientist I love Neuroscience I I
study neuroscience and I've done joint
work on fmri and EEG studies of the
brain and then lots of computational
modeling and so forth I'm very much into
the brain and I I love cognitive
neuroscience and I think it needs more
funding because it's far more
complicated than we thought we thought
when we look in brains we see neurons
and synapses and there's 86 billion
neurons and roughly the same number of
gal cells and trillions of synapses
that's complicated but it turns out
that's trivial compared
to what's beyond it that's just a a VR
headset to something deeper what we the
neurons are just the headset version of
a deeper reality that we as scientists
need to understand so we need more money
for Neuroscience not less because we're
just scratching the surface of what's
going on when we look inside brains so
so that changes the whole game for
Consciousness because is you know my
friends and colleagues and I'm I'm
friends with most of the people in in
this field or colleagues certainly who
are studying Consciousness most of them
assume that physical systems like brains
or AIS with the right either functional
or functional um Properties or causal
structure and so forth um that that
substrate with the right causal
structure or functional properties uh
somehow the unconscious system gives
rise to consciousness
you know like the unconscious U System
of neurons in the brain and there
whatever pattern of activity they have
whether it's a causal thing or a
functional thing that gives rise to
Consciousness and what I'm saying is our
best science you know evolution of
natural selection is telling us that
SpaceTime isn't fundamental and objects
inside SpaceTime are simply icons in a
VR headset that that we're somehow
creating so that whole approach now
which is the approach that I that I
first thought was the right approach
mean that's I went into the field
thinking we're going to find the the
neural basis of
Consciousness I now think that that's
it's not going to work now of course I
think we need to St study neuroscience
and we need to study the neural
corelates of Consciousness absolutely
I'm I'm all for that but the the the
direction of explanation is going to go
the other way instead of explaining
Consciousness in ter in terms of neurons
we're going to be having have to have a
theory of Consciousness itself that
explains why we see things that we call
neurons and gal cells when we look
inside what we call brains so it's going
to have to go the other the other way so
again I'm a small minority I you know I
would say 98 99% of my colleagues and
friends who are studying Consciousness
are physicalists functionalists or or
you're like in the case of IIT they
they're saying some kind of substrate um
some physical substrate with some kind
of causal structural organiz
ation um that that somehow then is
either gives rise to or is identical to
explanatorily identical to Consciousness
and I'm I'm saying there is no substrate
to Consciousness no physical substrate
to Consciousness what we call the
physical world is nothing but a headset
inside Consciousness so so to to just
see how dramatic the change is most of
us myself included have think of
ourselves um as tiny little objects in a
vast SpaceTime billions of light years
across this you know the the nearest
galaxy is 2.4 million light years away
and that's the nearest galaxy and and
they they go off you it's just like so
I'm just this little tiny tiny trivial
little chunk of matter in this vast
billions of light years
across Universe
SpaceTime that's that's the way I
thought and and now what I'm realizing
is is the other way
around
SpaceTime is a tiny little data
structure in my Consciousness and I
create it on the fly as I need so it's a
so so that's how outrageous what I'm
saying is it's it's it's not small now
sorry sorry I just want to quickly ask
there Donald how has that change in
perception changed how you felt in the
world because that's a massive flip on
understanding Who You Are
well it's it's caused a big conflict in
me
because we're all just born knowing that
we're little tiny objects in a big
SpaceTime that's the reality that we
just know we are it's it's it's there's
no question about it and in fact P talks
about object permanence little children
get he thought at 18 months they get
object permanence later research showed
it's more like three or four months we
we're born to believe that objects exist
whether or not they're perceived my
teddy bear when you put it behind a
pillow still exists and I believe that
it that that that you know there's
nothing that disappears uh in reality
when it disappears from my
sight and
so letting go of object permanence is
letting go of something I was wired to
believe at four months of age so so it's
it's it's not trivial me so what what I
find is really interesting to see in
myself when I'm thinking clearly about
it and I look at our best theories of
evolution and I'll mention physics in a
moment because I'm treading on their
territory clearly so I I'll talk about
what the physicists say but when I look
at what our best science is saying it
looks to me
like yeah SpaceTime is not fundamental
and therefore objects in SpaceTime do
not create my Consciousness it must be
the other way
around so but but when I am not thinking
my natural reaction is to go back and
and I'm just a little tiny 160 lb body
in SpaceTime and I'm you know and what I
see is the truth and and so forth so so
it's it's really so I I do meditate and
that's that's that's helping me to let
go of my prior assumptions but I must
say they they don't go quietly so when
people look at what I say and say that's
complete nonsense I say I completely
agree it it feels like nonsense to me
too emotionally it feels like complete
non sense what I'm saying but that's
what science is about science is taking
our best ideas making them absolutely
precise and then following wherever it
leads even if we don't like where it
leads and so that's that's what we have
to do and and just to emphasize what
we're essentially saying here is that if
you accept evolution and and Mathematics
as true if you accept those two things
as true then you also
have to accept or not have to accept but
it it's also true that the reality we
see is an illusion we're not actually
seeing what's there is that is that fair
to say yeah I would yes and I would just
make a slight thing I I don't need to
claim that evolution is true all I need
to do is say it's the best theory we
have so far okay right so if you if you
accept evolution then you have to accept
this as well evolution in in entails
this now I should say that um there is
an issue that's been raised by
philosophers that I should mention here
so a number of philosophers and I won't
mention them by name um I don't want to
impune anybody have published papers
where they they say that what I've just
argued is logically self-contradictory
and and the argument they they go they
give is this they say look Hoffman is
saying that
um he's used evolutionary Game Theory to
show that SpaceTime and its physical
objects um are not are not fundamental
that they're not you know what we see is
Just an Illusion as not fundamental
reality
now Darwin's
theory assumes that objects in SpaceTime
like organisms and resources are
fundamental that's what his theory
assumes so he's assuming that space time
and his physical objects are fundamental
now the argument the philosophers give
is this either the mathematics of
evolutionary Game Theory Faithfully
represents Darwin's ideas or it does
not now if it does not then Hoffman of
course wouldn't want to use it to try to
prove anything about what Darwin's
theory entails so and if evolutionary
Game Theory mathematics does Faithfully
represent Darwin's ideas then it
couldn't possibly contradict his
assumption that physical objects like
organisms and resources exist and are
real so either way Hoffman's shot
himself in the foot logically that what
they like to say is it's he's in an
unfortunate dialectical situation but
but basically he's so stupid he shot
himself in the foot um
logically so so and this is um more than
one philosopher has actually published
this this this argument so this is uh
and I think then other philosophers I've
talked with say yeah I I I buy that
argument so so here's why the argument
is
false it
misunderstands scientific theories what
is a scientific theory scientific theory
says please grant me these
assumptions and if you grant me these
assumptions then I can explain all this
other wonderful
stuff very very simple assumptions and
then
explanations what this means is there
cannot possibly be a scientific theory
of
everything because you don't explain
your assumptions you assume them you
don't explain them so now you can say
well I can give you a new deeper theory
that explains the assumptions of your
previous theory yes you can and your new
Theory will have its own new assumptions
and this goes on at infinitum so this is
horrible news for those who want a
theory of everything in science there is
no such thing it's great news for job
security for scientists it means that we
will never ever be done we will always
be building new theories and what this
means about any scientific theory is
that it has if it's a good theory it has
a certain scope of
explanation but it also means that it
will have definite
limits no scientific theory is a theory
of everything so it will have limits so
the a good theory gives you the
mathematical tools to explore its
scope a great Theory gives you the
mathematical tools to discover its
limits so Einstein's theory of SpaceTime
both special and general
relativity one of the key ideas that is
that uh you know the speed of light is
the same for all observers and and the
laws of physics are the same in all
reference
frames and and so Einstein is using his
assumption is that SpaceTime is
fundamental either flat SpaceTime or
curv SpaceTime SpaceTime is fundamental
and then he writes down all sorts of
interesting equations the Laurence
Transformations on the one in the flat
space and and you know the equations of
general relativity in the
curve now you might say okay
well is Einstein's theory just a good
theory or is it a great Theory does it
have the tools to actually show the
limits of the very concept of SpaceTime
itself it turns out to Einstein's dismay
it's a great Theory what we what we
discovered is
that Einstein's theory together with
just another thing Einstein came up with
you know energy is proportional to the
frequency of of a
particle entails that that space time
falls apart at 10us 33 cm and 10 Theus
43 seconds at the plank scale so
Einstein's own
mathematics is good it tells you the
scope incredible scope of his
mathematics of SpaceTime sorry Donald
can I just ask you to sort of confirm
what you mean by space time falls apart
at at that figure what does that
actually mean that that it falls apart
at that scale it means that SpaceTime
has no operational meaning there's no
experiment that you can do that would
have any outcome if you're trying to
measure things that's smaller than 10us
33 cm or 10- 43 seconds so so and the
problem is this as you go to smaller and
smaller scales of space how do you do
that well you have to get bigger and
bigger microscopes to look smaller and
smaller but what does that mean it means
that you're effectively using smaller
and smaller wavelengths of light or some
kind of radiation but let's talk about
light you have to get the the wavelength
smaller and smaller and smaller to
resolve smaller and smaller things in
SpaceTime and that's fine quantum
mechanics allows you to do that but but
Einstein told us that E equals H new as
you get the smaller smaller wavelengths
the energy is going up then Einstein
also told us the energy equals mass so
the mass is going up you're getting more
and more energy therefore more and more
mass inside a smaller and smaller region
of space and then general relativity
kicks in and gives you a black hole at
some point and so at that when you get
to 10us 33 CM the very thing you're
trying to say measure some tiny tiny
particle well by the time you get to 10
to- 33 cmers you destroy whatever you're
trying to measure you turn it into a
black hole and if you get frustrated and
say well I'm going to try to a smaller
wavelength and put more energy into it
the black hole just gets bigger and
bigger and bigger so so SpaceTime
there's literally no meaning that you
can give to 10us 36
cmers has no meaning there's nothing you
can do there it literally has no
operational meaning so Einstein's own
mathematics that Einstein himself wrote
down to model his intuitions about
SpaceTime come back and tell us the
limits of Einstein's very fundamental
concept of SpaceTime itself it says that
concept is fine as long as you're
dealing with stuff bigger than 10 Theus
33 cm at 10 Theus 33 cm and smaller
space time time falls apart is by the
way that's pretty shallow it's 10us 33
cm not 10us 33 trillion CM just 10us 33
cm so
SpaceTime it turns out in Einstein's
theory is a very very shallow data
structure very really shallow data
structure but this is how science works
you take your intuitions you turn them
into a mathematical theory if the theory
is a good theory it allows you to EXP
the scope of the theory like GPS comes
out of you know the technology GPS
depends on certain features of
Einstein's theory of general relativity
but if it's a great Theory then the
theory will actually give you the tools
to find the limits of that theory so so
now to come back to the the philosophers
arguments against me they're saying
again their argument is you know
Hoffman's using the mathematics of
evolutionary Game Theory to show that
the very fundamental concepts of Darwin
cannot fundamental in in they're they're
going to have to let go of those at some
point they're not fundamental to the
nature of reality and they're saying I'm
shooting myself from the foot You
couldn't possibly do that and what I'm
saying is no what you're missing is this
is the way science works the good
science takes mathematical theories and
and uses the mathematics to find the
limits of those theories so that we
don't get stuck in a rut with with one
Theory it allows us to go beyond
so so I'm not shooting myself in the
foot I'm just doing what science has to
do now what the old
Theory can't do is tell you what you
should do next Once you found the limit
once we know that SpaceTime isn't
fundamental and you say okay so well
what's outside of SpaceTime and what
could that even possibly mean to say
that there's something outside of
SpaceTime isn't everything inside
SpaceTime what is what what could you
possibly be meaning well SpaceTime
itself isn't going to tell you because
SpaceTime has its set of assumptions
namely that SpaceTime is fundamental
well what you're now questioning is that
you're saying SpaceTime isn't
fundamental so I've got to step outside
of Einstein's set of Concepts to get a
new set of Concepts um and the
Restriction then will be whatever new
Theory I come up with it has to give me
back Einstein's theory of SpaceTime as
some special
projection and by the way
uh physicists are already doing this
so the European research
Council in the last few months announced
a 10 million euro project called
Universe
plus and it's the goal of that is to
find the new mathematical framework
for for physics and the framework
they're saying Beyond SpaceTime and
Beyond quantum mechanics and the the
reason they're doing this is that
roughly 10 years ago 11 years ago
they discovered these structures called
POS they call positive geometries
entirely outside of SpaceTime entirely
Beyond quantum mechanics there are no
Hilbert spaces in these structures so
there's no quantum mechanics there's no
Hilbert spaces but they give rise
to the right answers to scattering
experiments like particles in the Large
Hadron Collider smashing into each other
you know gluons smashing in and gluons
spraying out and so so forth you get the
right answers the math becomes much
easier when you let go of
SpaceTime math not not not say it's easy
but much much easier than when you do it
in space time and you see new symmetries
so they've been discovering just in the
last decade physicists have been and I
should say high energy theoretical
physicists many physicists who aren't
high energy theoretical physicists don't
even know about this I mean I've talked
with many Quantum theorists for example
who simply don't know about this so it's
a a small Branch but it's the it's those
physicist physicists who are dealing
with
the edges of space 's abilities right
the high energy theoretical physicists
are the ones who are probing physics
where SpaceTime starts to fall apart and
so they're the ones that are moving out
to these new structures Beyond SpaceTime
called positive geometries and something
called decorative permutations so so
it's not just some cognitive scientist
saying we need to do this the ERC is
funding this to the tuna1 million 10
million euros they had in February their
first meeting with over a hundred
mathematician Ians and mathematical
physicists on board to launch this new
field of positive geometries outside of
SpaceTime so yes we can go outside of
SpaceTime it seems like ridiculous what
could you even be talking about i' I've
mentioned this to people and they have
no idea what I'm even talking what could
possibly be meant by something outside
of SpaceTime SpaceTime is everything
nope that's a
conceptual dead end thinking of
SpaceTime as everything is a conceptual
dead end we can in fact use mathematics
and go entirely outside of
SpaceTime and just to emphasize um what
we're talking about here in your last uh
conversation with us with annel Seth as
well you mentioned that what would have
taken pages and pages and pages of uh
mathematical equations using uh the
framework of quantum quantum physics or
SpaceTime you can get the same result or
a better result using a like maybe a few
Lin
of equations one page four four four or
five terms on on a page that you can
write down by hand and compute by hand
the other you couldn't even do it with
supercomputers this you can do by
hand that's pretty crazy so and the
implications in for Consciousness
are all almost all of my
colleagues are assuming that SpaceTime
is fundamental and that objects in space
time are fundamental they're looking for
a physical substrate
in SpaceTime that's prior to
Consciousness now it may be prior in the
sense that it has the right causal
structures as an integrated information
Theory or it might be prior in the sense
that it has the right functional
properties as most as most physicalist
theories are but in any case they're
they're what they're assuming either
integrated information Theory or you
know Global workspace Theory or higher
order theories or orchestrated collapse
of quantum states of neurom microtubules
like Penrose and Hammer
off these theories are all assuming that
SpaceTime and certain
physical substrates or objects inside
SpaceTime are fundamental and
Consciousness emerges
and that now is simply ignoring what
physics has revealed SpaceTime is not
fundamental and the substrates namely
the physical objects inside SpaceTime
are not fundamental
and ERC is and and hundreds of brilliant
high energy theoretical physicists are
now finding these new structures Beyond
SpaceTime the field of Consciousness
studies
is now lagging behind we are basing all
of our research on a outmoded model of
reality it's it's just it's
gone
so there's no hope of booting up
Consciousness from neural activity or or
from the causal structure of substrates
inside SpaceTime or the functional
properties of substrates inside
SpaceTime it's not
possible why because SpaceTime itself is
merely a trivial and shallow data
structure and the objects inside of it
for example what are particles when you
ask what is a physical particle like a
you know a quark by bosons leptons and
quarks the the elementary particles of
the standard model physicists will tell
you that they're just irreducible
representations of the group of
symmetries of space time
if you give me A
Spacetime its symmetries dictate the
properties of its particles what and
what the particles are so the particles
themselves when when space time is
doomed so are the particles because
they're they're just representations of
the symmetries of SpaceTime so we're
trying to boot up
Consciousness from the particles you
know complicated Assemblies of particles
that are just representations of a space
time that is itself a data structure not
the truth so the whole Enterprise of of
trying to build Consciousness from some
physical substrate either a causal
substrate or a functional substrate is
doomed and the physicists are the ones
who are telling us that and and I'm
saying also that evolution by natural
selection Darwin's theory agrees when
you use evolutionary Game Theory it
agrees so the the main pillars of modern
science you
know high energy theoretical physics
Quantum field Theory
together with Einstein's theory of
gravity and then Darwin's theory of
evolution with natural selection are
both are they our greatest theories
because in some sense they they have the
mathematics that tells us SpaceTime was
a wonderful framework for centuries and
it's over it's time to get a new and
deeper framework and For Better or For
Worse what I'm trying to do is get a
mathematical model of Consciousness qu
Consciousness outside of
SpaceTime and my goal is to show that so
it's like a a social network of
interacting consciousnesses so so the
mathematics is is Network Theory very
much it's all about networks the
mathematics of networks and stochastic
processes on networks that's that's the
the the work that we're doing and what
we're trying to do is show
mathematically that the positive
geometries and the decorated
permutations that the high energy
theoretical physicists have found
outside of SpaceTime actually are
projections of the network properties of
an even bigger dynamics of conscious
agents so the physicists are going from
SpaceTime outward and they're finding
when we when we take off the SpaceTime
headset what do we see we
see positive geometries well who ordered
that this it's little we take off our
headset and what do we see it's like in
2001 A Space Odyssey the the movie right
where there's an obelisk and all the
apes are hooting and hollering and
pounding on you know they know it's
important it's really pregnant with me
but they have no idea what it means well
that's where we are we've we've taken
off our headset we look outside of
SpaceTime what do we see obelisks these
geometric objects they static geometric
that's these positive geometries are
like the amplitud hedrin the associ
hedrin cosmologic poly like polytopes
and so forth these are like obelisks
outside of SpaceTime that and they're
sitting there you know sort of staring
at us silently and what do they mean the
the physicist you know there's no
Dynamics it's just these objects sitting
there who ordered that and then these
permutations the decorated permutations
that classify the objects so what we're
saying is Well we need a dynamical
system outside of all of this and how
about a network of conscious agents
interacting we've made the map we've
made the map into the um the decorated
permutations we're working on the
positive geometries a lot of this
revolves around your theory of conscious
agents as well what is a conscious agent
in like in really simple terms like why
would you describe that to someone
hearing that for the first time
that's right so so our proposal then is
that SpaceTime is
doomed so SpaceTime can't boot up
Consciousness why don't we start with
Consciousness being fundamental let's
have a theory where Consciousness is
fundamental no substrates no substrates
whatsoever Consciousness just is the F
so if you're thinking about making a
theory of
Consciousness you might say well there's
lots of stuff that that theory has to do
there's qualia
there's choice there's learning memory
problem solving intelligence the self
there's tons and tons of stuff what are
you going to do how do you how do you
build a theory of Consciousness that's
not you know coming you know emerging
from some substrate either causally or
functionally so what we are doing is
what you have to do with any science
pick the minimal minimal assumptions
because the more you assume the less you
explain so you want this is aam's
Razor do with as little as possible so
we chose two things there are
experiences so we're we're we're just
saying there are you know the taste of
chocolate the smell of garlic the color
red that's our fundamental Furniture of
the UN of our universe not a space Not A
Spacetime Universe something a universe
outside of SpaceTime there are there are
experiences um and experiencers you
know having those
experiences and there are probabilistic
relationships among experiences that's
it what if I experience red what's the
probability that I might experience
green next that's it no notion of self
learning memory problem solving
intelligence any we don't assume any of
that just so if people want to see the
math we have a paper called objects of
Consciousness you just Google objects of
Consciousness the math is there also
fusions of Consciousness they're free
online so you can see what what we're
doing and it it turns out that that we
get a social network of what interacting
conscious agents
the for I'll just say one sentence of
math for those who want a little bit of
beef the we measure we model the spaces
of possible experiences with prob
probability
spaces me measurable
spaces and the interactions you know the
probalistic interactions among
experiences with markovian kernels
so and and it turns out our Network
model is computationally
universal so it means even though we
don't assume learning memory problem
solving and so forth we can build models
of agents that only have our two little
assumptions experiences and problemistic
relationships among experiences we can
build models of learning memory what
anything you can do with neural Nets you
can do with conscious agent Nets they're
they're equally powerful as as as
neuronet so we have networks of
conscious agents but the key difference
is Neuron Nets are inside SpaceTime
they're networks of physical objects
inside SpaceTime conscious agent
networks are networks of consciousnesses
that have no physical substrate and are
entirely outside of SpaceTime and that
create space time as one of the more
trivial user interfaces that they use to
interact with each other so what we
countenance is that our SpaceTime three
dimensions of space one dimension of
time is a fairly trivial
headset that you know the some conscious
agents use to interact right think about
it like the
twitterverse there are millions of users
and billions of tweets there's no way
that anybody could read all the tweets
or interact with all the users so we we
have to have something that to you know
calm things down to to make it
understandable and so we'll do the look
at Trends and so forth But ultimately
what we'd like to have is some some kind
of like headset that allows us to see
what's happening and what's versus Tokyo
or whatever to and that's what SpaceTime
is it's just a little headset a little
um data compression scheme and data
understanding scheme that some um
conscious agents use to understand their
interactions with
others but I don't see any
reason that is special in fact it seems
to me one of the more trivial headsets
why not have
50 dimensions of space why not have 50
billion why be stuck with space at
all so I I I think that you know once we
once we get rid of our um blinders in
our addiction to SpaceTime which we're
born with so it's I understand how hard
it is to get rid of it but once we let
go of that then our scientific
creativity can can go where we
want okay I'm still trying to WRA my
head around this so we're Are we almost
saying that a conscious agent exists
Beyond
SpaceTime uh but uses SpaceTime as a way
to interact with other conscious agents
in the same way that somebody with a
virtual reality headset can interact
with somebody in a game um in another
part of the world for example is this
what kind of what we're saying here that
that's that's exactly right so that
conscious agents themselves uh are the
fundamental idea
and there's a whole essentially an
infinite collection of these conscious
agents that
interact and we're we're writing a paper
right now on a logic that ties them all
together so you know so many spiritual
Traditions have an idea of of one God or
one Brahman or or whatever they might
want to call it right some some ultimate
Consciousness and and it turns out when
we when we look at our conscious agents
we're we're starting off with little
trivial ones like this conscious agent
has only one experience it can only see
red that's all it can do and this this
conscious agent maybe it sees red and
green and this one has 20 experiences
that one has 50 and and and we can and
so any experience that you can imagine
we can write down a probabil probability
structure for it and a Marian Dynamics
for it and we can have these interact
and when they interact they can combine
you can take simpler agents and they
combine in interesting ways to create
more complicated agents and so we get
this
combination logic that that comes out of
it and and we found uh
in studying this we found a new
mathematical Logic on marov kernels the
marov chains that that we're about to
publish it um it turns out that there's
a a logic on all possible marov Dynamics
it's that hadn't been discovered before
it's a trace Logic for those who who
know about Trace chains the I'll just
give the definition one kernel is less
than another if it's the trace of the
other that turns out that one definition
gives you a non- Boolean logic of all
the marvian kernels which in our case
gives us a non- Boolean logic of all
possible
consciousnesses and and what it does is
it
says there is because it's non- Bulan
there's no
single top
Consciousness so there's not what most
people would think of as God instead
it's it's far more
interesting there are an infinite number
of directions in which you can go
infinitely
far in more and more complicated
consciousnesses so there's not one top
direction there's an infinite number of
directions and
and for me if anything sounds closer to
what I would think of by the meaning of
God that is much closer to than just
having one little thing at the top
having an infinite number of directions
so and by the way I'm not smart enough
to think of this it was it was the
mathematical logic of the trace the
trace order that forced me to let go of
my baby thoughts about bigger and bigger
Consciousness and it forced me to to
think in this new way so that's that's
the goal of science is to get us out of
our
dogmatic Slumbers and and our old ways
of thinking and then Force us Kicking
and Screaming sometimes to see a bigger
picture and that's what this is
doing okay um so just to clarify so each
one of us would potentially then be a
conscious agent which means that and if
that's the case does that mean that on
some level we each exist outside of
SpaceTime as well this what we're doing
right now is a sort of like
temporary uh illusion of a deeper
reality that that's right so you are a
conscious agent but you're also two
conscious
agents if you if we cut your Corpus
clome in half you have two hemispheres
the left hemisphere and right Hemisphere
and they're connected by a band of about
220 million axons called the Corpus Clum
and a front a friend of mine Joe Bogan
was a surgeon who um to help people with
epilepsy sometimes had to go in and cut
the Corpus Clos them and uh separate the
two hemispheres that helped with the
some problems with epilepsy and but what
they found when they studied these
people was that the right hemisphere you
could talk to just the right Hemisphere
or the left hemisphere and in one person
for example I think the right hemisphere
um was an atheist and the left
hemisphere believed in
God and the right hemisphere wanted to
be a race car driver the left hemisphere
wanted to be a draftsman have a desk job
so and and the two hands the it turns
out the right hemisphere controls the
left hand and the left hemosphere
controls the right hand and sometimes
the two hands fought they would fight
with each other because they they you
know maybe the person was making an
omelet and one hemisphere wanteded to
have an egg and the other one didn't
want to have an egg and would try to
ruin the omelet so it wouldn't it
wouldn't be able to be cooked so so so
you're one conscious agent but
apparently you're also we have evidence
that you're also two but I think that
you're infinitely many potentially
infinitely many conscious agents there's
this whole network of interacting
conscious agents and at the same time
you
are the one with the whole maybe I
shouldn't call it the one but maybe the
whole Consciousness the in some sense
you are the whole Consciousness looking
at itself through a particular trivial
space-time headset and has your body is
just a little Avatar in that in that VR
that through which you're looking so so
this changes the whole thing around
instead of you are your body and your
brain is the the source of your
Consciousness it's the other way around
your Consciousness is fundamental and
what you call well what you call your
body and your brain is merely an avatar
that you render when you need it it's
you know like an avatar in in a virtual
reality game is is you know it's not you
and and it only the hands that you see
only exist when you look if you don't
look at the hands those pixels are gone
and then there are no hands there's no
hands in the computer so so to be very
very explicit and and maybe to shock
people I'm a cognitive neuroscientist
but I'll say this neurons do not exist
when they're not
perceived because nothing inside
SpaceTime exists when it's not perceived
SpaceTime itself does not exist when
it's not perceived it is only a data
structure that exists when you created
in your Consciousness that's what the
that's the shocking and that's what I've
been having difficult time emotionally
wrapping myself around intellectually
I'm there the math has completely
convinced me our best signs convince me
this is true um we'll see when my
emotions come along for the
ride I have no idea how you get anything
done knowing this like just you must be
just sitting all day just going can't
believe this is actually this is
actually true you know um but before
before we wrap up here Donald I was just
want to ask a question that I think is
important to ask
um if this is the case
um why would Consciousness exist what
might or maybe the better question is
what do you see as the purpose of human
existence then um why would
Consciousness be having this experience
through our eyes in other words like
what what might be going on
there that's that's
the fundamental excellent question in
this
area I started off by talking about how
science there's no Theory of Everything
no set of Concepts no set of
theories can ever explain any everything
and that that's true of my own theory
about Consciousness right that's my my
theory of Consciousness is a first
trivial baby step Consciousness is
whatever it is my theory is just a
trivial Theory and it's is the first of
hopefully billions of successor
theories what this means about
Consciousness itself is consciousness
transcends any
description what science does is build
descriptions from certain perspectives
that's what we do as scientists we take
a perspective and we build a
description
and
so what this suggests is
there's a deep answer to your question
and it
comes there's a theorem that no
system can ever fully understand itself
if I have a computer for example and I
want the computer to to understand
itself completely what would I do well
I'd have it build a model of itself
right some software model of itself well
in the process the computer itself has
become more complicated because now it's
the computer with a model so now I'd
have to model a computer with a model of
and you can see this goes on adding
infinitum so it it's pretty
straightforward to seebe not to prove
but to see that that no system can fully
model itself so tie that together with
the fact that no Theory Of
Consciousness can
ever get anywhere close to the complete
explanation of Consciousness
Consciousness trans you are
Consciousness and you transcend so so
I'll be very personal you transcend any
scientific theory your Consciousness
transcends any scientific the so
what so what is consciousness doing and
why what if cons and first answer I
don't know
here's a guess maybe it's educated maybe
it's uneducated but it's a
guess maybe what Consciousness is up to
is knowing
itself and the way it knows itself is to
say let me choose to project myself from
this direction and look at myself from
this direction and when I do that I look
it looks like I'm this little thing
called Don Hoffman that weighs 165
pounds lives in Irvine and so forth
that's what I look like but this this
I'm just the universal Consciousness
looking at myself from this and or I'm
Neo or I'm you know I'm whoever I might
be that's what and and then I I give
myself 70 80 90 years whatever it might
be to you know to look at myself from
that and I I and and maybe to make it so
that I really take that perspective
seriously maybe what I do is I let
myself completely forget who I really am
let me let me forget who I really am let
me really believe that I'm 165 pounds of
of Flesh in space and time and really
believe that and really be worried about
stuff and and and so I really take this
thing ser and then let me slowly wake up
and and reap all the benefits that I got
from that perspective
and that the entire life of Hoffman is
one trivial trivial perspective on who I
really am and each one of the billions
of human beings is an important but
compared to the whole trivial
perspective
on what the Consciousness is and and so
that's my best answer to your question
is that what Consciousness is up to is
trying on different
avatars trillions quadrillions
uncountable numbers of probably an
Infinity of different avatars and the
SpaceTime headset that we're using is as
I've said probably one of the more
trivial ones we're probably really
really low on the totem pole of avatars
that Consciousness is using very very
low right now you
know we're like amibas you know really
low on that so but there are there are
other avatars with other perspectives
that are much more much more complicated
than than ours so so in this case in
that perspective it's no surprise that
I'm having a hard time with this because
the whole point was to give myself a
hard
time so I would take this whole thing
seriously and really take this
perspective and wake up from it
painfully um and and then realize that
um death isn't the end it's just taking
off the
headset wow okay well that's that's a
great note to end on Don um where can
people find you online where would you
recommend them to go after this
conversation well for for those who are
technically minded um I I have you know
the the objects of Consciousness paper
so just Google objects of Consciousness
and fusions of Consciousness and then
you can you Google Scholar me you can if
you do Google Scholar and type in my
name you can see the other papers that
that that we've done on this for by the
way if you're if you have a a recent PhD
in mathematics in in um uh algebraic
geometry and you know these positive
geometries I have a postto I have two
postto positions um
that I'm advertising right now for so I
I want you know someone within two years
of a PhD in algebraic geometry to to so
email me at DD Hoff uci.edu and I'll
point you to the um to where you can
apply for a postto we want someone who
again a recent PhD in algebraic geometry
last two years to work with us on this
and and for those who
are interested in in less technical
things I would just say that I I have a
Twitter feed so you Don Hoffman the D HF
ofan I think I forget what it's called
my Twitter my Twitter handle um I can I
can send it to you my Twitter handle so
I do Post you know stuff that I'm
thinking about and and and um I post
videos like this one I'll post when when
it comes out um if you allow me in
YouTube videos and so forth so
so yeah I guess yeah my my online
YouTube um
stuff oh and I have a book um the case
against reality for those who want to
look at the evolution argument in more
detail and see
more of the guts of that and I talk a
little bit about Consciousness in in
that as
well fantastic fantastic well another
thing I I mentioned to you before
recording um
before we started recording was that I
think what you're essentially doing I
know you're not this isn't your
intention and it's it's sort of Just
Happening as a byproduct but you are
opening the possibility
of mystery in the world and a sense of
spirituality in the world to people that
otherwise might not be able to access it
you know and I think that's super super
important people that are very sort of
intellectual and interested in
mathematics and physics and everything
else as well well spirituality is not
accessible to them but through someone
like yourself then they can get in touch
with this very very important thing in
life so I think it's super important
what you're doing and um obviously just
keep going and best luck with everything
going forward
too thank you very much and I agree that
ultimately I think there'll
be a very profitable interaction between
science and
spirituality because
mystery is at the heart science
tells us that there is no Theory of
Everything it's very very clear there's
no Theory of Everything That means at
the core is a deep deep mystery and you
are that mystery you are not separate
from the mystery you are that mystery so
I agree with you that science and
spirituality it will be difficult
there's a lot of bad history between
them but I think eventually it will be a
very very profitable
interaction thank you Donald thank you
very much Neil thank you for listening
in and I hope you enjoyed the show if
you'd like to hear the full version you
can do so with a weekend University
premium membership this gets you access
to your mastered library of over 5 years
of psychology conferences including over
230 talks interviews with the words
leading psychologist professors and
authors unlimited CPD certification
transcripts quizzes premium passes for
annual conference online courses with
Richard Schwarz and Deb Dana and more
the cost is £97 for 1 year which breaks
down at around 27p per day the best bit
is you can try it out for 30 days
completely risk free as all orders come
with a 100% money back guarantee if
you're interested please go to tww
members.com for more information
