what is the probability that any
organism has ever been shaped to see any
aspect of objective reality truly as it
is what if our entire understanding of
reality is Just an Illusion shaped by
Evolution could the universe be a
sophisticated virtual reality created by
our own minds or Evolution itself for
our own good and does free will even
exist the math is just the math it
doesn't tell you how you have to
interpret it but it's sort of tempting
to interpret it as a notion of free will
after talking just this year alone to
Sam Harris Robert spolski and Daniel
dennon three prominent philosophers on
the subject of free will two of whom who
deny the existence of free will I'm
thrilled to converse with Donald Hoffman
who offers a completely different highly
mathematical and grounded perspective
I'm delighted that different people are
taking different points of view Hoffman
is a renowned philosopher and a
colleague of mine in the University of
California he's the author of The
provocative breakout bestseller the case
against reality this is his third time
on the show because we simply never run
out of topics and it's always refreshing
to hear His Brilliant thoughts on these
issues and more so buckle up this is
going to be the deepest dive into the
fabric of reality that you've ever been
on let's go both Sam Harris and Robert
sauli have recently been guests on the
into the impossible podcast and their
perspective on Consciousness is quite
different from yours how do you view
their perspectives in contrast to your
own Don one of the things that they
focus on is that they don't think that
there's free will at least Sam doesn't
think that there's Free Will and the
theory of conscious agents that I'm
working on does seem to have an what we
call a decision kernel in it so a Marian
kernel that sort of models the decisions
that a a conscious agent takes of course
the math is just the math it's it
doesn't tell you how you have to
interpret it but it's it's sort of
tempting to interpret it as um a notion
of free will but a very interesting
notion of free will because
agents aren't in a vacuum they're in a
millu of other agents it's a social
network of of interacting conscious
agents and as as we'll discuss they they
can combine so agents can interact and
in the if they are compatible they can
combine and in that process what what
you see is that there's this it's not
just a social network of Agents but the
agents themselves are combining and or
or dividing and so the the decision
kernel of each agent is not the only
decision kernel that's going on there's
lots of these decision kernels
interacting but the fact that you can
combined means that in some sense my my
decisions um are part and parcel of
perhaps a bigger agent that of which I'm
a part and so so there if there is a
notion of Free Will and the the notion
of conscious agents
um I would say that it's it's it's a
notion that that's unusual that in some
sense my free choices
are entirely aligned with the higher
agents of which I'm a part and yet my my
actual if you look at the details of my
choices they're unique to me so I have
my own unique you know marvian konel for
my own choices but is compatible with
all the other choices so so that's
that's one interesting Direction so so
our work on Consciousness provides an
interesting framework for thinking about
about Free Will and and perhaps more
less philosophical more mathematical
kind of of way but but then there's
another aspect um where we may differ on
on
Consciousness although you know people's
views evolve I take Consciousness is
fundamental most neuroscientists and I
think Sam at least in in some of the
things I've heard of him heard him say
um wants to talk about the neural
underpinnings of consciousness now you
know maybe maybe that's no longer the
case um I won't pin that on Sam I won't
say that that's what he's saying but but
suppose suppose if he is then and that's
sort of the standard view is that in
some sense there is a physical substrate
to Consciousness so Consciousness in
that sense isn't
fundamental it's the neurals the neural
circuits for example that are
fundamental in their activity or if it's
an AI maybe the circuits of an AI or or
the software in an AI that that's
fundamental and and it's a substrate
that gives rise to Consciousness so my
attitude is that of course that's a
natural thing to look at uh it fits in
within the normal framework of Science
of you know of reductionism and so forth
uh but it hasn't worked out yet there's
not a single specific conscious
experience that we've been able to
reduce to a neural substrate for example
so there's or or any of the current
physicalist theories so we're we're
we're we're batting zero on that so
so those are two areas where I I I won't
claim that we're fundamentally
disagreeing but but where one could
imagine there's
disagreement and when I think about
those two individuals they both they
both you're right kind of deny the
essence of the question of whether or
not we have free will in one case it
seems to be you know strictly determined
uh in Sam Harris's case I should say and
in spolsky's case you know where I kind
of diverge from him or at least I I give
him intellectual honesty points because
he says I act as if I have free will and
I believe in my heart and to my shame he
said to me that people should be
punished for their action and I found
that very odd you know if if if I go up
to Stanford and you know occupy his
office and you know and so forth and
then or or worse I steal his manuscript
in latch form from his from his desktop
not his virtual mental and uh
evolutionary desktop that you have
pioneered but the real desktop on his
computer I assume he'd be uh pursuing me
in a court of law if I steal his next
book you know really determined or you
know super determined as he probably
want so how do you come down on people
that um that say that they don't really
put their money where their mouths are
you know and I'm glad that they don't
because nobody acts as if they have no
free will I mean even people that
believe like Sam Harris acts as if he
has free will even though he believes
everything is is effectively determined
how do you what do you make of such
people I mean are they you know do you
respect their honesty but you kind of uh
deny their legitimacy where do you come
down on the case of you know for example
Crime and Punishment uh uh you know
cause and effect how would you uh
adjudicate such issues these are
difficult issues and they have a long
philosophical history and and I'm I'm
delighted that different people are
taking different points of view and and
we're having a debate so when I read Sam
stuff for example it it it's challenging
and I and and it forces me to think out
of the box and so forth and when you see
the the neural evidence that we can
predict from neural activity in certain
parts of the motor cortex what you're
going to do you be you know several
seconds before you know what you're
going to do there's a Primacy case that
can be made that the neural activity is
in fact the the cause of your behavior
and not your what you thought was your
free choice it's an obvious primy case
that can be made now I I think that it
doesn't go beyond primy I think it it
you know when you push on it I think it
dissolves but I I I certainly would not
in any way charge them with intellectual
dishonesty or or or anything like
absolutely not I think uh I'm delighted
to have intellects of that stature
taking points of view that I disagree
with so that it gives me something
challenging to to have to push back on
and so forth so I think it's it it's all
good and and you know
reductionism has been a very powerful
framework for a long long time I I think
it's no longer going to work going
forward but it you know there's good
reason to try it given the the long
history of of of some major successes so
you gave a wonderful talk in the science
of Consciousness which is put on by our
mutual friend and many Time guest
steuart Hammer off and others the
University of Arizona it's been going on
30 plus years I believe I spoke at it
about 10 years ago was never invited
back um no I I but I've had on all the
all the wonderful luminaries like your
uh fellow colleagues but you gave a just
a spectacular talk and you've been
gracious enough to agree that you'll
present uh we'll present your slides
here and we'll walk through it and maybe
I'll ask some questions as a interested
lay person you know I'm always
frustrated when I talk to not not to you
but to others you know just seems to be
so little progress that the the progress
in string theory seems to be like
meteoric you know compared to
Consciousness and that's saying a lot as
you know my feelings about String Theory
but um let's walk through your slides
and then we'll show them on the screen
as you go through it and I'll try not to
interrupt but uh but it's such a such a
fascinating talk I couldn't let the
opportunity to share this with my
audience Pass Me By scientific advances
are often frightening as well as
exciting an example of this is Elon
musk's new neuralink a brain computer
interface designed to assist paralyzed
patients in controlling technology with
their thoughts while this technology
holds immense promise for restoring
movement and communication ethical
concerns linger around safety privacy
and the potential long-term effects
despite the controversy neuralink is
planning upcoming trials in more and
more patients aiming for high single
digits by the end of the year if
successful this could Mark a significant
step towards revolutionizing human
computer interaction I love staying
upto-date on news especially related to
science technology and artificial
intelligence and with the rapid speed of
today's news cycle it's crucial to stay
informed and Trust where you're getting
your information I'm excited I found
this story about neuralink on ground
news ground news is a website and app
that I use every day it gathers articles
from around 50,000 news sources all over
the world in an unbiased way that can
help you read between the lines of the
standard mainstream media bias it helps
you break through of algorithms and Echo
Chambers and filter bubbles you can
check them out at ground.
news/ Dr bran let me show you why I love
ground news right away in the nuring
store you can see that 40 7 news outlets
have reported on the story of these 47
Outlets 35% of them lean to the left
politically 35% come from the center and
only 31% lean right you can see the
reliability of the outlets covering the
story this is unique it also shows who
owns the outlets reporting on the story
The majority 32% are from independent
news outlets ground news also makes it
easy to compare headlines to see how
bias might influence the framing and
shape our understanding of the issues I
found it hugely fascinating that the
left tends to focus on the detailed
technical issues and improvements
highlighting the long-term goals while
the center emphasizes musk's intentions
to give people superpowers surprisingly
the right leaning media coverage
underscores assurances made that the
implant doesn't harm the brain and
focuses more on the Technology's
potential benefits you can't get this
type of news analysis anywhere else the
news isn't get a report on itself but
ground news does with ground news you
get a deeper understanding of the
complexity and Nuance of different
issues by seeing it from all different
sides and identifying media narratives
to get this go to ground.
newsdr Briant Dr Brant to stay fully
informed on breaking news and see
through media bias you'll become a
smarter news consumer And subscribe to
my link for 40% off unlimited access
with their Vantage plan the same plan I
use by subscribing they're directly
supporting an independent platform for
news and supporting the show as well so
the the title of my talk is positive
geometries of Consciousness I first
start off and talk about the fact that
we have lots of conscious experiences uh
we have uh you know we can experience
estimates are thousands of flavors or
millions of
colors and and I was surprised to to
find out that the field of smell now
thinks that that we could be
experiencing trillions of smells and
then we have all sorts of experiences of
like sounds and bodily feelings and so
all in all we have trillions of specific
conscious experiences that we en enjoy
or or or don't enjoy as as human beings
and so you think that you know there
there's been a lot of work now in
cognitive neuroscience and Ai and so
forth trying to get theories of of
Consciousness um you know to try to
understand and explain these specific
conscious experiences and most of these
theories assume of course that space and
time are fundamental
and particles Elementary particles in
space and time are sort of the
fundamental building blocks and uh when
you get you know a large enough group of
these particles interacting the right
way you get macroscopic objects like
neurons and brains and and neurons and
brains with the right properties give
rise to Consciousness or or to the
illusion of Consciousness some some
physicalists think that uh Consciousness
isn't real It's Just an Illusion that's
made sa by our our nervous system and
and then there are pan cists and of
various Stripes but the ones I'm I'm
interested in are pan cists who also
take SpaceTime as fundamental in certain
physical objects in SpaceTime like
Elementary particles as fundamental
objects but that in addition to their
physical properties they have some kind
of property of Consciousness some some
unit of Consciousness say an electron
has has its physical properties but also
has some kind of qualia experiences
associated with it so there a number of
of theories there are you know
higher order theories there are
integrated information Theory um
neuronal tubal Quantum States collapse
orchestrated collapse Global workspace
Theory there's a number of of theories
and and and recently you know the
there's been some adversarial
collaborations um that have been uh
funded where a couple of these theories
can go head-to-head and and make
predictions say about the neural
correlates of Consciousness that they
have and so forth so so it looks like
you you might think well okay well this
it's a good feeli we have lots of
theories out there and a good background
um so you know where are we and you know
there's trillions of experiences out
there that um you know for these
theories to explain so it must be you
know you think it would be like you
shooting fish in a burl um you know with
you know just pick there's trillions so
pick one and use your physicalist theory
to explain it well and so how are we
doing how you know how are how many
experiences have these theories
explained and the remarkable fact is is
they're zero there's there's no
physicalist Theory right now that can
explain for example the taste of mint uh
you know what what orchestrated collapse
of quantum states of neurom micales must
be the taste of mint and couldn't be the
the smell of garlic or something like
that so we we're batting zero um and
it's quite remarkable uh when you look
at all these theories and some of the
theories will tell you exactly what you
need to do for example an integrated
information Theory
um to have a a substrate for for
conscious experience you you need you
need to have the right causal structure
of the
substrate and that causal structure can
be specified by a markovian kernel so
the natural question is okay great so
give me a markovian kernel for the taste
of mint you know how big a markovian
kernel does it have to be you know what
does it have you know a thousand rows
and a thousand columns and therefore
like a million entries and if so why
that number of row and columns and what
are the specific numbers in the entries
that it must be that it must have or the
class of entries that it must have to be
the taste of mint and could and couldn't
be the taste of chocolate and and
there's nothing nothing's been done so
they some of these theories tell you
what they would have to do to have a a
theory but but in fact when it comes
right down to it where's the beef
where's where where is your Matrix or
where is your precise orchestrated
collapse of quantum states of microtubes
that must be the taste of vanilla or or
what's the global workspace architecture
and contents of of the of the shared
memory that uh you must be the you know
the the taste of chocolate so and and
part of the problem is that as soon as
you say okay well here's the Matrix that
must be you know this this is the ca The
Matrix that must be the taste of me the
the obvious question is give me a break
why in the world must this thousand by,
Matrix and those particular entries be
the taste of mint please you know give
me an explanation and you you can say
well you can see where there's going to
be some problems here um doing that or
what orchestrated collapse of quantum
and this is not by the way a new problem
livenet saw this way back 300 years ago
in in his monadology and he he he he
actually gave uh physicalist Theory
short shrift he gave them one paragraph
he said yeah obviously can't be done you
you can't boot up Consciousness from
uncons
mechanical physical ingredients he he
spent a paragraph on it and figured you
know you know intelligent readers can
move on he could a sided him you know
he'd have a good H index it' be good for
his career by now these are some of the
conscious experiences that you might
want them to try to explain the taste of
chocolate smell of a rose and so forth
or or you know the experience of space
you know um if you have a theory of
space you know the the experience of
space why was must must this for example
pattern of integrated information be the
experience of visual space and why could
it not be the experience of haptic space
or auditory space um and and Sim
similarly for for for time so so again
no no answers to this kind of thing for
example an integrated information Theory
and experience qualiity is identical to
Maxim irreducible intrinsic cause effect
structure of a mechanism in a state and
and the cause effect structure Can Be
You written as a transition probability
Matrix and so the the question then is
so what what what is a probability
Matrix that that must be uh you know the
taste of mint and and why why those
specific uh entries in in the marvian
kernel hey there students of the
impossible I'm sure you're enjoying this
conversation with my good friend Don
Hoffman and I want to make sure that you
help me help you get even more great
guests on the into the impossible
podcast it's been in a wild ride this
year alone I've had Sam Harris Dan
Dennett Robert zapolski and soon you'll
hear from Richard Dawkins two special
episodes but I want you to help me help
you which is to make sure you're
subscribed and following the podcast in
audio and video formats it really helps
out and if you don't mind extra credit
homework assignments from a professor
please make sure you leave a comment or
leave a review of the podcast on Spotify
or on uh the Apple podcast app you're
able to do that it will really help me
out so much so now back to the episode
with Don and what do these matrices
operate on what's the vector analog here
I think they're not so much viewing them
as as operators here as as representing
a a causal structure it could be viewed
as maybe a flow of information through a
particular you know circuit or something
like that so yeah so why should you if
you have a theory that you're claiming
is a theory of the experience of space
what is the Matrix for visual versus
auditory versus haptic and and why must
it be that Matrix and so forth so and
again this is just asking them to do
what Their Own theories say that they
need to do for right so orchestrated
collapse of Nal microtubules it would be
okay so what is give me the precise
pattern of orchestrated collapse of n or
mulus that must be the taste of mint and
and and why why must it be that and so
so we're batting zero on that this is a
little striking because if I came to you
and said I've got a theory of particle
interactions and you said oh wonderful
so you know what what particular
particle interactions can you can you um
model in your in your theory I say well
you know you might say well can you do
like electron Photon interactions like
this one or cork and gluon
interactions and if I said to you well
oh I can't do any specific particle
interactions I I can't actually you know
predict any specific ones I just have a
general theory of particle interactions
you might wonder what in the world I'm
talking about what does it mean to have
a theory of particle interactions that
doesn't explain any particle
interactions and so the same thing is
here what does it mean to have a theory
of conscious experiences or of
Consciousness where that doesn't account
for any specific conscious experiences
it's important to understand that what a
scientific theory is every SCI
scientific theory makes certain
assumptions and it says if you grant me
these assumptions then I can explain
some other wonderful stuff as a result
because every theory has um assumptions
there is no Theory of Everything the
theory has a scope and it has some
limits Newton's
Theory Newtonian physics um has
incredible scope a lot of mathematics in
in the theory to to explore the power of
that scope but it has a hard limit uh
when we came to look at chemistry uh we
we realized that basically Newton can't
do chemistry no way that Newtonian
physics is going to do we needed quantum
theory so so every every scientific
theory has its own scope and limits we
sometimes talk about the hard problem of
Consciousness um but you know there are
also certain theories that are just
going to be the wrong problem for you
know that it'll be the wrong problem for
them so so chemistry is the wrong
problem for for Newton um is the right
problem perhaps for for quantum
mechanics every good theory gives you
mathematical tools to explore its
scope um great Theory gives you the
mathematical tools to actually find
their limits and that's that's an
important aspect of science is that we
have certain Concepts like Einstein for
example had a concept of SpaceTime being
fundamental and and the the speed of
light being Universal for all observers
at least inertial observers so he he
turned his Concepts into a
mathematically precise framework special
and general relativity and then later on
uh that combined with quantum theory
Quantum field Theory um led to the
discovery that um SpaceTime is not
fundamental SpaceTime falls apart at the
plank scale so every every theory has
its own scope and limits and a good a
great Theory actually you can use the
mathematics of the theory to show the
fundamental limits of the basic concepts
of that theory for example Einstein's
case SpaceTime itself which is what he's
modeling turns out to have a you a
limited range of applicability it has no
operational meaning Beyond 10us 33 cm so
I want to propose you know in part
because um
SpaceTime is not fundamental that um
physicalism cannot do Consciousness so
it's not just that Consciousness is a
hard problem for physicalist approaches
neural reductionist approaches or AI
cist approaches or whatever it might be
or integrated information ident
identifying it with certain causal
structures in a physical substrate that
class of
theories assumes that SpaceTime is
fundamental and and and assumes the
whole reduction is Paradigm and I'm
saying that that whole Paradigm is just
the wrong Paradigm and and and then
Consciousness is the wrong problem not a
hard problem but an impossible problem
for any physicalist reductionist
approach so that's that's sort of one of
the main points that I want to make here
so and it's not of course that's one
thing for cognitive scientists to say it
but it's the high energy theoretical
physicists who are saying this so Nar KH
HED and others for so Nathan cyberg for
example says I'm almost certain that
space and time are Illusions these are
primitive Notions that will be replaced
by something more sophisticated Andrew
struminger at Harvard says the notion of
SpaceTime is something clearly something
we're going to have to give up David
Gross who won the Nobel Prize for his
work on the strong force says I believe
that space for sure and presumably time
as well will be Emer
and then I think Nema says the very
notion of SpaceTime is not a fundamental
one space time is doomed there's no such
thing as SpaceTime fundamentally in in
the laws of physics David Gren explains
why he he explains that there's no
operational meaning to distances smaller
than the plank scale you know if you're
trying to measure smaller and smaller
objects you need to have more and more
powerful microscope and and for that you
you effectively you're using light or
some kind of radiation with smaller and
smaller wavelengths so you can resolve
the details of the object that you're
trying to to to look at quantum theory
allows that mean you can make a smaller
wavelength as as you wish it requires
more energy you know the E equals H new
so as the frequency goes up you the
wavelength get smarter smaller then the
energy is going up but when you combine
that with Einstein's theory of SpaceTime
and especially you know the fact that
the energy and matter are the same thing
and and matter energy curve SpaceTime uh
you get a problem at 10- 33 CM that that
with the wavelengths at 10us 33 um CM um
you have so much energy in such a small
region of space that you actually um
create a black hole and you destroy the
very thing that you're looking at and so
what this means is that SpaceTime is is
a fairly shallow data structure it falls
apart at 10 Theus 33 cm not 10 Theus 33
trillion CM just 10 Theus 33 cm that
sounds impressive to us now because we
don't have the Technologies to probe it
but once we get the technology to prob
at 10us 33 cm then uh you know it's
going to be a hard limit to what we can
do inside SpaceTime so so SpaceTime is
doomed we we thought it was fundamental
and but it's not I also talk about you
know evolution by natural selection and
and it also agrees um with with the
physicist the high energy theoretical
physicist that SpaceTime is doomed you
can use Darwin's theory um in
mathematical form in evolutionary Game
Theory to ask a technical question um
which is you know what is a probability
that any organism has ever been shaped
to see any aspect of objective reality
truly as it is so you can ask that as a
technical question do we see the truth
what's the probability that that our our
senses show us the truth about objective
reality right we see what what what
appears to us in our senses are is space
and time and physical objects inside
space and time so the question I'm
asking does evolution entail that those
are going to be true true perceptions of
the objective nature of reality or or or
not and it turns out we so we can ask
the question does natural selection
favor vertical perceptions and the
answer on the next slide is um no we um
vertical perceptions go extinct in fact
the probability is zero that any sensory
system of any organism has ever been
shaped by natural selection to see any
structural aspect of objective reality
correctly so what we find is the two
main pillars of modern science which is
high energy theoretical physics you know
Quant field theory for example and also
evolution of natural selection both
agreeing that SpaceTime isn't
fundamental uh in objects in space time
aren't fundamental and therefore the
whole physicalist reductionist Paradigm
um will be called into question so so
what is it that we are seeing from an
evolutionary point of view we get a hint
that Evolution shapes our sensory
systems to guide adaptive Behavior
that's right we are shaped by Evolution
to have sensory systems that guide
adaptive Behavior period we thought that
seeing the truth was going to help you
have more adaptive behavior and that
that's just a wrong intuition when you
actually look at Evolution um what
what's really going on is in some sense
Evolution isn't showing you a window on
reality Evolution gives you a user
interface like the desktop interface or
it gives you a VR headset if you will to
play the game of life if you're playing
a virtual reality game like Grand Theft
Auto what you're really doing in this
analogy is you're toggling millions of
vol voltages in a precise sequence in
some computer some powerful computer
somewhere but if you had to do that to
try to win the game good luck it would
be very very difficult to toggle those
voltages um and win the game someone who
has a a little virtual reality headset
and they see a steering wheel and a
dashboard and gas pedal and so forth is
going to beat you they don't need to see
the truth they need to control the truth
but they don't need to know what the
truth is even they have you don't have
to know about diodes and resistors and
voltages to to win the game if you've
are given the right interface and so
that's sort of the idea of
um Darwin's theory tells us is that
Evolution shaped us with a headset that
lets us play the game of life and it
hides the truth so that means that
reductionism is doomed um it it if
SpaceTime is doomed then the idea of
reductionism which I think is in the
next slide that that the fundamentally
the laws of physics are given by some
laws at the ultra most microscopic scale
and we just have to go to the smaller
scale you know to see what's ultimately
going on and and physicists are telling
us is that that reductionist Paradigm is
wrong as we go to smaller smaller scales
at some point you just stop you you
can't go any smaller 10us 33 and
actually if you try to go smaller you
start actually going the other direction
you actually get black holes that get
bigger and bigger bigger so you get more
macroscopic uh so so the reductionist
Paradigm uh is a problem and it's been
the foundation for a lot of science we
used to think the the foundation was
like earth air Fire and Water four basic
elements and then we went to the the
periodic table of elements uh we thought
that was fundamental and now we have the
um the standard model of physics with
the bosons leptons and quarks and that's
our our current
fundamental reductionist approach but we
we know that SpaceTime is doomed so that
that even the bons leptons and corks
aren't going to be the final answer in
terms of of what what's the nature of of
the the the basic elements of objective
reality so the idea that has guided a
lot of Consciousness research is is
again a reductionist one which is that
you know we start with Al particles like
the bosons Leons and corks uh and when
they have the right combinations um we
get more larger objects like these
paramal neurons and if you go even
larger you get objects like the brain
and then the brain with the right
properties right the the right um causal
or other kinds of properties um somehow
gives rise to conscious experiences
that's the the the theory in global
workspace and illusionism and manism and
so forth but there's a problem with all
this and and Stephen Pinker points it
out quite nicely in his 2018 book
Enlightenment now what I'll call the
stipulation problem of Consciousness and
what Pinker says is but the last dollop
in the theory and he was talking about
the global workspace Theory which is the
theory that that Pinker seems to like in
in in that book um but the last dollop
in the global workspace theory that it
subjectively feels like something to be
such circuitry the global workspace
circuitry may have to be stipulated as a
fact about reality where explanation
stops what Steve was saying is that you
know we have the global workspace Theory
and and all of its architecture and and
is trying to explain conscious
experiences when you but when you get
right down to it like you know taste you
the smell of a rose or the taste of
chocolate it doesn't give it to you you
have you're assuming the global
workspace architecture and then you're
having to also stipulate the conscious
experience of the Rose or or or the
chocolate of the of the cake so you're
stipulating the physical system you're
also stipulating the experience there
there's no explanation here it's all
stipulation it's to logical yeah
yeah and it's not um it's not very
satisfying science when the thing you're
trying to explain has to be stipulated
at the very last step you you know you
you say you know have to stipulate so so
that's that's a big a big problem these
reductionist approaches are failing and
I think it's for principled reasons
because reductionism is doomed and
that's what the high energy theoretical
physicists are telling us SpaceTime is
doomed therefore reductionism is doomed
and and therefore our field the field of
Consciousness studies needs to get a cue
from the expert on SpaceTime namely the
high energy theoretical physicist that
it's over for SpaceTime and reductionism
and we can't if we want to start there
with our Theory Of
Consciousness you know we're starting
with the wrong foundation and and not
only is it SpaceTime not the right
foundation but also quantum mechanics so
again these these theorists are are
pointing out that quantum theory is not
fundamental either as Nema puts it so
there's some other structure that we're
looking for and some way of thinking
about interpre in the structure Beyond
SpaceTime that will let us see space
time and quantum mechanics emerge
simultaneously and Joint at the hip one
reason why um they're saying that you
know SpaceTime is doomed and and and and
quantum theory is doomed is that they've
they've you know when they're trying to
understand the probabilities or the
amplitudes for particles interacting
like two gluons smashing into each other
and six gluons spraying out when you do
the computation inside Space time it's a
mess it's hundreds of pages of algebra
for a single event
hundreds of thousand millions of terms
but they've discovered recently these
new structures outside of SpaceTime yeah
like the amplitud hedum and cosmological
polytopes and associahedron so they
found these these new structur this is
all fairly new last 10 or 11 years that
allow them to compute scattering
amplitudes much more cleanly much much
more simply millions of terms turn turn
into four or five terms that you can
compute by hand and and you see new
symmetries something called the infinite
yanging symmetry for example in certain
certain interactions that you can't see
inside SpaceTime what we're finding and
then they're finding these structures
called decorative permutations that help
classify allow them to classify these
new new um geometric structures and so
there's this whole new field called the
field of positive geometries that that's
coming out now we used to think
SpaceTime is fundamental but it's not um
there are Beyond SpaceTime there are
positive geometries like the amplitud
hedrin and then beyond them are these
combinatorial objects like decorated
permutations which allow us to classify
these objects so this this is a brand
new frontier we've we've stepped outside
of SpaceTime for the first time as a
species in the last 10 10 or 11 years
we're outside of SpaceTime and we're
finding stuff hey there it's me again
with a great offer for you which is free
and you can cancel at any time but I
hope you won't it's to join my Monday
magic mailing list and for one lucky
listener each month I select you to win
a real fragment of a 4.3 billion year
old segment of our solar system a
meteorite which fell to Earth in
Argentina some a few thousand years ago
I'll s you information about meteorites
and all sorts of cool things and how you
can observe and maybe find some yourself
but I'll also send you every week the
latest and greatest information from
around the world of stem science
technology engineering and math and many
many other thoughts that I develop and
go through and every week people really
seem to enjoy it recommendations tips
tricks hacks and all sorts of cool
things from around the world of Academia
and Beyond so if you're have a.edu email
address the offer is even sweeter your
guaranteed to win one of these Beauties
if you live in the United States for
those of you with a.edu email address
code of bring.com edu and send your
details there now back to the episode
with Don yeah and this is right up our
alley as physicists but it might not be
you know abundantly clear to the
audience you know how does it come back
to the brain I mean is it is it that
there's a it's a no-go theorem because
we you know we currently don't
understand or we need physics beyond the
standard model to understand physical
reality and the ultimate building blocks
are you know particles but we we we
don't actually know if there's strings
that go even below that or matrices or
Loop quantum gravity is correct is that
the relevance of I mean it's fascinating
to me as a physicist but what is the
relevance to the brain and the mind and
Consciousness well well the relevance is
if we're trying to find a fundamental
framework from which to boot up
Consciousness the question is is
spacetime itself a deep enough structure
for us to try to boot up Consciousness
from it and my take on what's what's
happening in high energy theoretical
physics is they're saying no SpaceTime
and quantum theory themselves are merely
projections of much deeper structures
and much more interesting structures
SpaceTime has four dimensions maybe 11
or 12 depending on what what other
Theory you might have the the amplitud
hedrin could have billions of Dimensions
these are these are different so these
are not little things curled up inside
SpaceTime these are brand new structures
and so we're very much um taking off the
headset we're looking outside of
SpaceTime and what we're finding are
obelisks we're finding these these
geometric objects outside of of
SpaceTime and I think about it is like
the scene in 2001 A Space Odyssey where
the there's the the Obelisk and all the
the apes are you know hooting and
hollering pounding and they they know
it's really important and it's very
significant but they don't know what it
means and I think that's where we are
because we we've only been outside of
space time for the last 10 or 11 years
we're finding these positive geometries
but the question is who ordered that and
why and what what does this mean and and
SpaceTime is is is clearly not
fundamental what is fundamental so we're
at this big you know this big New Vista
has opened up in science that says
reductionism inside SpaceTime is not
where it's at and there's something new
that's really important it's positive
geometries but we don't know what it
means yet for example we have no
Dynamics what what is that a Dynamics
outside of SpaceTime that gives rise to
these positive geometries and these
decorated permutations that they found
this is all brand new but what it says
to me
is to my field of Consciousness studies
if if we're trying to build our Theory
Of Consciousness on SpaceTime physics
that's an old horse now we don't want to
hop on that old horse we we need to get
get on something that's more fundamental
and and by the way there's a just in
February there was a um a a big Workshop
in in Germany bringing together 100 phds
in physics and in in high energy
theoretical physics um in What's called
the universe plus project that's been
funded by the European research Council
the ERC it's a 10 million euro Grant
international study uh effort to to
understand these positive geometries and
the you the combinatorial objects like
the decorated permutations so this is
where you know the high energy
theoretical physics is headed right now
and Consciousness studies will ignore
this to their own Peril will will
effectively be in in the same place as
someone trying to do chemistry and and
and believing that Newton is the way to
do it so I'm going to stick with Newton
I don't care what this new fangled
Quantum stuff is I'm sticking with
Newton for my theory of chemist well
good luck and that's where we are right
now in our Consciousness studies we're
going to we're going to stick with
SpaceTime even though that horse is not
the horse that the that the the
physicists themselves are riding you
know at the very high energy level so
what I want to propose then with again
with a number of collaborators including
you know chayton Pros Robert prenner um
Minish singing and a number of other
shapon chatapati and others um a theory
of what we call conscious agents a
network of interacting conscious agents
as the fundamental nature of reality and
this is going to be conscious agents not
emerging from SpaceTime but prior to
space time and the idea will be that
these conscious agents are in fact prior
to the positive geometries that that
high energy physics is finding outside
of
SpaceTime uh so the you know we'll I'll
talk about that in a moment so
there's a whole laundry list of things
that a theory of Consciousness must
explain I've got you know learning
memory problem solving attention memory
the self intelligence semantics there's
lots of things that you would like a
theory to
do but you know following aam's Razer I
I want to keep my assumptions to a
minimum so we're going to only pick a
couple we're going to use um qualia so
conscious experiences exist and actions
that there probabilistic relationships
among conscious experiences that's all
we're going to have in our in our Theory
and then um we put this in a
mathematical formalism which I'll only
talk about briefly we have these things
called conscious agents and an agent has
uh a set of experiences based on the
experiences it then decides um what
action is going to take and once it does
that decision that it acts on on the
network the big social network of other
conscious agents which then um acts back
on the conscious agent that we're that
we're sort of focusing on here so we get
this Loop a perception decision action
Loop um and we modeled this with Marian
kernels so probability spaces for the
for the set of you know possible
experiences and so forth and then
markovian kernels for the arrows it
turns out that that's the set of
conscious agents is computationally
universal so it's easy to prove that
anything that you can do with neural
network you can you can you can also use
a conscious agent Network to build so
theories of learning memory problem
solving and so forth can be and it's
markovian in that it the current state
you know provides input for the future
state but no further kind of memory you
know hysteresis or uh effects linger or
is there some other um implementation of
markovian processes we're going to
implement it as as you marov literal
marov kernels in the where those arrows
are so we'll literally have markovian
kernels but what you pointed out is
correct a markovian Dynamics is in which
the current state is all the information
that governs the transition to the next
state so it's a finite memory I I would
point out that you can make that state
as complex as you want so it's what it
really means is you can have an
arbitrary but finite amount of memory in
in your decision so it's very much like
in touring machines where we say you
have a you have a tape it's it's it's a
finite tape but there's as much tape as
you want you you will never run out of
tape when you're doing your computation
and that's sort of the way it is with
the with the Marian kernel States it's
going to be finite but as as big a state
as you want we can give you that and we
can turn it into markovian so so it's
not much of a limitation actually then
then I went through some know fairly
technical stuff here um there's a turns
out that we discovered um an order so we
we can actually model individual
conscious agents with what we call a
qualia kernel we can take the perception
decision action kernels that I talked
about in that Loop and combine them
together into a single kernel that we
call the qualia kernel so now we have a
much simpler thing and we can actually
then look at a single maren Kel to which
describes if I'm a conscious agent I
have the experience of red um now what's
the probability that I'll experience
green next or blue next or or whatever
so so it it's gives us what we call a
quality kernel what we've shown is that
there's actually a logic on the set of
these markovian kernels so this is
apparently a new contribution to the
mathematics of marov chains um and and
we'll be publishing that in in the paper
that we're writing right now um we
discovered that there's um what's called
a partial order on the S of markco
Marian kernels and this gives a logic
you can take the the and and the or the
meat and the join um and and so
complement in certain certain cases and
so forth we give a non- bullying logic
of markovian kernels which then turns
into a non- bullyan logic of conscious
agents so we can actually talk about
agents Consciousness is combining or or
disassociating DEC combining and we can
talk about um also a notion of
observation you know one conscious agent
um if it's sort of what's called a trace
chain of a bigger um agent then it
observes the the bigger agent um then
there's a whole logic that we that we
have on that so then our our big idea
then is that we have this network this
social network like the Twitter verse of
conscious agents and it's beyond
SpaceTime and it's actually beyond the
the geometries and permutations at the
phys have found outside of SpaceTime but
our proposal is that we can project the
Dynamics of conscious agents onto the
decorated permutations and from there um
the physicist tell us how to you know
project into the positive geometries and
into SpaceTime so we've actually in a in
a paper last year we actually got a
projection onto decorated permutations
from Marian kernels and when we did that
we first just went in literature we
assumed it had already been done just
how how do you represent markovian
kernels and you know classify them with
with decorative permutations and it
turned out it hadn't been done so last
year we we did it and we we actually
contributed as far as I can tell
something new to the mathematics of of
marov marov chains we we actually showed
how they can be classified by decorated
permutations so now what we're what
we're doing is we're um we're looking at
at how to now project we've got the
projection of the Dynamics of conscious
agents onto decorated permutations now
we we want to all the way into SpaceTime
right we want to make you know what does
the mass what what are particles in
space time how do what what do they
correspond to in the marov Dynamics and
so forth what does mass momentum spin
distance and so
forth and I I can just say at top level
in the paper we're writing right now
we're we're we're going to publish um
the the idea that the mass of particles
inside SpaceTime is a projection of the
so-called entropy rate of communicating
classes of the markovian kernels of
conscious agents so an entropy rate is
um is an interesting thing it's very
important in communication Theory uh if
if you're if you have a source
communication source that um has an
entropy rate that's greater than the
channel capacity then you're going to
get Distortion you won't get the message
through clearly and also entropy rate
has is related to a minimum description
for for Signal minimum description link
so the entropy rate is and if people
want I can go into detail about the
mathematical definition of entropy rate
but but we make a proposal that the
entropy rate um is what projects to to
mass and that makes a real clean
prediction because if the entropy rate
is zero then we're going to be dealing
with massless particles right and
therefore we have to make prediction
that this is going to be a spin one
particle plus or minus one and we're
going have to make the prediction that
this thing is going at the speed of
light that there's a maximum speed and
this thing is going so in other words we
don't just get to say oh entropy rate is
mass there are there are consequences
for saying that and and and it turns out
that they work in in the marod dyamics
when you actually have an entry rate of
zero you get a kernel looks like the P
kernel down here on on the bottom right
where it's all zeros and ones those are
the the entry rates are zero and those
in fact have spin or determinant plus or
minus one so they if if we say that spin
is a projection of of the determinant
then we get that and then they also have
the fastest commuting times so competing
time between two states is the expected
number of steps it takes you to get from
that state to the the second state and
then back again so it's it's the round
trip time and it turns out that that
when you have the zero entropy rate then
you are effectively the commuting times
are the fastest you can possibly have
and so there is a maximum speed limit
and it happens precisely when you're
massless in this Theory and when um the
determinant is is plus or minus one so
it's internally consistent it's
internally consistent you know it
doesn't mean we're right but it it means
that the the first the first little test
is passing the first sniff test we we'll
see if if it goes all the way so yeah so
what's nice is that um Einstein assumed
that the um speed of light is the is the
maximum speed and it's the same for all
observers but this theory if this if
this pans out will'll actually explain
why there is a maximum speed because
there is a maximum Computing time and it
happens to be for those um systems that
have zero entropy right and and
therefore are massless and have spin one
things that are are assumptions in
Einstein's theory will be things that we
can explain from deeper assumptions in
in this Theory Of Consciousness so how
do we test all this there's a number of
ways to try to test it um you mean you
might say well why don't you go after
neural Coral ofc Consciousness I mean
that's clearly the thing you want to
test and and eventually we do but I'm
more interested in um doing a something
simpler not not that it's simple but but
I'm looking in this little example here
I want to look at the inside of a proton
and the many physicists have spent
decades studying particle collisions
that that are in elastic collisions they
destroy the proton they let you look
inside you at the quirks and gluons and
so forth inside and so this is just sort
of a high level picture of you know
where quirks and gluons and protons fit
in the whole scheme of matter I have to
point out that that nucleus in the atom
is not uh charge neutr neol there's
something going on with that it only has
two protons it should be helium but it's
helium five or oh okay oh interesting so
when you look inside of a proton um what
at the top level what the what decades
of experiments have shown is that at the
at the lowest resolution what they call
Bor X and q^ S um inside of a proton you
find it's dominated by um three veence
quirks two up quirks and a down Quirk as
you increase the resolution in space and
time you get what they call a quark C
you start get Quark antiquark pairs
appearing and and you also get a bunch
of gluons then when you get to the
highest resolution um highest B con x
and q squ then you get just a vast gluon
C so what what you see inside the proton
depends on essentially the scale the
temporal and spatial scales at which
you're you're looking and so we want to
show that we can model all of this we
can get all of these momentum
distributions at the different scales of
of resolution in space and time and
actually get this the exact momentum
distribution so that's going to be one
of the asset tests we want to give give
our Theory and in fact there's a team um
of researchers from Caltech and
elsewhere that that are just working
with us on this right now they're
they're going to be trying to build
these simulations so these are some of
the momentum distributions that we'll
try to to match and for those who are
interested um in some of the the
published details on on this we have a
paper called fusions of Consciousness
which is free online you can you can
read about the the mapping to of a
Markov change to decorated permutations
and and so forth that's excellent no
that was uh really fun so I've got a
bunch of questions of my own and then uh
I've got a lot of questions for my
audience as well can I ask you know
since we talked in uh your F about your
first book the Case or the your most
recent book the case against reality um
have there been updates to your you know
sort of evolution in in this realm with
uh respect to the you know interface
theory of perception have there been new
developments since 2021 when we talked
last on on the podcast uh live about
that book any any new developments
either from you or criticisms or or you
know kind of joint uh research programs
there's been um some some criticisms
that um from from philosophers that have
been quite sharp and and and um
published so they've it's not just been
verbal but they've actually published
articles and and the and the argument is
goes like this that we
we use evolutionary Game Theory to show
that physical objects like organisms and
um resources in space and time are not
fundamental that that they're they're
just a user interface illusion several
philosophers have said um that is
logically shooting yourself in the foot
you're a cognitive scientist you don't
know philosophy you don't know about
logic well enough to know that you've
actually you committed some basic
fundamental self-refutation going on
here so so the argument is this you're
you're using Hoffman you're using
evolutionary Game Theory which is a
mathemat mathematization of Darwin's
ideas you're using evolutionary Game
Theory to prove that physical objects
like organisms and resources are are not
fundamental they're they're not part of
the fundamental F Furniture of reality
they're just user Illusions so to speak
now so their argument goes like goes
like this now either the mathematics of
evolutionary Game Theory Faithfully
represents Darwin's ideas or it doesn't
if it doesn't you couldn't use it for
the purpose that you you've used it for
and if if evolutionary Game Theory does
Faithfully represent Darwin's ideas then
it couldn't possibly refute those ideas
it couldn't possibly end up saying those
ideas cannot be fundamental so either
way you're in what the they've actually
in print said an unfortunate dialectical
situation uh okay in other words I shot
myself in the foot and and and so my my
reply
is that argument completely
misunderstands the very foundations of
how science works first there are two
critical things to know about science
first every scientific theory makes
assumptions very very simple thing to
note as a result there is no Theory of
Everything because you don't explain
your assumptions you assume your
assumptions your assumptions of your
theory are miracles for for that theory
the Flatout Miracles because you don't
explain them and if of course you can
give me a deeper theory that explains
those assumptions but your new Theory
will have its own Miracles its own
assumptions and this goes on at infino
so there is no theory of so that means
that every scientific theory has a scope
if it's a good theory if it's a bad
Theory we don't care about but if it's a
good theory it has a scope and it and it
gives you the mathematical tools to
explore the power of the scope but it
will have limit and if it's a great
Theory the theory will give you the
tools to discover the limits and in case
of Einstein's theory of SpaceTime he
gave us essential tools to discover the
limits of his very Central concepts of
space and time namely 10- 33 cm and 10-
43 seconds it's over for SpaceTime so
it's not that we wouldn't want to say oh
well Einstein is you know Einstein's
mathematics has ref poor einin he got
himself caught in a logical bind he shot
himself in the foot he he had these
ideas about space and time curving and
so forth and then but then yeah he came
up with this mathematics and and the
mathematics came back and and showed
well this that idea of SpaceTime falls
apart at 10 to the minus 30 oh well
Einstein you dork you you you dummy you
you you look well no that's not our
attitude it's like no it's a great
Theory because Einstein gave us the
tools to find out the the not only the
scope but the limits of these very
fundamental concepts these were
professional philosophers publishing in
some cases in professional philosophical
journals so so the the the
misunderstanding of science is profound
um in that so that that's the fun
interesting thing that's happened in the
last I've got a paper coming a couple
papers in reply to these another
question that um a lot of my audience
has had and I I've had it too is you
know this this Trope that the map is not
the territory you know that you're
explaining modality to explain something
but now it's not clear where these
matrices end and like real reality would
begin what what do you say in in those
cases what what do you make of of that
as a criticism that describing something
as a Markov process is inherently which
is inherently the byproduct of a human
brain someone called Markov uh you know
originally but um you know where where
does it end is is it important to truly
have you know some base layer where you
say this is where we start from and
these are axioms and then even if you
could do that sorry to ask a double
barrel question but if you if you could
do that you know what what would G
girdle say you know that how can it be
complete um get that so the map is not
the territory how do you answer that and
then maybe girdle's objection I couldn't
agree more with the first objection and
so when I say that there is no
scientific theory of everything that
that includes Hoffman's Theory and
that's that's the predicament of science
is that it well it's you know this the
predicament if you wanted a theory of
everything then this is a bitter pill to
swallow right but there is no Theory of
Everything if you want job security this
is great so for job security for this is
really great and my own view about
scientific theories is that whatever
reality is a scientific theory is
merely a description of a particular
perspective at best at best it's a
description of a particular perspective
on reality and my guess is that there's
an infinite number of perspectives that
one could take not just one or two an
infinite number of of different
perspectives that one can take and in in
some sense the perspective that we're
taking is what we what we call space
time that's our little headset that's
the little headset that we use to get
our little you know projection of
whatever this this reality is and again
I'm I when I say that of course I'm
already using terms of my own Theory and
so at this point now I can all I say is
those terms are used as pointers there
is a reality and and we're just pointing
to a description of a projection of that
of that reality so but turns out most of
our theories are not even good at that
so most of the stuff that we come up
with is not even good as a as a
description of a projection of reality
right but every once in a while we get
something that that is a good
description of a projection of reality
and then we can build technology with it
so so there is a there is something
useful to to be done here we're I don't
think we're getting closer to the truth
if you ask me what is the truth my my
own guess is you are the truth but to
know that truth you have to let go of
any concept of who you are you you have
to let all let go of all Concepts and
just be with yourself then then then
you're knowing with it's a
non-conceptual knowing of of who you are
as as the truth so now that gets to the
girdle question right so the I take
scientific theories as mathematically
precise systems right and they they have
the at least the power of arithmetic
which is something that gir was looking
at so they they will in general have the
power
arithmetic and so therefore there will
be statements using girdle's approach
that that are true but cannot be proven
within whatever axium system you've
chosen for your for your scientific
theory so I think
that that girdle incompleteness thing is
one another reason why I I'm saying
pretty emphatically there is no
scientific theory of
everything and in in
fact we don't even get close right that
in some sense the the reality whatever
it is
infinitely
transcends any scientific theory
including my own infinitely transcends
but it's not all hope is not all lost
because I'm I'm suggesting that what you
are is that truth that that that reality
just looking at itself through a
particular Avatar in this case where
there's a you know a Brian and a dawn
Avatar uh but it's the one there's this
one
reality looking at itself through
different Avatar in in a particularly
simple headset and only a
four-dimensional headset those are
fairly trivial and I I can imagine that
there are an Infinity of other headsets
for example with maybe billions of
Dimensions trillions of Dimensions who
knows um and and we're probably you know
the more dumb one hey there's a good
chance you might be a scientist or an
engineer aspiring to be maybe going to
school graduate school or after school
or maybe you're a professor like me if
you're wanting to learn the greatest
tips and ways to become your best
scientist you might want to get my book
Into The Impossible think like a Nobel
Prize winner with a forward by my friend
Nobel Laur at Barry barish in it we
describe an incredible series of tips on
how to collaborate better unlock your
creative genius and get over common
pitfalls like the impostor syndrome I
hope you'll take a deep dive into it and
I know you'll enjoy it you can read a
free chapter at my website Brian
king.com books and you can buy it at
amazon.com an ebook audiobook or in
physical hard copy or paperback form
thanks a lot okay some questions from my
audience Abe Chung asked Dr Hoffman I'd
love to hear more about the interface
for reality in the context of
linguistics particularly text
Linguistics I am a translator by trade
for 20 years and studying this field
constantly reminds me of the lectures
you have given my studies are not enough
to capture anything at the level that
you do but I have a gut feeling you've
seen more down there can you say
something about Linguistics and
applications of the interface for
reality in that context the language
that we
use represents in some sense a world
view in in part and the way we learn
language how do you actually learn the
the words of a language when you're
teaching a kid for example at at at 18
months of age or something like that you
have you know Johnny there and and
there's a rabbit on on on a rug in in
your living room and you you you when
the time is right you you you're there
with Johnny and you point your finger to
the rabbit and you say rabbit and if
Johnny's old enough and attentive um he
gets it um it's it's actually that's
what we call ostensive definition so in
this case we almost every term that we
learn in a language is by ostensive
definition and notice that there's an
infinite ambiguity if if I point and say
rabbit um what in the world am I
referring to it could be
the color of the rabbit it's white or
it's fur the the furry texture or it
could be the the the left ear and the
right front paw or it could be the the
tail and the carpet so the an object
composed of the tail of the rabbit and
the carpet that is sitting on could so
what what does the word rabbit refer to
and yet
somehow and also you there's something
called the the um the level of at which
you're doing it um the basic level so
when you point you're going to say
rabbit you're not going to say oh biped
or or quadruped you you won't say oh
Johnny quadruped right it is a quadruped
but but you know that you'd be messing
up your kid if you if the first thing
you said was not rabbit but quadraped or
even if you tried to say the you the
color first you you'll you learn that
you have to say the shape first and then
the color and and higher things so so we
have what's really interesting is Johnny
has to share this perceptual interface
with Mom and Dad and whoever is right
you have to have the same evolutionary
interface so this whole inter so that's
now I'm tying in the interface Theory
perception with this linguistic thing
for for Johnny to even pick up what
you're talking about he has to have the
same kinds of entities in this interface
otherwise I mean if if if you try to do
that with uh you know um a rabbit if you
take a rabbit and and point and say
rabbit it's not going to get it it it
it's got a different a different
interface so so yeah this there's a a
really big connection and and in in some
sense everything that you know all the
words that refer to objects and
properties uh in in a language you only
learn by ensive definition that that
means you assume a shared headset so
there's of course you can see a huge um
the language depends hugely on an
assumption of of some shared properties
of
headsets and maybe uh the last question
I have from a listener is uh his name is
Los and
donio uh which I considered for one of
my children's names he says like this
suppose the argument for only conscious
agents existing depends on an
evolutionary argument in that case it
seems like the biological entities and
their systems involved in perception are
somehow outside of or more fundamental
than perceptions of a conscious agent
yet they are brains eyes Etc must also
be merely products of evolution and
predictive modeling and not real
entities does this lead to an internal
contradiction in your theory of
conscious agents well if you approach
that way you might get it a
contradiction but I approach it in a
different way so so the way I approach
it is is the following we can write down
to more Coop dynamics of conscious
agents um that is was called stationary
and and that means that the the entropy
for at each step is is the same so
there's no entropic Arrow of time in
this dynamic but it's a theorem very
very simple theorem to prove that if you
take a projection of that stationary
Dynamics Say by conditional probability
you'll get a new Dynamics Mar Dynamics
um that's a projection and but the
projected Dynamics will have increasing
entropy so it will have an entropic
arrow of time so my take on this is I
think that the the conscious agent
dynamics of Consciousness is stationary
so when we get an arrow of time in our
headset
that's entirely an artifact of the
projection so so so time is not
fundamental the entropic errow of time
is not fundamental now now this now ties
into the evolution question what is the
most fundamental limited resource in
evolution it's time if I don't breathe
in time I die if I don't eat in time I
die if I don't m in time I don't
reproduce time is the most fundamental
limited resource so what I'm saying is I
I love Darwin's theory I've studied it I
think it's incredible if you're going to
talk inside of our SpaceTime headset
about biological evolution use Darwin
that's the Right theory inside of our
our headset having said all those nice
things about Darin I I'll now say every
aspect of that theory
organisms competing for resources
limited time nature readed and truth and
Claw every aspect of Darwin's theory is
not an insight into a deeper reality
every aspect is entirely an artifact of
loss of information in the projection
into this headset so the theory of
conscious agents need have no limited
resources no competition no nature
Redden tooth and Claw cooperation and
love possibly right that it could be all
that but in the projection when you lose
information it will look
like there's an arrow of time nature red
and tooth and Claw predictive processing
Mark out blankets the whole all that
whole thing of me vers the separation
between entities um will all appear
there so you can see how I'm re
reframing the entire question I'm not
trying to boot I I don't take Evolution
what I did with Evolution was I said
that's our current theory I'm trying to
find the scope and limits of our current
theories right so I used Evolution to
show that organisms in space and time
can't be the fundamental reality right
that's what that's what it's the inside
game that you play in science you use
your own Theory to show its own limits
that's what we did so given that great
so now I have to make a leap I make a
leap in entirely Beyond SpaceTime the
evolution doesn't tell me what leap to
take I'm just making a leap I'm
proposing there are these positive
geometries there's decorated
permutations and Beyond them a theory
you you know a network of conscious
agents now of course my what I have to
do is what I just sketched if I start
with the theory of conscious agents
outside of SpaceTime how do I get
Evolution inside SpaceTime answer as an
artifact of loss of information in the
projection then it looks like nature
read in truth and Claw fighting for
resources in limited time
but that's not true of the deeper
picture but but the deeper picture shows
how this limited headset picture arises
as a loss of information in a special
case and that's the way science works I
want to ask one last question with my uh
host prerogative and that's just I
noticed that you are now listed as a
Meritus professor at UC Irvine just up
the road as an anteater I want to ask
you just quick Reflections on on a
career in Academia but with a particular
eye towards the future of Academia for
you know slightly Young
uh though not much younger but folks
like me and and even a new professor um
will Academia look the same in 20 years
when I'm you know a Meritus or or when a
new assistant professor today that we
just hired and she's going to be a
Meritus in 40 years what will Academia
look like and what will in particular
the field of artificial intelligence
obviously very closely related a lot of
uh your wonderful images came from AI
generated art which I love how will AI
change our profession or how will other
forces protest and disruptions and
encampments we've what do you see as a
future of Academia with the benefit of
this story legendary career that you've
had my best guess is that AI is going to
have a profound impact and in fact when
you're asking the question that was the
first thing that came to mind is that
AI right now ai is my closest
collaborator right because I mean on
mathematical things I always ask chayon
but sometimes my mathematician friend
chayon that I've worked with in love for
35 40 years right but you know he's a
person he's got a life and I you know he
can't be at my beck and call every time
I chayon what you know tell me about
this math so he's not a grad student
anymore that's right so I just go and
ask the AI to explain the stuff to me
and and it does it does a good job so
already my my in just in the last year
my whole style of research has really
actually accelerated because I don't
have to wait uh and I can actually ask a
series of questions and I can get a a a
pretty I mean I you have to tell when
the AI sometimes the AI gets it wrong so
you have to you have to be careful but I
think that students um you know
ultimately I'm not sure we're going to
need us to teach frankly it won't happen
right away I mean but I I you know if
you're looking 20 years down the line I
don't see too many people being able to
compete with AIS 20 years down the line
in terms of didactic skills and so forth
and right now is the worst AI is going
to be right I mean it's it's only going
to get better and imagine uh my you know
kids a 10-year-old and you know he or
she has had AI you know reading over
their emails and let's say it's
benevolent you know who knows about
Google and but you know everything will
be on Google you know I wasn't on Google
when I was 10 it didn't exist for the
you know it took 20 more years almost
before it existed so imagine everything
every single thing every thought every
email to collaborator uh and again it
could be malevolent but let's just
assume it's benevolent just the imagine
you know it's truly a second third
fourth fifth brain and and just the
capability of that but you know I wonder
I I had some conversations last week
with David berlinsky who you probably
know he's a wonderful thinker and Rak
contour and he was talking about a
conversation he had in 19 you know 65
with Nome Chomsky and BF Skinner and all
these Incredible Minds that that are
heroes right to to many people and and
the question that came up of you know
will you know computers ever really be
able to reason and he asked this of
Chomsky and Chomsky said you know the
probability of you know in a stochastic
system of the next word being selected
is zero you know basically there's an
infinite number of words and then you
add in context grammar syntax lexicon
vocab all these so the probability and
yet I'm speaking to you right now uh and
I'm not even thinking about what I'm
saying it's probably obvious to you but
but the point being uh that chsky even
the great Chomsky thought that these
llms were impossible you know as
recently is you know 30 years 40 years
ago even uh maybe even more recent than
that so and yet I I push back on David
who's sort of even suggesting that AI
will come up with these laws of physics
I mean I don't have to remind you but
you know Einstein here uh you know he
said his happiest thought was that if he
was in freef Fall he'd experience no
gravitational field and that led to the
Einstein equivalence principle which
then overlaid onto it you know all
remani and geometry and everything uh to
what extent you know can chat GPT
produce an ampl to hedron you know or or
an Einstein equivalence principle is it
just a matter of tokens because I'm very
uh optimistic about the need for humans
although I I agree our our days at least
as we do it are are numbered but um I'm
no Einstein and the question of you know
creativity at the level of you know I I
made a joke the other day on X I said
you know is it I assume I stipulate that
computers will always be better at
humans than chess but I don't believe a
computer will ever invent a game like
chess so where is the magic you know
where is where's the room for for
physicists for cognitive scientist is it
in creativity are there things that llm
certainly cannot replicate just based on
their architecture earlier I I I said
that I think that you are the truth you
are the the the reality and then there's
this one infinite reality that
transcends any concepts that's talking
to itself through a Dawn and Brian
avatars and so forth and that's relevant
to this this question because if if we
look at an llm or or a future AI it's
it's it's going to be some kind of
computational system and computational
systems have their limits right we have
G limits at that at a minimum I'm
betting
that you and I are avatars of of an
infinite intelligence that's the true
source of all creativity and that that
that Einstein and any scientist Taps
into when they come up with their
truly
original ideas the first step will be to
say if it's just a computational device
then it it it doesn't transcend it it
doesn't transcend and doesn't get to
this true originality but but then
there's a deeper level to trying to
address your question because in some
sense okay well what is this thing we
call Da and Brian well these are just
avatars in in a particular headset right
so why can't we create a new Avatar in
our headset that looks like a
computer that is actually an avatar of
the deep intelligence right if we're
going to only stick with a computational
thing then I think there's no problem
but somehow the the Brian Avatar is a
portal into the infinite Consciousness
and and and the dawn Avatar is a portal
into it and we we we know one way of
creating new portals into this infinite
Consciousness that is having kids so
that's one technology that that allows
us to do that so could we once we
understand SpaceTime as a headset and we
understand the headset and and and at
least some layers of its relationship to
the infinite reality the the that's a
source of true insight and true
originality and
creativity could we figure out new ways
to open up genuine new portals and might
that look like
AI there I'll have to say I the jury's
out but so the first one I would say if
it's just an llm kind of or just a
computational device no then there's
this a level of creativity that is going
to miss but is it possible that we could
actually open new portals into the
Consciousness
behind then it's a different game
excellent well Don this is a wonderful I
can talk to you forever maybe I'll come
up to Irvine next time we'll do it in
person think we ever met pleasure
absolutely great pleasure Brian yeah Don
you're such a fan favorite my favorite
and love talking to you and hopefully
we'll do it again like I said in person
sometime I would love to do that Brian
great to talk okay stay well bye Don
congratulations you made it all the way
to the end in this wonderful
conversation with Don I know you're GNA
love my episode with Sam Harris and
click here for my greatest episodes in
the theory of Consciousness in the mind
see you next week on into the impossible
