you think you've been taught things that
aren't quite right this whole thing
about molecules in a puddle or in a pond
lightning strikes molecules form those
molecules form into Slytherin creatures
and they come out of this pond that's
the primordial soup model that's a bunch
of nonsense
I am the chapter director for the rashio
Christie chapter here at Rice I
graduated uh back in 2020 I was over at
Jones I did a double major Linguistics
and theater and I helped
start our chapter here and I just
enjoyed it so much enjoyed the
conversations that we have that I
decided to stay on board
so
welcome
rashio Christie is
a Christian Ministry here that likes to
tackle the big questions of life
why are we here does God exist
is the Bible true and so we enjoy having
uh conversations having lectures
bringing subject matter experts like Dr
James Stewart here
normally we talk about
philosophical historical scientific
Arguments for belief in the Christian
faith
but
that's not one of those talks tonight
some of y'all might think that this is
about creationism Evolution no
there is not going to be any God talk
here tonight rather we are having Dr
tour talk about the state of the
research on the origin of life
abiogenesis
so
if you aren't a Christian here we
welcome you and we always welcome you to
come to any of our weekly meetings we
normally meet here in this room 6 30 on
Tuesdays so if you're a Christian
welcome if you're not a Christian you
are more than welcome to join us and now
let's give a big round of applause for
Dr tour
okay with intent there is going to be
nothing about God in this I think I had
my mentioned right at the end I write
the word God to say you did not hear me
speak about God at all so when people
say that tour uses god of the gaps
arguments or tour has to bring God into
this her tour has to bring in Miracles
into this they're wrong okay they're
wrong all right now now um I am locked
and loaded and it's not because of you
it's because of of uh my position on
these things has brought attack from
people on the internet an attack from
the scientific Community that's why I am
locked and loaded so if if you think
that I am being hard on people trust me
I am an angel compared to the way that
they treat me okay so so because I know
in this day and age you say one little
thing that might
you know ruffle some feathers and you
look at people like boy they should be
canceled but it's going to happen
tonight all right
um so there was a there was a video put
out a couple of years ago by Professor
Dave uh uh who's a guy named Dave Farina
and that has 786
000 views
as of today and it's it's he talks a lot
about uh my motivation for doing these
things I was psychoanalyzed and uh um he
knew things about me that I didn't even
know about myself at all and so I came
out with a 13-part series it's actually
14 Parts because this is a one of the
parts is a and b but say a 13-part
series on abiogenesis and so you can
listen to all of those parts and so you
see I don't have the YouTube following
that he has this has 43 000 views in the
last year and two years he has 78 786
000. so you know if you guys would just
click on it a few times bring the
numbers up and be helpful and what I
also did is so you don't have to click
on all the different parts you can just
click once and now it's nine hours of
content and and you can just listen to
it because I had to go through the
science it's just strictly science I'm
going through the science and uh there's
a lot involved there and so then he came
out with a two-part series on me again
now these have got like almost nine
eight hundred thousand views 900 000
views and uh and and again he says I'm
still clueless so we will address that
not so much tonight but that will be
addressed in due time
so it's because I have a day job that I
can't just run in and make YouTube
videos and this is not easy because I
have to actually read papers and go
through the data on the papers but we he
brought in what was really good is he
brought in three experts
and so now I can go after the experts
because I'm not going after a YouTuber
who it's very hard to engage just going
like you know you put a hook in jello
and it comes out but but I I'm going
after chemists only two of those people
on his that he brought on knew that they
were being brought on uh one of them
didn't even know uh so I I I I was going
to go after the two today to show really
their work on abiogenesis and what it's
really like but I only have time for one
because because uh uh it was just it was
so rich there was so much to go through
abiogenesis is the origin of life from
non-living matter and to construct any
convincing theory of abiogenesis we must
take into account the condition of the
earth about 4 billion years ago these
are not my definition these are textbook
dictionary definitions all right so so
this is origin of life this has nothing
to do with Evolution which is life from
Life
all right what are the characteristics
of life responsiveness to the
environment growth and change ability to
reproduce you have a metabolism and
breathe maintain homeostasis being made
of cells and passing traits onto
Offspring homeostasis is the steady
internal physical and chemical condition
all right again not my definition this
is what we've got to go after
all right molecules don't care about
life organisms care about life chemistry
on the contrary is utterly indifferent
to life without a biological entity
acting on them
molecules have never been shown to move
toward life never all right so a lot of
people have have tried to make molecules
that that are reminiscent of the
molecules uh of life for example eschen
Moser Sutherland devaraj pounder
krishnamurthy uh um and and their origin
of Life researchers ool origin of Life
researchers
what they do is they purchase some
chemicals generally in high Purity they
mix those together in water and high
concentrations really high
concentrations uh compared to the way
they might be dispersed on an early
Earth or in a specific order they attain
mixtures of compounds that might
resemble a precursor for one of the four
classes of compounds you need for life
you need four classes of compounds
carbohydrates nucleic acids amino acids
and lipids you need those four classes
they publish a paper making bold
assertions
even though even though that well before
they do that
all of their compounds are stereo
scrambled they have very little control
of relative stereochemistry no control
of absolute stereochemistry and and uh
so they couldn't work anyway and they'll
publish a paper much like Miller and
Yuri did in 1952 so we're 70 years into
this since military experiment which is
a great experiment I think it was a
great experiment uh we're a bunch of the
amino acids formed
um so then they'll watch the the publish
these papers and then the late person
will say you see scientists understand
this because the Press has turned up the
knobs and then they encourage a
generation of science textbook writers
and then you hear about these primordial
suit models which are a bunch of
nonsense we have no zero zero evidence
for that
um the problem with these is this that
molecules decompose molecules that
compose the living systems almost always
show homochirality uh when you're
building molecular systems you need
constant redesigns so if you hook
something on uh wrong you can't go back
once you hook them already on it's very
hard to take it back off again uh the
synthetic reactions don't know how to
stop molecules don't know what they're
going toward they don't let's move
toward life today they don't know that
they're just moving along and if they
make an intermediate that's kind of
interesting kind of in your life it's
going to change into something else the
next day under the same conditions
molecules don't know where to stop time
although claimed to be the savior of
abiogenesis is actually the enemy
because molecules decompose you get a
molecule is it's good and then
under the same conditions that it Formed
it goes bad all the time all the time
and molecules don't sit around saying I
think I'll sit here for a billion years
and wait for the next substrate to come
no they they oxidize and if you say the
Earth was reducing fine you had a lot of
ammonia which is more degrading than
oxygen very often uh um
Prebiotic systems don't have the ability
to purify things and they do relay
synthesis uh this was the origin of Life
researchers do reagent addition order is
essential it's like making a cake you
can't say well you know let's just put
the icing in in into the into the flour
no there's an order in which you have to
go and to to build things you have to
control temperature pressure solvent
light or no light pH what the gas
atmosphere is over this complex molecule
building is hard the characters
characterization at each step is
critical in biological systems there's
characterization they don't run it
doesn't run spectroscopy but you have
enzymes that check things and if it's
not the right thing then they'll pull it
out and they'll they'll chop it up and
they'll use it to build something else
Mass transfer is the killer of
everything if you start with a kilo of
something kilo would be a lot if you had
a particular thing and how many steps
could you bring that kilo before you
would have nothing left because each
yield might only be one or two percent
yield and and all of a sudden you have
very little material left
and uh so so um
the mass transfer problem to anybody who
does synthesis you run out of material
you try to optimize and optimize
material and uh yields and it's still
hard nature keeps no laboratory
notebooks so say it's going along and
hey this is moving like and now it runs
out of material
and it took 400 million years to get
there
well why doesn't it just go back and
make more because it never kept a
laboratory notebook you don't keep a
laboratory no it doesn't know how to go
back and do it again these are all the
big problems that that happen here's the
way synthesis is normally done you take
a you mix it with b and you get a number
of compounds a b will couple together
you get a B1 ab2 you get a number of
different compounds say ab4 is the one
you want then you will separate out ab4
from the mixture of compounds you purify
that and you'll take ab4 mix it with C
then you get ab4 C1 ab4 C2 maybe this is
the compound that you want then you
separate this out and bring it on the
next step right then you you get the
compound you want you separate it out
and bring on the next step this is the
way synthesis is done
here's the way people who work in the
era of origin of Life do synthesis and
remember if you think I'm being hard on
them
I there's no there's no uh uh ad hominem
attacks none
if I
hit him with an ad hominem attack it was
not intended so I'm sorry I apologize
preemptively all right but but uh I'm
just saying their work is wrong their
work makes no sense it's nonsensical I'm
not criticizing the individual I'm
criticizing their Work Direct criticism
of their work
uh relay synthesis here's what they do
they'll take A and B they make the same
series of compounds and then they never
purify this because it's in such a mess
they can't purify it how would early
Earth go about purification
well it might crystallize it might we'll
try to crystallize it go ahead well they
don't then they say ah we see ab4 in
there it's a little blip on my hplc so
it's in there it might only be a tenth
of a percent but it's in there so I will
go ahead and buy a B4 I will purchase it
and it'll be chiral homocytrel and pure
100 enantiomeric excess or as good as
you can get I will buy it that way and
then I'll go on well wait a minute
that's cheating they isolated that from
a natural source and then they took it
on and and now he takes he or she takes
it on and they get a mixture of
different compounds say this is the
compound that do they that they want
they will say ah it's there I see it now
they will go ahead and buy this so they
put upon the early Earth constraints
that they would never be able to deal
with the heck with early Earth that's
early Earth's problem that my problem is
origin of Life researcher not my problem
that's earlier's problem you see how
unfair that is it's cheating every step
nobody could get away with a synthesis
like this nobody
I mean reviewers would just laugh at you
but origin of life you get away with it
all the time because they cheat at every
step they cheat at every step
scientifically they cheated every step
chemically they cheat at every step all
right so here's here's a
you can just get this off the internet
and this is the Prebiotic nuclear bases
and The Roots to them this is a lot of
this is showing if you look at these
syntheses they are exceedingly complex
very very hard and there is no absolute
stereo control so in other words not
controlling chirality here in some cases
there's some relative control but not
absolute control there's no absolute
control there's little or no control of
relative
stereochemistry there's little or no
accounting of yield there's little
accounting of purification no accounting
for mass transport they don't they don't
say hey I ran out of material then they
look at their notebook and they go back
and they make someone but they don't
even really do that because they're only
one step back they just buy some more
is cheating all the way a Prebiotic
Earth would never have these luxuries
so if you just look at carbohydrates or
some kind sometimes called sugars
sometimes called saccharides and the
polymers they're from so if we just take
glucose just d-glucose it can have an
open form and four closed forms two is
six member rings and two is five
membered rings they're four stereogenic
Center 16 possible isomers on the open
form there are five stereogenic centers
so 32 possible isomers but that's times
four plus the 16 from here that's 144
possible isomers just of the glucose you
already have d-glucose
but it can open or close in and and you
can have you can have all of these
possible forms
so if you just have d-glucose how many
ways can you poke together 60 glucoses
because you want to make starch for
example you have to be able to build
polysaccharides to have life how many
ways can you hook these together well if
you had nucleotides so you had the a
base there's only one way AAA that's it
six A's hooked together that's the only
way how many ways can you hook together
six glucoses it's over one trillion ways
over one trillion ways to hook this
together you see why because it's got
all these different tentacles it's got
all of these alcohols all these
different so it can hook together
through one or through the other through
an open form through a closer over one
trillion ways that's why nobody's ever
done it nobody's ever made glucose in in
in uh with with even relative control of
stereochemistry in a prebiotically
relevant manner that it is purified from
its other material let alone absolute
control where you have to have a
homochiral material nobody's ever done
it nobody's ever polymerized glucose
that's how far away we are nobody's ever
done it in a prebiotically relevant
manner means that you're not taking
human-made design stereo protecting
groups deep protecting groups just what
would be available on an early Earth
so Steve Benner he's the founder of the
foundation for Applied molecular
Evolution why why would I why would I
talk about Steve's work oh I can't
imagine
you look at those videos that came out
from Dave Farina and you will see him
saying things about my motivations and
why I say these things and I challenged
him you think that I'm only speaking
behind his back I'm not I challenged him
we met together we were at a conference
in Israel in May and I went when Susie
got to the dinner the night before the
conference I went right at him and and I
asked him I said did you ever watch my
videos and remember this is this is 13
videos all right 13 videos of like nine
or ten hours of videos did you ever
watch my videos before you commented on
them because you said that I said many
things in there that I never said
and he said well
it was on but you know I was kind of
doing other things oh I believe that it
was on you turned on part one it was
this was long before I launched the the
the click once and watch the whole thing
and it's just part you you you clicked
on part one and then you went and did
other things and it was just playing in
the background and then when you got
done with that playing in the background
you went and you went to part two you
clicked on that and then you went and
did other yes I believe you Steve
do you believe him it's hard to believe
it's it's my voice like like you know
soft music in this in the background
that people like to enjoy listening to
this stuff
he's published this paper Prebiotic
chemistry that could not not have
happened meaning that this is chemistry
is so easy it it must have happened on
early Earth okay let's I was interested
in this I wanted to see this
so he talked here's what this scheme
that showed in the paper these different
molecules that he could make and you see
all these these carbohydrates here the
this is this precursor to to a nucleic
acid and things like this wow he thinks
that these could happen let's look those
articles up so just look up the
synthesis of the carbohydrates so in
that article you you have to go back to
these other articles to see exactly how
did he get this compound how did he get
this compound so you go and you look up
the article so here's his paper where he
talks about the synthesis of this and so
he says one present obstacle is in the
RNA first model of the origin of life is
the inability to generate reasonable
hands-off scenarios for the formation of
carbohydrates under conditions where
they might have survived for reasonable
times when it's formed so he understands
he's a real synthetic chemist I know the
person that he worked for for his PhD
real synthetic chemist he knows that
these molecules under the conditions
that they're made they decompose so how
does the chemist make these you watch
the reaction as soon as it's optimized
and starts going to Boom you stop that
reaction and then you fish it out
because they decompose on their very
reaction conditions in which they form
lots of chemical reactions are like that
but he wants a hands-off scenario so he
picks on other origin of Life
researchers saying they have two
exacting conditions early Earth would
never have been that exact ours is a
hands-off scenario
okay let's see how hands-off it is and
then he says here we show how we can do
this on a borate material and it it
helps the formation and it makes them
stay around longer it's a hands-off
approach it makes them stay around
longer so that they don't decompose so
fast
okay I want to read about that
then he shows all the
I mean just like
people would be embarrassed to show a
mixture like this in a normal synthetic
paper where are you going with this but
in any case so he makes his d ribose d
ribose has a normal Half-Life under the
conditions in which it forms in five how
of five hours that means after five
hours you only have half as much as you
had five hours before that's what that
that the half-life means after eight
half-lives it's gone
well he's stabilized this thing so that
it lasts 45 hours which is less than two
days
when we're talking early Earth and
Prebiotic stuff we're talking millions
of years
you go from five hours to 45 hours
there's no difference the Delta is too
small
it's just not there
and this is what you're proud of
that you stabilize this what is is there
something there that as soon as it forms
is good I mean that's a stability now
you look at his D ribose that he made
this is what the Spectrum for d-ribose
should look like this is right off the
internet you guys who are taking my
organic class you're going to learn
about C13 NMR by the end of this
semester you so so so you can have an
open form in closed form and so there's
d-ribose here's what he gets
if you know anything about chemistry
this is another joke that's not a proton
anymore that's a C13 NMR this isn't
people would be ashamed to show this
ashamed
every one of these little Peaks this is
not noise every one of these is a
different compound there's a bazillion
compounds in here it's totally useless
and this guy puts it in there as he's
proud of it
somewhere in there is ribose now it's
it's racemic so you have the other
Mirror Image there but somewhere there
is ribose
okay now what now what do you do with
it's in such a mixture you could never
use it but what does he do
he gets ribose go on to the next step
well where did you get that where did
you get the ribose he doesn't say he
says references krishnamurthy's paper he
says krishnamurthy got ribose in his
Prebiotic work oh okay so I looked up
Krishna murthy's paper
and you know what it says he bought it
he bought it from Sigma Aldridge it
comes from a natural source and then he
reacts it with this compound so so
Benner refers to Krista Murthy Christian
Murthy had taken ribose which he bought
and he reacted with this compound which
all origin of Life researchers say is
prebiotically relevant in other words it
could form on an early Earth we're sure
and so I searched this thing down I
searched it and and uh uh so anyway so
where does this reagent come from so
that's also in reference 48 you go to
reference 48 and you go and then it
refers you to another paper and refers
you to another paper so you work your
way back and so you can look at here's
Krishna murthy's paper and so he talks
about this compound these compounds that
you need for putting for phosphorylating
these compounds and you look up these
references so here it is reference four
and five in the Christian Mercy paper so
he referred me to Krishna Murthy and
Kristen Murthy refers me to references
four and five
so I go to reference and and then he
also uses another way and then if you
look at the yields look at the yields
here his yield of this compound which
Benner is going to use is 29 yield of a
three to two mixture hence it's 17 yield
of what he wants this is starting with
something that he bought chirally pure
from a from a from a distributor that
gets it from a natural source and he's
using all this chemistry that's not
really prebiotically relevant he has
magnesium chloride around
so he uses magnesium chloride I want you
to remember that he injects magnesium
chloride uses magnesium chloride it's
going to be available it is available
2.5 percent of the crust of the earth is
magnesium magnesium chloride is
available
all right so you you get this compound
now does he does he take this and
somehow get it in pure form no it's
mixed in with many other things he has
to buy this in pure form or make it by
another route in pure form but
nonetheless where does he get where does
he get this this uh this is a hands-off
remember Benner said we do hands-off
centers other people do Hands-On well
what Bender does is he refers to people
who do the Hands-On he says well I
didn't do it the other guy did it not me
it's him
here's the hands-off synthesis D ribose
well where'd you get d-ribles he bought
it from Sigma Aldrich D ribose was
dissolved in water and this sodium
ammonium phosphate was added well
where'd you get that I bought it and it
was added at room temperature the pH
value of the solution 9.4 was lowered to
maintain it at seven oh how convenient
was that that really happened on an
early Earth over a 24-hour period by
addition of ion exchange resin amber
light IR went to where do you get ion
exchange resin on an early Earth no way
this is not a naturally occurring
compound these are all human made at
four hour intervals another batch of
sodium ammonium phosphate uh
pentahydrate was added at pH 7
maintained as before for 24 hours
subsequently the pH of the reaction uh
mixture was lowered to 6.5 how
convenient was that and maintained for
another 24 Hours by addition of the cyan
exchange resin and then the reaction
mixture was diluted with 0.05 molar uh
this this ammonium formic acid complex
all of this and then he he gets this and
then he has to to characterize it so
detailed so involved this doesn't happen
did you ever go out to a puddle and see
it doing one of these things I asked you
this is the Hands-On stuff that Benner
criticizes but then he cites this this
is available it was done in early Earth
because here's a paper on on Prebiotic
synthesis where they do this type of
thing and the the idea of hands-off is
to have someone else do the Hands-On
part and then cite their product buy it
from an isolator of natural sources and
press ahead that's what Benner did now
when you go to track that compound which
they say is really prebiotically
relevant you go back to this article
which is like from 1955 had nothing to
do with Prebiotic synthesis using
compounds that would never be available
by Prebiotic synthesis you see how the
science itself screams out that all of
your chemistry is nonsense when it comes
to Prebiotic synthesis
as for ribose it was junk unusable like
everyone else's no homochirality so it's
not accessible ribose and even then it's
a trace in the sea of billions of other
products yet the world believes this
nonsense
and I'm the one Speaking
of Miracles this is Miracle right here
this is Miracle
all right so then Benner publishes this
paper which he had talked about on that
video he talked about it on the video so
I go to look up the paper because he's
criticizing me and he's talking about
how we've made you know this these poly
ribonucleic acids should I go to look up
the paper it's not there so I contact
him I said you cited a paper could I see
the paper I can't seem to find it this
is not published yet
I said you talked about an article in
the paper as your prime example has not
even published yet could it could you
send me a preprint so I can look at it
no no you'll have to wait till it's
published it came out 13 months after
his video 13 months after his video and
he never said this in this video it has
a substantial fraction of three five
dinucleotide linkage three five is what
you want it has a substantial fraction
what the heck does that mean
does that mean two-thirds of it
or does that mean one-third who knows
who knows a substantial fraction
he didn't even say The major portion is
three five which is the linkage he has
to have
so in a step growth polymerase and then
he goes on he goes on in the video about
how you can do this with impure
materials that's garbage you cannot do
step growth polymerization with impure
materials there's something called
Carruthers equation which shuts the
things down it says it cannot happen if
you don't have 99.999 pure material you
don't get big polymerizations it just
doesn't happen so so uh that just can't
happen so here here's what it is if you
look at at RNA you want to buy RNA this
is from the chemical manufacturer who
isolates this from natural sources
um or or they make it on a DNA
synthesizing machine they say you store
it at minus 80 degrees Centigrade that's
minus 112 Fahrenheit you have to store
it at that with lots of stabilizers to
keep it to keep it really stable you'd
never want it around divaling cations
so this is the three five linkage this
is what you want here's the base here's
the three three prime position going to
the five Prime position three prime to
five Prime that's how it's polymerized
here's a three prime to five Prime but
here's now the two prime five Prime you
see this is three prime this is two
prime here's two Prime oh oh that is a
wrong attachment that one doesn't work
for coding now into into a a
polypeptide to make an enzyme to do any
synthesis that's the problem because RNA
RNA can couple through either the two
prime hydroxyl or the three prime
hydroxyl and any chemist knows exactly
what I'm talking about and so you look
up in his paper and you look up it you
look you click on the experimental of
his paper and in the experimental he put
up a word file not even a PDF and it has
a different author order than on the
original paper it's really wild but
where did he get his his ribose with his
his uh nucleotide triphosphate on it New
England bio Labs or Sigma Aldrich he
bought it well why didn't you do useless
stuff you made because it's junk because
he can't use it
he buys it it's all relay synthesis it's
a game it's a game and you're all
deceived all of you all of you are
deceived until 7 30 then you're gonna
know
and he says you can do this on on impure
stuff well then you read is experimental
before every experiment glass powders
were treated for 20 minutes with three
percent hydrogen peroxide that's really
scrubbing it off followed by 10 washes
with Ultra Pure rnas free water well I
could see why you have to have rnas free
because you you wanna you want to uh not
depolymerize this thing but 10 washes
with Ultra Pure Water this could never
go on an early Earth where you have
normal impurities around
and why is that because what happens is
that hydroxyl attacks that phosphate and
the RNA decomposes and it decomposes
much faster if there's
what is that
magnesium around 2.5 percent of the
surface of the Earth is magnesium you
want to be able to add magnesium
chloride when you want it but now when
you don't want it you can exclude it had
it early Earth know that
all right and then you look at his
experimentals and you see that it's got
branching it's got all sorts of crazy
structures in here so the two five could
never work it has been shown by other
people that characterize and they
honestly tell you we made this on Clays
I mean and we always get two five
linkages in fact he says 75 to 80
percent is the two five linkage what's
wrong with the two five linkage it
doesn't work it can't code for a protein
so let's just say let's be gracious and
say that he he said a substantial
fraction is three five linkage so we'll
give him two-thirds of his material so
that's a substantial fraction 66 of his
material is three five linkages that
means the other one-third is two five
linkages that means one out of every
three linkages is the two five linkage
the wrong linkage
well what does that mean well that means
that you could never get even a single
amino acid coded for because each amino
acid has to have three nucleotides
coding for it if one out of three has
the wrong linkage you can't even get a
single amino acid out of this thing and
you're going around hyping this thing up
like it's so amazing plus if you have
any of the two five linkage it acts as
s-i-rna that's called small interfering
RNA it stops the chemical reaction
Steve Benner starts with pure nucleoside
triphosphate he gets these mixtures he
couldn't even coat for one so then you
you see what do these guys say to the
Press which you guys read
and it says scientists announced a
breakthrough in determining life's
origin on Earth and maybe Mars
look we gotta have a cell we have to
have a ton of infrastructure to have a
cell work RNA is not a cell even if he
had it on it and he doesn't even have it
this is so not true
um so let's let's see what Steve Benner
says one Community revisits classical
questions with complex chemical schemes
that require difficult chemistry
performed by skilled chemists that's
Hands-On stuff Bender explained they're
beautiful craft work appears in name
brand journals like Nature and Science
however precisely because of the
complexity of this chemistry it cannot
possibly account for how life originated
on Earth you used it you used their
chemistry in your papers
you see what I mean he took their
Hands-On chemistry and applied it but he
didn't touch it in contrast the
foundation study takes a simpler
approach and they talk about how they've
made these nucleotides 100 200
nucleotides long in length on this uh
basaltic glass which is the sporon glass
says the same impactors that formed the
glass also transiently reduced the
atmosphere with their metal iron nickel
cores RNA basis whose sequence is stored
genetic information are formed in such
atmospheres the team had previously
showed that nucleotides are formed by
simple reactions between ribose
phosphate and RNA bases
didn't we just look at that paper that
you cheated all the way along you never
made ribose you bought the stuff and you
used Hands-On chemistry from someone
else's reaction that didn't even use
prebiotically relevant compounds this
may sound like a bunch of mumbo-jumbo to
you but you're getting enough to catch
my drift
the beauty of this model
is its Simplicity it can be tested by
high schoolers and chemistry class said
John's Spock Spock spot check who was
not involved in the study but who
developed instruments to detect alien
genetic polymers on Mars mix the
ingredients wait for a few days and
detect RNA no you won't no you won't if
you don't watch that 20 times with Ultra
Pure Water and wash it with hydrogen
you're not getting this no way the
Carruthers equation tells us that they
say the same rocks resolve other
paradoxes in making RNA in a path that
moves all the way from simple organic
molecules to the first RNA for example
boray manages the formation of ribose
the r in RNA it does not it gave a
billion compounds
and that ribose would be totally
unusable you didn't even use it how do
you expect early Earth to extract from
that
Banner added this path starts from
simple carbohydrates that could not not
have formed he loves that term in the
atmosphere above primitive Earth thus
this work completes a path that creates
RNA from small organic molecules that
were almost certainly present on early
Earth a single geological model moves
from one to two carbon molecules to give
RNA molecules long enough to support
darwinian evolution
is that not enough to make you vomit I
mean come on
how do you go from small molecules a
bunch of junk that you made even if you
had the RNA
RNA now you've got darwinian Evolution
so you you got life now and that life is
now
genetically passing on to offspring
even Jack sawstek which himself he will
see more about Jack sauce deck he's a
Nobel Prize winner at Harvard here's
what he says about Benner's work if you
think I'm being hard here's what Jack
SOS Tech says to the to to a Science
magazine he says I find it very
frustrating that the authors have made
an interesting initial finding but then
decided to go with the hype rather than
the science so if you think I'm being
judgmental I mean he's telling the press
this I'm just telling my community
all right lipids in the cell membrane so
protocell experiments they they buy
homocchiral diastolipids and they shake
it together they make these these uh
vesicles and they say this is a
protocell it is not a protocell it is
garbage and and the reason is anytime
you have a cellular membrane you have to
have different
uh you have to have different diocio
lipids on the outside than on the inside
you have to have them different and why
do you have to have them they're
different because you have to have
proton gradient to form without a proton
gradient there's no life plus you have
to have to have a lot of transmembrane
proteins you have to have glycoproteins
on the surface cell membrane is really
complex but even just your membrane
itself could never work nobody knows how
to make the outside different than the
inside how does how do biological
systems do it they have enzymes called
flip-base enzymes and they'll take
things and they'll flip them over and
move them to the other side
remember there's no enzymes there
Carolyn do spin cell activity is
homochirality necessary for life and the
answer is yes here's here's what what
biological systems can do they can take
two hydroxyl radicals and they can have
them form hydrogen peroxide or oxygen
plus two protons
does does uh does do biological systems
do that we are just learning in the last
20 years how this is done and it's
because the electron the electron here
is spin polarized it's either spin up or
spin down these can travel down chiral
surfaces and these are spin valves they
only allow one of the the electron spins
to go through and not the other and
that's how you get the two surfaces one
is anti-parallel one is parallel it's a
spin valve we don't know how to do
synthetic chemistry like that we don't
know how
that's how nature does it so cleanly
so what we're learning is that is that
um all of biological systems have
this Carolyn do spin selectivity going
on and that's why biological system
yields you know like in our class you
know we make 45 of this 55 of this 70 of
this and 30 is other junk
why and in biology you're getting 99.999
yield or better and the little bit that
does that isn't right it has scroungers
to go around find that and and take it
out because it would gum up the works
how does it do that through chiral
induced spin selectivity yes there there
are Van Der waals interactions which is
this hand and glove we talked about for
enzymes but now you have Carolyn do spin
selectivity which is the thing that
dominates we didn't even know this 20
years ago I didn't learn this when I was
your age I just learned this 20 years
ago and many chemists don't even know
this to this day and and certainly
biologists don't know this
uh the interactoms if you just look at
the protein protein interactions in a
simple yeast cell yes yeast cell is very
simple just protein protein interactions
and we're learning that non-covalent
interactions have to all be aligned
non-covalent interactions have to be
aligned here and and uh the reason they
have to be aligned because information
travels down these by electrostatic
potentials there are 10 to the 79
billion combinations of how these could
be ordered the number of Elemental
particles is 10 to the 90. you think
that's a big number
foreign
it's a one with 79 billion zeros after
it
and and uh that's a big big number
that's the number of combinations and
the E cell has the proper combination to
get this cell to work
and that's why when a cell divides it
puts this information on both sides of
the cell and then it divides and those
do the same thing the information is
constantly passed on nobody knows how
this is done it's called 11th all 2.0
paradox
origin of information critical for life
is the origin of information DNA and RNA
the order in which these things are
attached this information is primary
matters secondary matter is secondary so
if I if I uh if I have a thought in my
mind all right and then I write it on a
piece of paper now it it it was it was
stored in interconnected Pathways in my
brain now it's written down on a piece
of paper now I take that paper and I
type it into my computer
it's going it it goes into a flash
memory it goes actually in into SRAM
right away and then when I hit save it
goes into
uh into flash memory now I take this and
I upload it to the cloud so it goes to
an RF wave to the to the Box on the wall
wherever that is and and it'll go into
that box just through an RF wave so that
information has been here it's been on a
piece of paper it's been on SRAM it's
it's been on flash memory now it's in an
RF wave then when it hits that box it
goes down a wire that information is
going down a wire it goes through a
server Farm into another flash memory
the matter upon which it resides is
secondary the information is primary the
information is the key and the matter
can keep on changing we don't even know
how to make the matter the
carbohydration nucleic acids lipids and
proteins I can do the same thing with
with Lee Cronin and his protein garbage
that he had in in in what he talked
about it's all a bunch of nonsense but
this will come out on my YouTube channel
Dr James tour this is coming out it's
going to come out and all of this will
be exposed all right a synthetic cell
you see well we've read There are
synthetic cells you look you're not
telling truth people have made synthetic
cells oh yeah okay in 2010 Craig
venter's team copied an existing
bacterial genome and transplanted it
into another cell and they call that its
synthetic cell that means that I buy I
buy a Corvette
I buy and then what I do is I buy
another Corvette and I take the the the
computer control chip out of the first
Corvette and put it into the second
Corvette and I say I need that Corvette
no you didn't you just took in something
out of an existing bacterial genre and
transplant
2016 vendors team did something similar
they removed all but 473 genes from a
natural genome and transplanted it into
another cell
it didn't work very well
couldn't we produce so in 2021 they
added 19 genes back to get it to to work
a little bit better and they called
these synthetic cells and people say
true you're wrong because I just read a
paper where they said is it you got to
read the paper you can't just read the
title you've got to read the paper and
this is what happens to a lot of people
they say sure you're wrong you say amino
acids don't polymerize in water I read a
paper it says peptides form in water
yeah with special
activating agents and you've protected
them so you no longer have amino acids
you don't have severe ionic structures
if you just read the title you get
completely misled because these guys are
not to be trusted because they're
telling you things that are going to
really mix you up
all right a challenge make the simplest
living cell a Nobel Prize would probably
awarded be awarded very quickly for the
first person who makes a simple sell not
a complex cell a simple one because
people always argue well cells were much
simpler back then
well how simple were they well this has
been computed so so bioengineers have
computed how simple a cell could be the
simplest cell has to have DNA
replication repair restriction
modification Machinery has to have a
basic transcription Machinery has to
have aminoacyl TRNA synthesis TRNA
maturation modification ribosome
proteins ribosome function maturation
modification
all the way down and even with all of
that it has to be able to get all 20
amino acids exogenously because it has
no ability to make it it's too simple to
make it this is nanotechnology this is
Building Systems out of Nano composion
you have to have all of this in a simple
cell does anybody have any of this in
the junk that they build no no nowhere
close you have to have all of this this
has been computed so you can't play this
game cells were really simple back then
all they had was a little bit of RNA
that's a bunch of nonsense has to have
all of this to be a cell remember the
requirements that we said the seller has
to have and so go ahead and first you
have to make the simplest cell so first
you have to make all the monomeric
sugars which nobody's ever made then you
have to make all of the amino acids in
chirally pure form which no one's ever
made uh you can get some some Racine a
bunch of amino acids from the milieur
type experiments and other experiments
but never in currently pure form you
have to be able to make the nucleotides
where you have to first have ribose then
you have to have a base on there and you
have to have a phosphate on there in a
relevant Manner and this all has to be
chiral you have to control all four of
these stereogenic centers one
stereogenic Center there four
stereogenic centers there then you have
to take glycer glycerol and desimeterize
it because both of these ch2o oh groups
are enact your topic
you say you can't do that
well then you can't make a cell so nice
guy that I am I'll give you that
now just polymerize these put them in
the polymers I'll give you this just
make the polymers just make the polymers
go ahead make the polymers out of these
things nobody knows how to do that
nobody's ever demonstrated that either
really really hard remember this there's
over one trillion ways you can hook just
six of them now you gotta hook like 2
000 of them
all right how many ways you're going to
get that chemistry right all right nice
guy
I will give you that as well
and I'll even give you the sequence of
nucleotides so I'm giving you the
information which is another mystery
nobody knows where this informational
code came from if somebody tells you
that the DNA itself is the code that's a
bunch of garbage that's like saying this
this this memory stick you know I just
bought it this memory I have a memory
stick in my pocket so this memory stick
this is the information
uh I haven't written anything on it but
that's inherently the information no the
information this is this this is the
medium upon which it's stored the
information is primary
so I'll give you the sequence I'll even
give you that even if you had all the
components could you build a cell
Nobel Prize awaits you surely you know
more than a Mindless early Earth so they
can't do it they can't do it in other
words even if I gave you a cell I give
you a cell that's alive and it just dies
can you bring it back to life because
certainly a resurrection has got to be
easier than a de novo synthesis
everything's pretty much in place
nobody can do it we don't even know how
to define what we just lost when that
cell died how do we even Define life
that's how clueless we are
I said the exact same thing I'm saying
to you I said in May with Steve Benner
sitting 10 feet in front of me in the
audience
you know what he said
nothing
and nothing is an answer in itself from
a scientist
so you say would you say this to a says
I already have
all right has the public been misled on
origin of Life claims under simulations
of early Earth's atmosphere scientists
have mixed molecules together in the
laboratory to produce complex life forms
like frogs one-third of the general
public thinks that is true
under simulations of early Earth uh uh
scientists have mixed molecules together
in life in laboratory to produce simple
single single cell life forms like
bacteria two-thirds of the public thinks
that's true
who are these people well the average
age was 38 half male half female 80
percent of them hold college degrees
do you think you've been taught things
that aren't quite right this whole thing
about about uh about molecules in a
puddle or in a pond lightning strikes
molecules form those molecules form into
Slytherin creatures and they come out of
this pond that's the primordial soup
model that's a bunch of nonsense
here's the dichotomy of the messaging
from origin of Life researchers
themselves
Jack sawstek Harvard Nobel Prize winner
he said in 2014 he said we'll have life
in the lab in three to five years he
said that in 2014. how you doing jack
how's it going
Harvard astronomer and origin of Life
initiator director who was also there
Demars cecilov also a panelist told the
audience that years ago origin of life
was a neglected question mostly because
people thought it was too hard but
outside the meeting room he confirmed
that they were indeed now very close to
life in the lab cecilov thinks it will
be take like five years and not three
okay
how's it going Dimitar how you doing
six months well well uh
I don't know if I have it in here but
six months after that Jack sawzek
retracted what he said he said well I
was being a little over ambitious we're
working on making the RNA you don't even
have the RNA yet even if you had the RNA
you don't have a cell you don't have
life he doesn't have the RNA yet by
prebiotically relevant root
uh at the University of Chicago here's
what he said in 2021 on a YouTube a a a
virtual lecture at the University of
Chicago and basically that's because RNA
we know we had to get RNA and RNA is
delicate it has a phosphodiester
backbone it's subject to degradation by
intramolecular attack of the two prime
hydroxyl on the phosphate which I showed
you so you can get cleavage of the
backbone which is catalyzed by metal
ions you have magnesium in there you you
probably have a few hours and it's toast
yeah I mean so we don't have millions of
years everything has to actually happen
pretty quickly the synthetic processes
have to be faster than the degradative
ones he can't even get RNA
and yet he went around saying he'll have
life in the lab three to five years
that's why everybody's confused here's
here's Lee Cronin another another uh
origin of Life research he says he said
in this video September 9th 2011 he said
this what I'm going to try and do in the
next 15 minutes or so this is during a
TED Talk is to tell you about an idea of
how we're going to make matter come
alive
and what I'm going to try and do is
plant some ideas about how we can
transform inorganic dead matter into
living matter in inorganic biology so at
the end Chris Anderson the the the
moderator says just a quick question on
timeline you believe you're going to be
successful on this project when
the question was when look at the answer
so many people think that life took
millions of years to kick in we're
proposing to do it in just a few hours
once we've set up the right chemistry
Chris Anderson and when do you think
that will happen because no answer is an
answer in itself so we pushed him on it
hopefully in the next two years 2011.
how's it going Lee
this is what I'm talking about this is
the problem
Steve Benner in 2021 he said to Dave
Farina in the in that YouTube video I
suppose most of the many of the big
paradoxes in the origin of Life have
been solved like none of them have been
solved
but to the professional in 2019 in a
talk it's all on YouTube he said
chemistry is actually hard to get to
work the molecules precipitate the
molecules hydrolyzed the molecules
decomposed so it's very much a
constraint that you have to deal with
it's one goddamn problem after another I
guess I did mention God okay all right
so it's one goddamn problem after
another he says this is what he says to
the expert because he's a real chemist
he knows we can't even get the molecules
made
but that's not what he tells the world
remember he's the guy saying you know we
figure this out you know this is good
it's life on Earth Life on Mars I mean
it's all here here's 41 textbooks
talking about the primordial soup model
the textbooks that you guys grew up with
in fact in fact uh these are upper level
College here's intro College upper level
College during the primordial suit model
you're still learning it to this day
and these are only the ones that I could
identify through the help of a friend
between 2001 and 2018. this is what you
guys learned with
research is an original community
community of public publicly accused me
of being nefarious and not hearing to
current scientific consensus you bet I
don't adhere to current scientific
consensus
in fact some of the biggest discoveries
have come when people didn't adhere to
the the the the the current scientific
consensus
so because of that I'm nefarious which
means Wicked evil
uh unlike the claims of making life in
two years or three to five years or that
most of the many of the paradoxes have
been solved what really is the current
state of origin of Life research nobody
has shown a method to make the homakairo
versions of lipids amino acids nucleic
acids carbohydrates in a prebiotically
relevant manner nobody has shown the
mixtures found in meteorites or
Interstellar space could have been
useful for synthesis even John
Sutherland said I don't think meteorites
make the right sort of mixtures but we
need to have more constrained chemistry
to actually make the right sort little
bits of things can be delivered but
they're all mixed in with other things
you can't do chemistry on vast mixtures
because they come up the works
uh nobody has shown Prebiotic Roots the
polymerization of the amino acids
nucleotides or carbohydrates with
required specificities that are needed
carbohydrate polymerization is
unfathomably hard almost all amino acids
need protection DNA bases sometimes need
protection and you have the 2535 problem
nobody has solved the code problem for
ordering the nucleotides
nobody has come close to making the
higher order structures remember all of
these things you have to have a cell
nobody's ever come close to this and and
uh and John Sutherland had the audacity
to write in nature chemistry all
cellular subsystems could have Arisen
simultaneously through common chemistry
boy I'd love to see that
nobody has ever shown the lore on the
anti-americ excess mixtures could
facilitate the requisite high-yielding
biological like chemistries with
minimization of heat release thereby
mitigating the need for chiral into spin
cell activity we do all these
computations in our mind and we dispel
10 watts in the process
this computer is is just putting out so
much more heat
why why don't we burn up why doesn't a
cell burn up because of Carl induced
spin selectivity you had to have had
chirality from the beginning it's not
something that you could have evolved
into nobody can explain the requisite
interactoms remember the 10 to the 79
billion nobody even if given all four
classes of molecules in any desired
order could prepare even the simplest of
cells
nobody has come close to synthesizing
even suggesting how to synthesize the
symbolism cells in a modern laboratory
let alone a sufficient suggestion on how
to do this how the universe could have
done it in 100 million years because
that's the time from when the earth
cooled to the time where you find life
as soon as you're cool you find life
or even 14 billion years you want to
give it the entire time of the universe
fine nobody's has even a hypothetical
method for doing this
I have not talked at all about God of
the gaps so when people make that
accusation
this is this is just just uh changing
the argument they want to attack me as
an individual because they cannot
address the Science address the Science
address the science
as a scientist I would never say that we
will never understand I couldn't do that
one day in the distant future I presume
we will understand life's origin but for
now we are nowhere close how do I know
where that we're nowhere close
it's because of this it's because of the
moving goal posts because every year we
find out the cell is more complex than
it was the year before not because the
cell itself got more complex but we find
out about it we didn't know about Carl
induced spin cell activity we didn't
know about interactoms and the 10 to the
79 billion and that's just protein
protein interactions you've got protein
DNA interactions you've got protein RNA
interactions you get DNA RNA
interactions all of these things going
on nobody knew about this so the target
is oh I gotta do that too so the
target's further away that's how I know
we're nowhere close
okay therefore scientists remain
clueless On Life's origin and current
scientific models for emergence of Life
are nonsensical here's how you can
connect with me and I'll stop right
there and open it up for questions
and that's it thank you
yes why do you think there is such a
divide between the current state of
origin of life science and the public
and clear perception of it yeah I think
the the public has been thoroughly
confused and the origin of the confusion
comes with the origin of Life
researchers themselves some argue that
the Press is responsible the Press is
not nearly as responsible as the origin
of Life researchers you look at the
quotes of these people in their actual
papers is crazy and then when they get
to the Press it's an order of magnitude
more crazy what they say to the press
and it's quotes So the Press is just
reporting what they say and when you do
that you get more money
you get more money for your research
because people say we were just on the
verge of doing this that would be a
really important advance so so you get
more money if people think you're close
if you just say you know I just spent
40-year career doing this and we're
further away than when I began who's
going to fund that
so you you know I I don't know exactly
why they say but it's from their own
mouths their own words are so off and
that's why the masses are so thoroughly
confused and most scientists are
confused on this remember one most
scientists don't know the difference
between origin of life and evolution
they say tour you always talking about
evolution of the problems I don't talk
about Evolution talk about origin of
life these are two very distinct
different things secondly secondly uh
uh that they think that this has been
solved I've asked my colleagues they
said you know it comes from the foremost
reaction I started looking into this
about six years ago before that I assume
people had much better models so
scientists it's not like they're looking
at origin of Life papers nobody cares
they're too busy doing their own things
you know how many emails people get a
day
half half your day is just addressing
emails and you don't have time to read
origin of Life papers so so the
community thinks that these origin of
life scientists know this stuff but they
don't
yes yeah so I guess how plausible do you
think that as we maybe learn more about
initial Earth conditions that some
naturalistic account of abiogenesis
would be plausible or do you think the
more we find out the more challenging we
find out that that sort of model would
even be
like probable even if there's a
probability of B right yeah can we find
out that the origin of Life the on the
the origin of the Earth was different so
that the system was better set up to do
this it would have to be better set up
than the most advanced Laboratories in
the world today
because we have no idea
so could it happen sure anything can
happen
but it seems implausible based on even
the most advanced Labs today or Clues we
don't know where the origin of
information is we don't know how to keep
these molecules stable so so we don't
know that now if we can say the life was
planted here by by some alien and I'm
okay with that but this is origin of
first life that just begs the question
what is the origin of first life and and
that's what we have to get back to and
people will say well tour what do you
think it is I have I haven't the
foggiest idea as a scientist I have no
idea people say well then you shouldn't
criticize that's totally wrong what you
do what we teach our students to do is
you look at a chemical reaction
and you may formulate a hypothesis on
how this reaction may have gone then you
look at the details if any of those
details say that your hypothesis
couldn't be you get rid of that
hypothesis and you think of another I am
shooting this down because maybe one day
one of you folks will come with some
great advance but you're not going to
come with a great Advance if you keep
being told we've about got this thing
solved you'll come with a great Advance
if you say everybody's clueless on this
and I have a thought on how this might
happen so that's why I'm doing it yes
consider current Pursuits in Prebiotic
chemistry irrelevant or just over hyped
if you could change in the way origin of
Life Field Works scientifically how
would you propose we change the way we
approach the question right okay so the
question that came in from the Internet
is that uh
do I do I think that the work being done
is is is is not worth being done or
should we just keep keep doing it and
and what do I propose that we do I think
that the way we're doing it is so wrong
it's just got to stop radically stop
it's getting us nowhere and I say we
have something akin to a DARPA challenge
what DARPA does is when they have it the
community is stuck on solving something
so they have DARPA challenge they don't
invite in any of the old guys who've
been working on this for 40 years they
want young fresh Minds on this and you
can't do anything that's the same as
what been done and give us some fresh
proposals that's what we need because
what I say is all of the origin of Life
researchers that are working today will
die
of old age before they solve this
problem and their students will die of
old age before they solve this problem
because they know that we're nowhere
close if we keep going down the same way
so I think that there's no use in
continuing the same work we need some
totally fresh ideas that are that are
much different than what we're doing
today is there another question
so could I see something that's
non-carbon based sure you could have
silicon the problem the great thing
about carbon it forms very very strong
bonds
and the bonds do not easily hydrolyze
when you talk about other elements water
has a tendency to break those up you
talk about polycylanes you get silicon
oxide which is sand and and you get
these very stable compounds that are
then dead ends so the the ways you can
transform carbon is very is very broad
compared to any other element in the
periodic table and the strength of the
bonds carbon bonds to itself and to many
other atoms very strongly and under
certain conditions they're modifiable
that's not the case with any other
element that's why there's a whole
branch of chemistry called organic
chemistry just around the element carbon
so it's hard to Envision that but it it
doesn't have to be based to carbon I
mean there's a reason that we eat
carbon-based materials because we're
made out of carbon if we were if we were
made out of silicon we'd be eating sand
or something like that we're meeting
something different go ahead your next
question
so like overall like how optimized are
they compared to like how optimized they
could be like for example you mentioned
like how are playing too much more power
efficient in a computer is there like
cases like we're processes in the cell
like so you're just like so much more
efficient uh that they're almost like
ideal
uh okay our cells so efficient that they
can be a deal these processes it is very
hard to match a cell with many things
but there are human made things that
that hands down when when you're talking
about uh vast computation of crunching
of numbers I mean computers went hands
down over human beings but as far as the
operations within a cell the making of
molecules it's really Exquisite but it
can't willy-nilly just say hey I wanna I
wanna put a a an alcohol there really
easily you don't have an enzyme for that
so you have to genetically modify your
DNA to start making some genetic
modification that's going to modify an
enzyme that'll put a hydroxyl group
there where synthetically I can just go
in a lab and boom just do it so people
are a lot broader in what we can do
than a cell is cell is very specific to
keep it alive but what it does it does
amazingly clean in ways that we we today
can't rival but in 500 years we may be
able to rival if you asked a man or a
woman uh in the 1700s when would we have
space flight
if they said I don't know
300 years they'd have been right
it's unfathomable in in the year 1700
that we'd have space flight we knew in
1700 that it was not going to happen in
three to five years we knew it wasn't
going to happen and if anybody said it
was going to happen you'd think you back
then you'd lock them up
um but but um uh so so uh we know we're
nowhere close to this thing but cells
are specific they do a certain job you
can modify them at the genetic level you
can go in and change the genes to change
the enzymes to do some modification but
synthetic chemistry that human beings do
is a lot broader in what the changes we
can make
yeah yes in the back
um so how would you recommend explaining
to people actually ourselves I
personally don't have a background at
all in chemistry
um like as simplistic way as possible
yeah so how do you explain to people the
origin of life in a simplistic way
because the primordial soup model is so
simplistic that that uh it's a
convenient thing to explain to people
but it's like totally wrong it's totally
wrong so uh um uh you know you know the
the
astronauts the astronauts were just
super good basketball players and they
could jump really high and that's how
they got to the Moon
that's a simplistic model for children
but it's so wrong we would never teach
that we never teach that to Children
this is so wrong it's not worth teaching
I think the better explanation is we do
not know how life formed we just do not
know there's so many problems we do not
know we know the types of compounds that
would have to be available we know that
they're going to have to have a cell and
have these properties because life has
these properties we don't know how we
arrived at it and then I think people
would be a lot more interested in going
into this field how many people work in
origin of life not many
because most people think it's been
solved
there was another question yes yeah I
was wondering what makes you personally
so like passionate and motivated to
speak up against it yeah why am I so
motivated to speak up against this
it's because somebody pushed me
because somebody pushed me because
because uh um
uh what what happened was
I was okay so so I was going up for an
award
and a few of my colleagues said they
would never put me up for the award
because you have to have other
colleagues to nominate you you can't I
nominate myself for this award you're
not allowed to do that they said we
won't nominate you because you signed a
statement back in 2001 which is now
called the dissent from Darwinism
statement at the time I didn't even know
what it came to me in an email it was
like in 2000 or 2001. it came to me and
you know how fast you go through emails
and I read this statement says can you
agree to this I said yes I found my name
on a list with 700 other scientists and
the statement goes something like this
that that we find that natural selection
and random mutation
uh uh insufficient for accounting for
the diversity of life therefore further
research is warranted
never said darwinian Evolution was wrong
it just says we find it insufficient so
further research is warranted that
statement then was used in the Dover
trial where people were trying to bring
creationism into schools and it was held
up as a statement look at all these
scientists
and so people think that that statement
says something that it doesn't so my
colleague said because you signed that
statement I said what statement are you
talking about I didn't even know what
they were talking about so then they
said I said did you ever read that
statement I said you know what this
statement says
you know what they said
nothing
they didn't know what it said I said you
you go back and read that statement
let's make it they came back they read
the statement one of the one of the
people wasn't it was a Nobel Prize
winner the other was was in the National
Academy of Science and and uh they both
came back they said well it was
carefully crafted I said well die I mean
you think they're gonna just fly by the
seat of their pants on this statement
where in any other place of science
would you not say that further research
is warranted that is the kiss of death
for a scientist to say that we get no
more money
further research is always warranted but
because that came the Touchstone and
they said because you signed that
statement I said well
if that's the bottom line that's the end
I was just minding my own business
not anymore
and so I started looking into this and I
wanted to track back darwinian Evolution
to the beginning which brought me into
origin of life and I started looking
into origin of life and I thought
this is smoke and mirrors this is smoke
and mirrors and nobody knows this except
me because you have to be an organic
chemist to really understand this number
one number two you have to be interested
enough to go after it and number three
you have to be willing to take the shots
like I heard came on Instagram when
people heard that I was going to speak
look they've said all that they're going
to say and that just catalyzes me it
lowers the activation energy
to to get to the other side of this
equilibrium and and you know every time
people say you know he's nefarious and
he's going against current scientific
consensus I'm like yes I'm gonna go even
more and I'm going after you any other
researcher that goes on this Dave
farina's program I'm going right after
them I'm going to expose their work
whoever goes on his channel their work
will be exposed
because they went on a social medium
to to talk about this stuff and I will
go right after them on the same medium
people say why don't you just write
papers about this I have I've written
five papers about this people ignore
them
people ignore the papers I am trying to
reach the masses I'm not trying to reach
my peers anymore
I'm trying to reach the masses and
that's why I'm doing this that's why you
need to subscribe to Dr James 2.
yes I think what you're talking about
brings up maybe a deeper concern about
Science Education and how people are
taught that science is done as opposed
to being this methodology where you ask
questions and do experiments it's oh you
accept this sort of Canon literature can
instead of yeah how do you how do you
think we can convince maybe the public
that you know like science works as this
iterative process where somebody has
offices somebody points out a problem
with this it becomes further refined as
opposed to just these people are writing
these people are wrong because they're
in the majority you know you know this
is an area
this is an area that that touches to
life itself
and and uh
so so I I don't like to psychoanalyze
people I don't like to suggest why they
say what they say because so often I
don't even know why I say what I say you
know and I say things and I walk out of
there I'm like do I even really believe
that uh so so it's hard for me to
psychoanalyze others but you're
absolutely right the scientific process
is different than what young people
think who haven't yet been engrossed in
this thing so much is controlled by
money by some powerful people with money
and they can push certain agendas they
can move funding and if you start
bumping up and you can you can feel
their pain so when somebody spends like
better the last 40 Years of his life
working on this thing and I come along
and I say you don't have ribose it's
garbage
I can I can see how that would hurt and
and because
and and and so you you know I I can feel
the pain I do I feel their pain if
somebody were to say all this time you
were talking about graphene you never
made graphene I'd be like yikes
you're gonna do now either I can just
dig my heels yes it is graphene or I can
say yeah I was wrong for the last 10
years I've been wrong
if you like the content that's coming
out on this channel I've not monetized
it in the sense of advertising but if
you want to give and you want to help
support it you can give to a 501c3 so
it's fully tax deductible and you can
see the link below we'd love to have
your participation and there's several
mechanisms by which you could give thank
you
thank you
