why do we only take things seriously
when it's about war and this is an
important question today given that we
have a terrible tragic War happening but
look what happened even in Germany after
months saying there was no money and
there was a lot of pressure in
government having to cut its budget 100
billion was found overnight for the war
effort that happens all the time with
war because we take it seriously
what do management Consultants do
I think it's an important question
because this is a global industry worth
as much as a trillion dollars and yet if
you are somebody like my dad he drives a
taxi for a living what does a Management
Consultant he wouldn't have the faintest
idea
yet they play an increasingly prominent
role in the public sector with
extraordinarily large public contracts
whether it's test and Trace or
delivering Healthcare websites to the
United States and of course they're in
business too
a new book by Mariana matzakato the big
con makes some pretty provocative
statements it says that actually
Consultants don't just undermine
democracy they lead to less Effective
Government
Mariana matsukato welcome to Downstream
thank you I'm very happy to be here how
are you doing more generally at the
moment if you really want to know oh my
God actually fine I'm thrilled because
this week I got to speak a lot with the
Prime Minister of Barbados Mia Motley
who I think is the hero of the 21st
Century it's true she's in the UK at the
moment right well actually so I was
listening Barbados I was in Barbados two
weeks ago working with her but she was
supposed to be in um London this week
but we ended up having her virtually she
was at the first event we had for this
book The launch event at the RSA she was
in dialogue with me about why we need
not only financial space which is what
her big Global mission is about but also
the kind of fiscal space and state
capacity which our new book kind of
looks at why we don't have that and it
was a great conversation so your new
book you have many books they're all
very good I have to say actually this is
one of my favorites the big con but
you're only halfway through I can tell
no no so I've got I've made notes no no
I finished this last night
um
and it's gonna sound strange how a book
about the Consulting industry is quite
riveting I think pretty people watching
this probably won't believe me they
think I might be trying to respect you
but yeah because there are so many
Amazing Stories yeah um but let's start
from the top so yeah what are
consultants and what do they do
so first of all there's different types
of Consultants some are more on the
accounting side some are on the strategy
side so you know Deloitte versus
McKinsey
um but there's also other types of
Consultants which we talk about in the
book even though we don't focus on them
which have been organizations like Circo
and G4S where the government has
actually decided to Outsource a lot of
its activities to those companies we
kind of treat them differently but
they're all part of the same phenomena
of basically the decapacitation if
that's a word I don't know if that
sounds more Italian than English of
government
so what do they do they consult they
advise and one you know but we look at
it as an industry this is very important
point so there's many different types of
Consultants we you might have a head
teacher of a school who might consult a
nurse could consult a doctor could
consult academics myself we can consult
but that's based on our expertise it's
not actually core to our lives you know
I might consult based on 20 years of
research in an area again a head teacher
might have great knowledge about the
schooling system we look at a business
model of the Consulting industry as a
sector which is making lots of money
Consulting and where that business model
has lots of different problems it has
conflicts of interest it has lack of
transparency and kind of a veil of
secrecy and especially we look at
its role in even though it's not its
fault because we look also at
governments and we ask why do you allow
yourself to get captured in some ways by
Consultants so easily
um we look at the co-evolution between
Consulting and some of modern problems
in capitalism today from
financialization to Outsourcing she said
it's a big sector some people watching
this will be familiar with the names
McKinsey Deloitte et cetera how big is
it what kind of numbers to a trillion
um per year wow yeah and also it's
rising so the subtitle here turn it
around so I can remember what our
subtitle is the big con how the
Consulting industry weakens our
businesses and fantalizes our
governments and warps our economies the
infantilizes our governments but came
from a quote by a Tory so conservative
Lord Lord Agnew who during uh covid on
the back of all the contracts that he
was witnessing that the government was
using to bring in Consultants you might
remember that Deloitte was charged with
the test and Trace system but also with
with brexit lots of money went to
Consultants he said oh my God we are
infantilizing Whitehall in other words
if we keep Outsourcing the role of
government we will stop learning we will
actually become like babies who haven't
learned yet we won't be doing so we're
not learning by doing and this is
actually something I've been talking
about for decades so it was very
um not surprised but it was very
interesting that it was actually coming
from the conservative side of government
because the it's not necessarily
intuitive that that's where it would
have come from
the numbers here are really impressive
in terms of the growth and it's
something I'm pulling out the book this
isn't my own personal research this is
so memorable as a fact when Margaret
Thatcher becomes prime minister in 1979
the British state is spending six
million pounds a year on Consultants
when she leaves in 1990 so we're talking
30 years plus 246 million yeah so it's
gone up more than 40 times yeah and it's
obviously going to considering more than
them this is hardly shrinking the state
is it well that's what's so interesting
first of all
um you know you mentioned Thatcher so
that's the bit that might be intuitive
you might think okay a government a
reaganite government a thatcherite
government which is I don't want to say
anti-state because actually both of them
spent a lot on things like War right I
mean actually what Reagan shrunk was the
welfare state my first book The
entrepreneurial State I actually looked
at State investment in the U.S also
during the Reagan years actually Rising
around whether it's the military
industrial complex but even the National
Institutes of Health which in the United
States spend billions just last year 42
billion on drug Innovation that happened
also under Ronald Reagan so we should
also just remember that that's sort of
been a propaganda that they put out but
didn't necessarily believe themselves
there was lots of State investment in
both of those governments it was
actually more a war on the welfare state
and really um taking away a lot of the
social fabric of society which we've
also seen recently in the UK with
austerity for the last 10 years all the
cuts you know to very very concrete
areas whether it's after school clubs uh
youth centers mental health I'm talking
about what I just noticed in my
community let alone the kind of more
macroeconomic figures
um that's very different from just
saying anti-state right because there
was actually lots of investment that
went elsewhere
um anyway so what's interesting is if
you look at
kind of a more conservative in quotes
neoliberal government you might
intuitively think they want to reduce
State investment and bring in the
private sector both through
privatization but also consultification
of government so that figure you just
mentioned from 6 to 246 million is part
of that but then there's two questions
one the one you just said that cost a
lot of money so in terms of actual
expenditure by the state it didn't
necessarily reduce it but was that
really the point of Thatcher's
government I would argue no it was
actually to dismantle in some ways the
ambition of the state or the structures
of the state and by bringing in
Consultants regardless of how much it
costs and it costs a lot you are helping
to render the state actually in some
ways weaker at least the structures you
might not necessarily care about you
know health education public transport
again very different on the military
um and yet one of the things we talk
about in the book is how the real door
opened to the Consultants actually under
new labor so if you don't really have
have a strong idea of what the state is
for you want the state so it's not the
neoliberal idea of no State you want the
state but you want it to look efficient
and responsible and business friendly
then ultimately you bring in business
sector metrics into the state apparatus
so cost benefit analysis net present
value and the whole idea in economics
which is that at best the state should
fix market failures so all my work has
been saying that that's actually not
very smart what we actually need for all
the problems we have whether it's
climate Health digital is co-creating
and co-shaping not just the market but
the economy economic growth has not just
a rate but a direction the sustainable
development goals there's 17 of them
that's about directionality whether it's
about Hunger poverty climate the digital
divide health is the UN sustainable
development yeah sorry I always forget
that not everyone knows about sdg my
kids actually went to State schools here
in London where they sung about the SD
oh wow I think actually interestingly
young kids probably know more about the
sustainable development
um but yeah anyway so the 17 sustainable
development goals very important we've
had them since 2015 not that long they
require huge ambition they require
Mission they require collaboration
collective intelligence co-investment so
on and so forth and what my work has
been looking at since the
entrepreneurial state is how if we don't
have kind of a proper understanding of
the state as anything more than fixing
market failures we will always be too
little too late we will always be just
reacting we will at best be filling the
Gap so that literally even public space
will be just a space that you're allowed
to fill up when private space is not
there
think of it even architecturally in some
ways but really in terms of even public
goods and economics the word public good
sounds good there's two words one is
good if you actually look at the framing
of it in economics it's fixing a market
failure problem that occurs when we have
positive externalities the new labor
thing is really interesting for me
because
obviously they spent a great deal of
money on things like the NHS compared to
the Tories uh historic amounts of money
they reduce child poverty pensioner
poverty so people say how could you say
this but actually when you go into the
nuts and bolts of how they did
government so for instance I find this
fascinating you talk about this new
delivery unit which is created under
Tony Blair yeah which which basically
seems to me to be
saying tacitly that government should
just be done by management consultancy
or it should be a major part of the
state's capacity and it's not something
which is just bolted on or an
afterthought it's it's Central to how
new labor wants to run things yeah so
one of the things I was just talking to
Rosie about she's my co-author she's
actually one of my PhD students at The
Institute for innovation in public uh
purpose is that in some ways you could
sum up what you've just said is as the
fact that new labor had an idea of
private Public Partnerships not public
private Partnerships right so a
public-private Partnerships I would
argue is what we had with the moon
landing it was a public idea there were
strong public directionality but
ultimately there was 400 000 people
involved so many different private
sector industries from nutrition
materials Electronics software it wasn't
just Aerospace and what government had
to do was to redesign all its different
tools at the time it was especially not
only procurement so government as
purchaser to catalyze as much bottom-ups
experimentation towards that goal and
the goal was getting to the moon and
back in a short amount of time I would
argue that when new labor did was kind
of forget you know what's the actual
Mission the moonshot around Health
around public education around public
transport if you're going to bring in
the private sector you better make sure
you're very clear what the public goal
is so you're working together to
actually deliver on the moonshot as
opposed to just what we end up having
having which is a lot of private
activity in areas that used to be
publicly run and it's not about saying
that's wrong I think it's actually wrong
to say it's about private or
nationalization
kind of in a corbinite kind of way I
think that's where Corbin went wrong
it's about how do you actually organize
that partnership so it's truly about
actually doing something good purpose
oriented for people
let's fast forward to kirstama
because this morning he's talked about
um missions rather than pledges now a
cynic would say well he's exhausted the
rhetoric of pledges because of course
he's broken so many from his leadership
election but for somebody like yourself
yeah actually no this is substantially
different this means something quite
different but reading his his missions
crime decarbonization they seem quite
sort of ambiguous is the is the point of
a mission that's actually quite specific
and measurable so I mean I've had the
honor to
I don't want to say be responsible but
for having written about missions and
having actually seen it put into policy
so I first wrote about it actually for a
long time but when I first wrote about
it where it became policy was 2017 for
the European commission I said look guys
you're just talking all this talk about
climate about inclusion it's not getting
us any more inclusive or sustainable
they said what would a mission-oriented
approach look like and I wrote two
reports on the back of which the
European union now has five missions and
a large chunk of the Horizon program
which was 90 billion euros is now
targeted through these missions
instruments so what's a mission at least
in my Approach is you begin with the
challenge we talked about sustainable
development goals but they're very broad
right turning them into Moon shots so
sdg sustainable development goal 13 you
can turn it into something much more
clear that you can actually answer yes
or no did you achieve it similar to
going to the moon and back in a short
amount of time very clear you can answer
yes or no so whether it's Net Zero in a
particular region whether it's getting
all the plastic out of the ocean if
we're looking at sdg 14 but the main
thing is to frame it so it actually
requires investment and Innovation
across multiple sectors of the economy
because the old industrial strategy in
the UK was very similar to what we've
seen globally which is it was just a
list of sectors so in the UK under Vince
cable it was Aerospace automobiles the
financial sector the creative industry
and finance don't ask me how I remember
that because I don't remember what I did
yesterday anyway so the idea of a
mission-oriented approach for industrial
strategy would be to say why did you
just make up those random five sectors
did they just Lobby their way up why not
think of actually challenges like clean
growth healthy aging sustainable
Mobility
and so on and they get all your
different sectors to work together
towards particular missions underneath
that and then again change those tools
on the ground to Foster that investment
towards that but that requires knowledge
capacity implementation ability to
actually then change the current status
of like procurement which is just money
being given from the public sector the
private sector to be outcomes oriented
something by the way that many countries
rediscovered with covid outcomes
oriented procurement it's often a
wartime tool which is interesting right
Wars people want to win war so they take
them seriously if you look at the
public-private partnership in the war
when I've learned this in the U.S when
the ministry of Defense the Department
of Defense funds health because
sometimes they do because soldiers get
sick in the war they don't get messed
about by the pharmaceutical industry
because they want to win the war they
want the soldiers to have access to the
medicines that the ministry of Defense
funded when it's the Ministry of Health
and normal times somehow we forget that
the prices of the drugs should reflect
that public contribution that the
intellectual property rights should not
be abused to just become extraction
tools by the sector and so on so a
missions approach has to lead to change
it should be a source of discomfort I
often tell ministers and policy makers
if you're getting really cozy with this
idea and it's just kind of a blah blah
blah you obviously don't
understand it because it should actually
create change in how you work with the
private sector you need conditions
attached for example in France under
covid the Finance Minister Bruno La Mare
put strong conditions on Renault and Air
France to get access to the covid-19
bailout program uh why because I had a
very clear Mission around or challenge
actually Around clean growth they had to
commit to lowering their carbon
emissions to get any public money in
this country where we're not used to
having that conditionality EasyJet got
600 million no conditions attached so
cure starmer if he's interested in
emissions has to then immediately talk
about a new social contract with
business
let me stick a pin in this I've actually
got a question for you about China now
you said all that but these are the
missions from kirst armor
secure the higher sustained growth in
the G7 I mean at least that's measurable
right but then build an NHS fit for the
future make Britain's Street safe break
down the barriers to opportunity
opportunity every stage make Britain a
clean energy superpower those those last
four just seem
so ambiguous and you know the line you
know you you can only manage what you
measure how do you measure progress in
any of those things
or am I being unfair are those the kinds
of things that you would call missions I
would call those Mission areas so I
think it's actually well first of all I
should con you know we should
congratulate him for actually even
having a strategy for basically looking
at those areas as ways that we would
redirect an economy because there I mean
now we have a problem with growth but in
general the problem in the UK was not
lack of growth it was a problematic form
of growth it's a form of growth that is
led by consumption not investment that
consumption is led by private debt not
not
um you know real incomes have not been
rising very much in this country so
there's a lot of credit and private debt
in the system to the point that private
debt to disposable income in the UK is
close to what it was just before the
financial crisis and that's what caused
the financial crisis so you'd think
people will be like oh problems very few
people are talking about this labor is
not talking about it neither of the
Tories so the unsustainable level of
private debt which is interesting if you
think about it because we always talk
about public debt um so so it's very
important I think to have those Mission
areas as a way to talk about the need to
have investment-led growth because all
those areas are going to require
investment we've also had financialized
growth in this country where a lot of
companies are making profits but not
necessarily reinvesting those profits
into the economy so anyway so as soon as
you talk about those bold areas the
question is what does that then mean for
the design of of policy what does it
mean for an industrial strategy what
does it mean for procurement strategy
and I think the challenge is so the
first one I would say is not even a
mission area that's just economic growth
and that's going to happen as an as a
result if you get the other stuff right
you know if you have an innovation
policy an industrial strategy that
catalyze and excite a lot of different
actors that then invest collaborate do
those Moon shots across different spaces
growth will I will hopefully kind of
result from that because they all
require investment and Innovation which
can lead to productivity increases for
example but the other ones could be
missionary is right
um but the question is what are they so
keeping Street safe I mean this is
something that I think is incredibly
important because I've seen how in
London and I just happen to live in
London on the back of all the austerity
that we had uh in this country the
social fabric at the community level was
really uh broken and so the rise in
knife crime for example so you could
have a mission at the city level right
because a lot of these missions might be
talked about nationally but then they
have to resonate with communities where
you might have uh you know citizen
assemblies you might have different
types of democratic four also where
people think about those missions I only
say that because I've worked on missions
also in Camden where I live and we have
the Camden renewal commission that I
co-chair with Georgia Gould and one of
our
um missions that we thought about for
Camden actually did have to do with you
safety and the idea there would be how
do we look at for example knife crime
not just from policing right so that's
the kind of result but if knife cram is
actually the symptom of lots of other
problems think of all the social and
economic determinants of crime where a
lot of the both victims but also the
perpetrators often come from broken
homes homes where there's a lot of
problems how can you really think of
that of that problem in a way that bring
lots of different branches of government
together to think holistically with an
all of government approach that's a key
factor in a mission oriented approach
um as I just mentioned before you know
going to the moon was not just Aerospace
solving climate is surely not just for
the Department of energy solving issues
around well-being is definitely not just
for the Department of Health so it's not
just about interceptoral that I talked
about before it's really that all of
government approach and that really then
helps government become more Dynamic and
that comes back to the book because what
we say in the book is that we don't have
Dynamic governments we often have rigid
siled governments governments that have
stopped insourcing the capacity and
capability they need to govern modern
day complex challenges with other actors
and if you have consultified that
capacity if you're asking Deloitte to do
your test and Trace where Deloitte had
no expertise whatsoever on tests and
Trace so it's not surprising it went
belly up then you have a problem because
you stop learning by doing you've
stopped the doing how do they get these
jobs because like you said Deloitte had
no I mean nobody had any expertise in
tests and Trace maybe a few a few
countries in East Asia after the SARS
epidemic but so they've got no technical
expertise in in
whole swathe of of what they make money
from so what's their pitch we've got no
experience give us a multi-billion pound
contract what was I mean just I'm going
to answer that question but just to to
almost played not Devil's Advocate but
just to put another thing on the table
at the same time that Deloitte did test
and Trace we had a very which went very
badly in the UK the NHS did the vaccine
roll out through a decentralized network
of GP practices and not only went well
it also became something we talked about
the politicians talked about it
successful so then the real question is
why didn't they invest more in this
decentralized network of GP practices
why did we not actually wake up and say
wow what a great success story and let's
actually increase the Investments within
the NHS instead of doing what we're
seeing today which is that the real
Investments
um aren't are not only not increasing
but there's a lot of stress within the
system we have Junior doctors on strike
nurses on strike all over uh the UK so
this is also so a very interesting
question because it's the parallel of
the question you've asked now what we
look at is why are we hiring it's your
question consultants in areas that they
have no expertise in we saw this also in
Australia where they spent over 6
million uh on McKinsey to do their
climate strategy and it was then
reported to be a very faulty problematic
climate strategy and the question there
that we pose in the book is well there
was also expertise within the government
it wasn't perfect expertise but they
have this organization called csiro
which actually has a lot of climate
capability so what is this kind of
almost allergy to using not only your
internal expertise but not to actually
invest in that expertise and just need
that rubber stamp because that's what
ultimately ultimately it is a rubber
snap of McKinsey or Deloitte that makes
both governments and businesses one of
the subtitles is weakens our businesses
why is that and we look at two different
issues one is that this kind of
dismantling of State capacity has also
led to gaps where sometimes literally
even just numbers of people don't exist
I experienced this with the kova 19
recovery in Italy where you know the
treasury basically outsourced the
recovery to uh I keep talking about
McKinsey but there's lots of these
Consulting companies it's BCG Bain
pricewaterhousecoopers and bcgs Boston
Consultants yeah Boston Consulting Group
um and so one thing is that as a
consequence of not just the austerity
but the dismantling of State capacity
there often is the need to bring in
others to help you out but when those
others don't have the expertise that's
the real kind of interesting challenge
because of course there's lots of
expertise in universities for example
and I'm not just saying this because I'm
an academic but I know some top climate
experts around the world like at the
Potsdam Institute in Germany they have
amazing climate science that would be a
more natural place right to go to for
climate expertise but the rubber stamp
of the Consulting companies uh is
something that is looked upon is
justifying as making look good good a
government that is fearful especially on
the on the back of so much kind of
government bashing
um that somehow there isn't that
expertise inside government in
um and and also sometimes to make
uncomfortable decisions so this is also
something that we you know don't blame
Consultants we say that both with
businesses and government sometimes
letting someone else not so much take
the blame but have their kind of brand
on it allows you to maybe do some
controversial activities in the private
sector we look for example at the
downsizing Trend the financialization
trend by saying oh it was you know
recommended by or rubber stamped by a
consulting company it might go down uh
the throat easier and so in that case we
say government sorry businesses should
actually own up to the decisions they're
made as opposed to just requiring that
rubber stamp of the consulting company
but also there's a risk averseness
there's a fear of making mistakes and
what's interesting I've talked about
this in other books that whereas we
celebrate risk-taking and making
mistakes in the private sector as soon
as a civil servant makes a mistake you
know bang front page of the Daily Mail
in this country there's other actually
there's not that many tabloids around
the world this country has a
um that's about it right sorry built in
Germany exactly exactly New York posts
yeah I mean there are but it's just
incredible here
um just the power they have we've we've
learned it in the recent uh Harry and
Megan uh discussions but um but but it's
not just the tabloids it's a you know
public servants civil servants are not
allowed to make mistakes which is a
problem this is something we talk about
trial and error and error you would not
learn how to ride a bike if you did not
fall off so the fact that governments
you know part of the consequence of
Outsourcing of privatizing of
consultifying is in fact what Lord Agnew
the conservative Lord who made this
accusation you know that Whitehall was
getting infantilized infantilized means
you're kind of becoming a baby you're
not learning you're you're not growing
up you're still an infant and this was a
Tory Lord saying Whitehall is being
infantilized and so you know this is one
of the biggest problems that even though
you might be doing it out of fear
because you'd prefer someone else to be
taking the risk so you don't go blame
when things go wrong you ultimately will
get addicted you will require that help
constantly right because you're not
growing up you're not building that
capacity and this is one of the things
we talk about we say that you know the
reason the sector because it's the
Consulting industry that we kind of
focus on not just Consultants
um it's problematic is that the business
model itself kind of relies on that next
contract uh uh following whereas if
you're a really good therapist for
example you don't want your client to be
in therapy their whole life that
probably means you're a bad therapist
the principal agent problem exactly
exactly can you explain this quickly the
principal agent problem well it's just
about incentives I mean if if you know I
mean the principal agent problem can be
applied to different types of problems
but in this case it's that if there is
um we would call it asymmetric
information in terms of a market failure
then the agent that you are if you want
you know Consulting for doesn't
necessarily really have knowledge about
you know the contract in this case and
in fact this is one of the things we
talk about which is that there's a veil
of secrecy and lack of transparency in
the contract so in South Africa for
example you might have what we have had
Consultants who the same consultant is
advising escon which is a state-owned
Energy company and it's also advising
the Ministry of Finance which in theory
is regulating uh s-com right so you
can't be on both sides of the street and
if you are that better be very
transparent and known to the government
and so one of the you know this kind of
conflict of interest
well that's what's really striking
actually that it's legal and we talk
about all the different uh Consultants
who are both advising the fossil fuel
industry while at the same time advising
on ESG metrics right as though it's all
fine and the same of course it's not you
can't be helping and actually in some
ways fostering a fossil fuel industry to
be increasingly successful in making
record level profits today while you
know on the other side of the street
pretending that you're an expert around
environmental and social governance
metrics which is all about companies
actually becoming Greener more societal
um you know more good for society
there's lots of Amazing Stories in the
book and like I said at the top that's
why it's really riveting
these case studies of of failure uh but
one of the more dazzling ones is the
story of healthcare.gov of course
started with Obamacare can you tell us a
little bit about
healthcare.gov why it failed and what
that has to do with Consultants sure I
mean it's actually part of a much bigger
problem because one of the capabilities
we say that has been decimated within
governments is actually their ability to
govern digital platforms
um and one of the areas by consequence
that is increasingly consultified so
Consultants are being brought into has
to do with
um precisely that area the kind of let's
just call it the digital area of
government now this is not a small uh uh
problem in 21st centuries 22nd century
soon
capitalism if you don't know how to
govern digital platforms you won't be
able to have a climate strategy a health
strategy think of the infodemic side of
covet 19. in fact I did a report on
which countries globally did better in
covid-19 it actually worked was
countries that actually had invested in
areas including digital platforms
because of that very important
information processing side of things
including by the way test and Trace
which we touched on before so
healthcare.gov of course is famous
because the U.S government as we know
doesn't really have a public health
program a lot of people in the U.S die
actually not because they're sick but
because they can't afford health care uh
this is one of the reasons I'm very
proud to live in Europe the NHS in the
UK is very important in terms of giving
everyone Access to Health Care
Now the problem is that what was also
called Obamacare so Obama finally gets
through a program which by the way
Hillary Clinton had tried to get through
when her husband was a president it had
a web you know site where people could
access in order to sign up for uh
Healthcare
uh in the U.S from the Obamacare uh
program and as soon as it opened up it
basically crashed and government was
blamed but actually it wasn't government
that had uh uh um governed it it had
been outsourced it had been outsourced
to private actors
um and this is a huge problem first of
all because it's Central like how you
actually govern the digital side of a
program whether it's health or climate
is Central so if you are Outsourcing
your core that's a problem if you're
Outsourcing something that's peripheral
perhaps it doesn't matter catering or
something right so
um
and this is actually not just around
Health as I just mentioned I mean if you
look at the weakening of government it's
precisely around those kind of areas and
so unless they're investing in their own
digital capacity they won't be stronger
and they will become increasingly
needing to have others to come in but in
that particular case also those that had
been brought in to do the digital side
weren't very capable I mean it costs 1.7
billion dollars 1.7 billion dollars for
a website is just extraordinary and on
the first day of opening six people
could use it
people like to say blamed the state yeah
but they should have been blaming
management consultancies
well that's a significant
I mean that's again that irony because I
just mentioned before that part part of
the answer to why governments are
allowing Consultants to have so much
power is the risk right the kind of uh
worry of getting things wrong and
thinking that somehow Management
Consultant will not only bring in maybe
some expertise which as I just mentioned
often we don't have but also get the
blame if things go wrong and yet things
continue to go wrong and they're not
actually held accountable so even how
those contracts are designed they've
actually kind of become almost risk-free
for the consultants and so it's not only
costing government a lot of money in
theory they're sometimes pitching it as
though it's going to help them uh cost
less so you know reduce deficits by
letting others undertake uh public uh
programs
so we have kind of three different
problems it's costing a lot of money
it's actually not delivering and when
things go belly up the blame comes back
to government so it's actually you know
a toxic cocktail and you'd think that it
would be better known how problematic
this is and I think one of the things we
were kind of pleasantly surprised but
not so surprised is just how much the
book has spoken to people both in the
business community and government
communities at different level City you
know local Regional National Global
precisely because it's it's almost
scandalous at every level I must say
though that we're not there to blame
consultants in fact we spoke to many
different Consultants especially young
kind of 30 year old Consultants who go
into the industry also wanting to do
good you know like this isn't a book
about the bad guys trying to do terrible
things around the world
um and
they are disillusioned you know when you
see that kind of operating on both sides
of the street or the not hypocrisy but
that kind of treating any of the latest
trends whether it's ESG and climate or
shareholder value maximization on kind
of The Other Extreme in terms of
problematic tendencies in modern day
corporate governance is almost equally
available places to kind of leech on to
to provide your Consulting Services you
start to lose faith that this is
actually really about making the world a
better place we do make
um some specific recommendations at the
end because it's not enough just to
complain and to kind of denounce and we
talk about the need to make contracts
much more transparent precisely on all
the different types of areas that you're
Consulting in so you can see those
conflicts of interest making contracts
so they actually embed learning
precisely so you don't have those kind
of repeat contracts so that you actually
show that you're cumulatively adding
value so the organization in question
ultimately shouldn't need you that that
example I gave from therapy before if
you have someone in therapy their entire
life you're probably not doing your job
very well
um and I think you know if you look at
all the different problems we have
globally they do require lots of
different actors where the Consultants
might have a role but first of all we
need to make sure they actually have
expertise in that area so we should
definitely become much more aware of
where those areas of expertise lie but
also how do we make sure the ecosystem
between these different actors is truly
kind of a symbiotic mutualistic one and
not a parasitic one consultancy is one
of those things where where I mean I I'd
obviously heard of it before I graduated
I'll start again consultancy is a
strange one because I'd heard of the
term before I graduated I graduated in
2007. bad luck so it was a really
interesting year because at the start of
the year as an undergraduate every you
know all you could hear at University
College London where you teach McKinsey
Deloitte Macquarie HSBC Banco Santander
everybody had an internship with a bank
or a consultancy and then within a year
it dropped like a lead balloon so it was
really fascinating to see that but if I
if I said to my dad as a graduate oh
I've got a job as a consultant he'll say
what the hell is that yeah what do you
do yeah and I I mean he thinks anyway
actually yeah but
um it's one of those things where I had
a pet Theory which is
in particularly in anglo-america
since the late 1990s we have a massive
overproduction a very clever generalist
graduate students Humanities in
particular but also you know in the
sciences and they don't really know what
they're going to do they're sort of
aimless very ambitious very
conscientious people and it seems to me
lots of those people gravitated towards
consultancy as a job and it almost seems
to me and obviously I don't think you've
written that in the book it almost
strikes me as a shame because having
this concentration of people that want
to do problem solving highly competent
it seems like a massive misallocation of
Human Resources basically but we do talk
about that in the book we say wouldn't
it be great if all this you know desire
to do good in the world actually also
resulted in more of these young people
going into government and we also talk
about this self-fulfilling prophecy that
the more we've had this kind of backlash
against government with Tony Jett in his
book ill Ferris the land calls a
discursive battle like literally you
know just talking about Administration
instead of kind of like a Ministry out
are trying to do really difficult things
or what I've talked about you know
Market fixing not Market shaping
de-risking not taking risks simply
enabling redistributing and regulating
instead of being a True Value Creator
it's not actually a coincidence that it
becomes much more sexy to go into the
mckinsey's The McCoys even though I have
a whole theory about Macquarie anyway
but the Goldman Sachs isn't the Googles
right so um there is that
self-fulfilling prophecy and it's not a
surprise I've actually you know taken
the time to set up a whole Institute for
Innovation and public purpose at UCL
which is all about rethinking the state
bringing purpose to the center of policy
making but also really having a theory
of value Creation with the state at the
center not to say the state is more
important than any other actor but it's
a very it's important in terms of
leading at least in democratically
elected societies and then using all the
tools that has to bring together that
kind of stakeholder value lots of
different actors to solve really complex
problems uh Drive collective
intelligence a sexy word but that needs
to be embedded in the contracts you
can't have collective intelligence if
again intellectual property rights are
abused they're currently too wide too
strong too upstream and yet an
intellectual property right is a
contract that for 17 years the state has
given to the private sector so you need
to govern that in the public interest
um and the capacity to do so I think has
withered away to govern those particular
contracts but any contract whether it's
a procurement contract or an
intellectual property right should have
the public interest at the center
because that's that's the point of
government it's not just to help
companies make profits
do you think there's been a cultural
shift as well which is the Fault here so
you know I'm a materialist you have a
materialist explanation for all that's
happening but it's an ancillary point
you know in the if you're an ambitious
young person in the 50s 60s and you want
to change the world you'd go work for a
big government Ministry and you would
say I want to go work for the Department
of EX or I want to go work for NASA
um and after the 60s there's there's
this idea that actually particularly
progressives thought oh if you want to
change the world you need to be like Jan
Jacobs or you need to be like Ralph
Nader you need to be on the outside
right
you need to be lobbying and you need to
be it's active interest representation
but not institutional power do you think
that was a kind of
a big social error actually all of a
sudden tons of talented people stopped
going into precisely institutions where
we need them to be I don't know I mean
first of all I don't want to exaggerate
the point about the people who are
working in government I mean I work with
governments globally including in the UK
and it's full of incredibly not only
smart but people really with ethics at
the center they go into government
because they're interested in you know
to put it simply making the world a
better place I think what's happened
though is that there's so much backlash
on government there's such a cartoon
image you know I talk about this in the
entrepreneurial State like the kind of
coffee and bureaucrat and then the cool
you know Steve Jobs and Elon Musk today
that actually what we've seen is also
hemorrhaging of that talent I mean so in
other words it's been a much more
explicit intentional problem than sort
of what you just described also in the
1960s I learned this when I was running
Mission economy the average age in the
mission control room for Apollo was 26.
so crazy very very young average age
there was there was younger people and
yet at that time already a lot of this
Outsourcing was happening to the
Consultants literally actually to
McKinsey in that particular case
Mackenzie began in the mid-20s and the
head of procurement for NASA this guy
Ernest Brackett said if we continue this
we won't even you know not only won't we
know how to get to the moon but we won't
even know how to write the contracts
with the private sector because they
were working with lots of private sector
companies
um and and his quote was we will get
captured by bro shermanship
it's endearing because they didn't
really have power points at the time
that you know that that these
Consultants have today they had sexy
brochures so the idea that you would get
captured by the brochure
was not to say oh we don't want to work
at the private sector it was more like
we won't know which private sector
companies to work with and I would
actually argue that's what we have today
we have
um definitely if you look at the
contracts we have a very
um unbalanced power in terms of even the
legal expertise but the problem is not
that there's not enough public or
private investment is that partnership
it's not it's not a dynamic one it's not
purpose oriented it's not fair it's not
just there's often again socialization
of risk privatization of rewards and you
can fix that in the contracts NASA
actually had a clause in its contracts
no excess profits it's great not no
profits you don't get to the Moon with
philanthropy charity of course you can
make profits but not excess in excess of
what of what you've done right so as
soon as you have a whole kind of
narrative and discourse that although
value is getting created in the private
sector and the state is just there to
facilitate enable work on the sides then
it's much easier to get these very
problematic contracts that socialize
risks and privatize rewards and allow
excess profits to be earned by some who
are doing good stuff but not everything
so some somebody watching this from the
left might think oh this is just such
democracy very vanilla I actually think
you understate your radicalism I think
it's very radical oh no because that's
why people don't like this by the way I
got a lot of hate the whole thing about
not private public partnership but
public private partnership and yeah you
might not agree with this I think in
some ways is reminiscent of the better
features of the Chinese system because
there was a great talk by Eric X Lee who
talks about the Chinese Communist party
yeah and he he made a point on a
separate a separate interview and he
said China has a market economy we have
private firms that try and make profit
he says the point is the interests of
those firms the interest of capital more
generally to make profits does not
supersede political Authority political
Authority Always super and obviously
that has bad expressions of
manifestations but the point is
political Authority Always supersedes
the private interests of businesses or
or capital and that's basically what
you're saying isn't it this idea that
political Authority democratically
accountable yes there's a democratically
accountable thing in terms of not being
a China yeah but the the same theme is
there right that political Authority
with that accountability from from
people and the Mandate from people sets
the agenda around like you say
particular missions yeah yeah and that
supersedes the interest of capital
that's hugely radicalism so I once gave
an interview actually I can't remember I
think it was to the financial times
where I said that China's learning from
the United States at the same time that
the United States is unlearning from
itself so again everything that's you
know Smart in our smartphones and not
stupid was actually invested in by
government Mission oriented government
the internet GPS touch screen and Siri
all fruits of government investments in
some cases with private sector uh
collaboration but it was actually
through a public sector problem that was
required so the internet came about
because we needed the satellites to
communicate
um GPS the Navy invested in it to know
where all the ships were in the sea so
it's not actually I mean today it feels
more like maybe a Chinese or kind of a
you know top-down planning system but
that's actually how the United States
developed they talk Jefferson but act
Hamilton people should only understand
that because now the Hamilton musical
but basically you know Hamilton was a
very important U.S politician who at the
time advocated for an industrial
strategy whereas Jefferson was more free
marketeer the US has always talked the
talk of the free market but acted
actually on a much more visible hand not
the Invisible Hand
um where I think so the work on missions
coming back to here is a speech this
morning is all about that in other words
or it should be about that I mean he's
using the word I'm very curious to you
know know and and perhaps work with them
on actually making this real the how the
how is harder than just the word it's
all about
actually having a plan that's really
difficult you know remember Kennedy said
we're going to the Moon because it's
hard not because it's easy so this isn't
about one side facilitating an Italian
facilitating means making something
easier for someone else like the word
de-risking so it's not about making it
easier de-risking someone else it's
about tackling those really difficult
challenges together now that requires a
goal that's going to be the end goal but
the how along the way really matters how
you design the financial institution
with conditionality you're not just
giving out money it's conditional on
change happening within different
sectors you don't do it top down and
tell them what to do because that could
hurt Innovation but you do it with the
strong Direction that's that public
private versus private public bit that
we talked about before it means learning
how to do again outcomes oriented
budgeting so you're not just giving a
bit of money here and there but you
actually have a goal where the budget
itself even at the city level zero knife
crime requires its own budget you can't
just give a bit of money here a bit of
money there and then stir the soup and
hope for the best
um and and so I think what's interesting
in China though is that they obviously
have very kind of clear targets at such
high poverty that they really alleviated
a lot of people out of poverty they also
are spending a huge amount on Greening
their entire manufacturing base because
they have a huge pollution problem
um so they don't have that myth of oh
this is just going to happen through the
free market one of their problems though
is they don't really have what I talk
about in the entrepreneurial State a
decentralized network of different types
of public actors they're very large for
example the Chinese development bank
which gave huge amounts of money to
Huawei Huawei would not exist without a
guaranteed loan that was over 5 billion
from the Chinese Development Bank by the
way
Elon Musk got over 5 billion from the
U.S government for his different
companies including the early stage of
Tesla was it was a guaranteed loan from
government so
um but in China you have just these big
chunks of kind of money from
institutions like the Chinese
Development Bank in the U.S they had
DARPA that the National Science
Foundation the small business Innovation
research program The Venture Capital arm
of the CIA in qtel but it has at least
in the U.S been more around their
military industrial complex and what
I've been arguing for is why do we only
take things seriously when it's about
war this is an important question today
given that we have a terrible tragic War
happening but look what happened even in
Germany after months saying there was no
money and there was a lot of pressure in
government having to cut its budget
hundred and hundred billion was found
overnight for the war effort that
happens all the time with war because we
take it seriously and I'm very anti-war
at any War but isn't it interesting that
for war money comes out of the woodwork
why doesn't it come out of the woodwork
when and we have war on poverty when we
want to strengthen our health systems
when we want Net Zero targets when we
have these social problems in our
streets so really it's what I've been
talking about for a long time is the
need to create a mission-oriented
economy around our Social Challenges
starting with the sdgs that we talked
about and what this book the big con
talks about is that that requires
capacity and if we continue to
consultify that capacity you won't know
how to implement you want to know how to
work with others
and that's important because you know I
sometimes get accused as being just kind
of you know folklorically loving the
state I'm like no I'm I'm the states
kind of I don't want to say biggest
enemy but biggest provocateur saying
what are you doing you you can't you
know become agile flexible capable and
creative unless you actually invest
internally in becoming a learning
organization you said you have haters
well who are they oh god
um I find them very hard to believe if
you're a woman
if you are progressive
if you're lucky enough to actually get
media attention but especially this is
the big bit
have impact so different governments or
even businesses start to implement some
of your ideas
are you dangerous
um if you're just ranting and no one's
listening you're less dangerous so I
think when your ideas start to have
impact and I feel very honored because
I'm not the only one you know who has
some good ideas I feel honored that I've
had the opportunity to work with
governments carefully because it's not
just about going to lecture doing a TED
talk and then leaving again that's why I
set up a whole Institute to take care
have teams that help governments
Implement new policies but also train
because that's the main thing we do we
have an educational program you are much
more dangerous to those who would love
to see the state less able less not so
much large because I've never been about
large versus small state but a more
capable State
um a state that is truly purpose
oriented a state that knows how to get a
good deal in a contract is not great
news for those who are making either a
lot of money or having a lot of power by
having a weak state so do you think that
some of the people you take Target in
this book I know you've said already
many good consult and you can see the
role for certain services not being with
inside a firm or with inside a public
agency Novara media has an accountant we
don't have an accountant inside the
organization that's something that
somebody else does for instance but this
trillion is accounting your core
business precisely right that's exactly
yeah exactly is governing a digital
platform a Core Business of a government
in order to make sure that the next
pandemic it can actually deal with the
infodamic side of the crisis of course
yeah this is a trillion dollar industry
though so like you say you putting this
in in the crosshairs and you are an
influential person that must put a mark
on on your back a little bit with some
of these people I mean I've read the
write-up and the financial times for
instance perfectly civilized and polite
but there was clearly an under current
which is you know don't make too much
noise about this industry oh really I
haven't read that have you not read it
have they made threats they're going to
come and knock on the door I'm not
threats but no it's huge there's huge
vested interest basically not having
this conversation I thought that was
actually quite funny to be honest I mean
the comments that were so defensive and
then all you have to read was the
comments that came afterwards by others
I mean I almost didn't have to reply I
think the fact that we purposefully we
say this several times in the book that
this is just as much a challenge to
those that are hiring and that are and
that have stopped investing within their
own capacity as it is to those that are
making a lot of money by profiting from
those that don't have that capacity it's
really a wake-up call to everyone
because I truly believe that in the long
run we all will benefit you know the
planet will benefit the sustainability
of the planet but also these problems we
have around inequality will benefit if
we actually have more capable actors all
around
Mariana thank you so much for joining us
this evening thank you
it's a great book thanks so much
congratulations
