thank you very
much I'm going to start in fact talk
throughout about an essay and a book
written by Samuel Huntington entitled
The Clash of civilizations when it first
appeared in
1993 in uh the journal Foreign Affairs
it had a question mark after it um uh
and it announced in its first sentence
that world politics is entering a new
phase three years later Huntington
expanded the essay some would say
bloated it to uh to the size of a book
without a question mark the new book is
entit which was published last year
entitled The Clash of civilization and
the emerging World Order My premise is
that the essay is better than the book I
mean it got worse the more he added to
it so I'll concentrate most of my uh
attention on the essay but make some
comments about the book as we go along
now what Huntington meant when he said
that world politics is entering a new
phase uh was that whereas in the recent
past World conflicts had been between
ideological camps grouping the first
second and third worlds
into uh Waring entities the new style of
politics which he discerned would entail
conflicts between different and
presumably clashing
civilizations I quote him the great
divisions among humankind and the
dominating source of conflict will be
cultural The Clash of civilizations will
dominate global
politics later he explains how it is
that the principal Clash will be between
Western and non-western
civilization um but he spends most of
his time uh in the uh in in the two
Works discussing the disagreements
potential or actual between what he
calls the West on the one hand and on
the other Islamic and Confucian
civilizations in terms of detail a great
deal more attention hostile attention is
paid to Islam than to any other
civilization including the west and much
of the tremendous interest subsequently
taken in Huntington's essay
I think derives from its timing rather
than exclusively from what it says as he
himself notes there have been several
intellectual and political attempts
since the end of the Cold War to map the
emerging World situation and this
includes Francis fukuyama's thesis on
the end of History which nobody talks
about sort of the end of fukiyama really
um and and the thesis put about during
the latter days of the uh Bush
Administration the theory of the
so-called new world order but there have
been more serious attempts to deal with
the coming Millennium uh in in works by
Paul Kennedy for example uh Eric Hobs
Bal uh less interesting and more rabid
uh Connor Cruz O'Brien uh Robert uh
Robert Kaplan and a book that's uh
apparently making the rounds and
campuses on uh uh Jihad versus mcworld
uh by um by Benjamin
Barber all of these books have done so
have looked at the coming Millennium
with considerable attention to the
causes of future conflict which has
given them all I think justly cause for
alarm the core of Huntington's Vision
which is not really original with him is
the idea of an unceasing Clash a concept
of conflict which slides somewhat
effortlessly into the political space
vacated by the unremitting war of ideas
and values embodied in the
war of which of course Huntington was a
great uh uh theorist I don't think
therefore it's inaccurate to suggest
that what Huntington is providing in his
work especially since it's primarily
addressed to influential opinion and
policy
makers is in fact a recycled version of
the Cold War thesis that that conflicts
in today's and tomorrow's world will
remain not economic or social in essence
but
ideological and if that is so then one
ideology the
wests is the Still Point or the Locust
Locust around which for Huntington all
other civilizations turn in effect then
the Cold War continues but this time on
many fronts with many more serious and
basic systems of values and ideas like
Islam and conf Confucianism struggling
for ascendency and even dominance over
the West not surprisingly therefore
Hunan concludes his Essay with a brief
survey not only his essay but his book
as well with a survey of what it is that
the West might do must do to remain
strong and keep its
opponents um uh it keep its opponents
weak and
divided he
says the West must exploit differences
in conflicts I'm quoting now and
conflicts among Confucian and Islamic
states to support in other civilizations
groups sympathetic to Western values and
interests to strengthen International
institutions that reflect and legitimate
Western interests and values and to
promote the involvement of non-western
states in those institutions it's a very
interventionist and quite aggressive
attitude towards other CI civilizations
to get them to be more Western so strong
and insistent as Huntington's notion
that other civilizations necessarily
clash with the
west and so relentlessly aggressive and
chauvinistic is it prescription for what
the West must do to continue winning so
that what the reader forced to conclude
that he's really most interested in
continuing and expanding the Cold War by
other means rather than advancing ideas
that might help us to understand the
current world scene or ideas that would
try to reconcile between
cultures not only will conflict continue
but he but he but he says the conflict
between civilizations will be the latest
phase in the evolution of conflict in
the modern world it as a very brief and
rather crudely articulated manual in the
art of maintaining a wartime status in
the minds of Americans and others that
Huntington's work has to be now
understood I'd go so far as saying that
it argues from the standpoint of
Pentagon planners and defense industry
Executives uh who may have temporarily
lost their occupations after the end of
the Cold War but have now discovered a
new vocation for themselves but perhaps
because Huntington is more interested in
policy prescriptions and these either in
history or in the care careful analysis
of cultures Huntington in my opinion is
quite misleading in what he says and how
he puts things a great deal of his
argument first of all depends on second
and third hand opinion that scans the
enormous advances in our concrete
understanding and theoretical
understanding of how cultures work how
they change and how they can best be
grasped or
apprehended a brief look at the people
and opinions he quote suggests that
journalism and popular demagogy are his
main sources rather than than serious
scholarship or Theory when you draw on
tendentious publicists and Scholars you
already Prejudice the argument in favor
of conflict and pmic rather than in
favor of true understanding and the kind
of cooperation between peoples that our
planet needs hunting his authorities are
not the cultures themselves but a small
handful of authorities picked by him
because in fact they emphasize the
latent
bellicosity in one or another statement
by one or another so-called spokesperson
for about that culture the giveaway for
me is the title of his book and his
essay The Clash of civilizations which
is not his phrase but Bernard Lewis's on
the last page of Lewis's essay entitled
the roots of Muslim
Rage which appeared in the September
1990 issue of the Atlantic Monthly Lewis
speaks about the current problem with
the Islamic world I
quote this is incredible stuff it should
by now be clear Lewis says that we are
facing a mood and a movement in Islam
far transcending the level of issues and
policies and the governments that pursue
them this is no less than a clash of
civilizations the perhaps irrational but
surely historic receptions of an ancient
rival against our whenever you hear the
word our you you want to head for the
exit
uh against our judeo-christian heritage
our secular
present and the worldwide expansion of
both it is crucially important that we
on our side should not be provoked into
an equally historic but also equally
irrational reaction against that rival
in other words we shouldn't be as crazy
as they
are and of course Lewis is very much
listened to uh at the Council of foreign
relation the New York Review books and
so on and so
forth but few people today with any
sense would want to volunteer such
sweeping characterizations of the ones
Advanced by Lewis about a billion a
billion Muslims scattered through five
continents dozens of differing languages
and traditions and histories of them all
Lewis says that they are all enraged at
Western modernity as if a billion people
were really only one person and western
civilization was no more complicated a
matter than a simple declarative
sentence but what I do want to stress is
first of all how Huntington has picked
up from
Lewis in a classical kind of
orientalist gesture the notion that or
that civilizations are monolithic and
homogeneous and second how again from
Lewis he assumes the unchanging
character of The Duality between us and
them in other words I think it's
absolutely imp imperative to stress that
like Lewis Huntington doesn't write
neutral descriptive and objective Pros
but is himself a
polemicist whose rhetoric not only
depends heavily on prior arguments about
a war of all against W but in effect
perpetuates them far from being an
Arbiter between civilizations which is
what He suggests he might be doing
Huntington is a partisan advocate of one
civilization over all the others like
Lewis hunting defines Islamic
civilization reductively as if what most
matters about it is its supposed
anti-westernism I mean it doesn't matter
to him that Muslims have other things to
do than to think about the West with
hatred but you get the impression that
that's all they're thinking about is how
to destroy the West bomb it and you know
destroy the whole world really for his
part Lewis tries to give a set of
reasons for his definition that Islam
has never modernized that it never
separated between church and state that
it has been incapable of understanding
other civilization all of them you know
complete untruths I mean of course the
Arabs Muslims have traveled well before
the Europeans in uh in in the in the
east in Africa and in Europe and were
great discovers of other civilization
well before Marco Polo uh and uh
Columbus but Huntington doesn't bother
with any of this for him Islam
Confucianism and the other five or six
civilizations Hindu Japanese Slavic
Orthodox Latin am am and African that
still exist are separate from each other
and
consequently potentially in a conflict
which he wants to manage not resolve he
writes therefore as a crisis manager not
as a student of cultures and
civilizations nor as a reconciler
between them at the
core and this is what has made his work
strike so responsive Accord among post
Cold War policy makers is this sense
that you saw
in uh you know uh crisis managing Pros
during the Vietnam
war this sense of cutting through a lot
of unnecessary details you go through
masses of scholarship and huge amounts
of experience and you boil all of it
down to a couple of catchy easy to quote
and remember ideas which are then passed
off as
pragmatic hard-headed practical sensible
clear but is this and now I come to the
more serious part of what I have to say
is this the best way to understand the
world we live in Is it
wise to produce a simplified map of the
world and then hand it to generals and
civilian lawmakers as a prescription for
first comprehending and then acting in
the world doesn't this in effect prolong
and deepen
conflict what does it do to minimize
civilizational conflict do we want the
Clash of civilizations doesn't it
mobilize nationalist passions and
therefore nationalist
murderousness shouldn't we be asking the
question why is one doing this sort of
thing to understand or to act to
mitigate or to aggravate the likelihood
of
conflict I'd want to begin to survey the
world situation by commenting on how
prevalent it has become for people to
speak now in the name of large and in my
opinion undesirably vague and
manipulable abstractions like the west
or Japanese culture or Slavic culture or
Islam or Confucianism labels that
collapse particular religions races and
ethnicities into ideologies that are
considerably more unpleasant and
provocative than gobino and hon did 150
years ago let me give a couple of
examples to illustr what I mean the
language of group identity makes a
particularly strident appearance from
the middle to the end of the 19th
century as the culmination of Decades of
international competition between the
great European and American powers for
territories in Africa and Asia in the
battle for the empty spaces of Africa
the so-called Dark Continent France and
Britain
Germany uh Belgium Portugal Resort not
only to force but to a whole slew of
theories and rhetorics for justifying
their plunder
perhaps the most famous of such devices
is the French notion of the civilizing
mission a notion underlying which is the
idea that some races and cultures have a
higher aim in life than others this
gives the more powerful the more
developed the more civilized the higher
the right to colonize others not in the
name of brute force or plunder both of
which are standard components of the
exercise but in the name of a noble
ideal Conrad most famous story The Heart
of
Darkness is an ironic even terrifying
enactment of this thesis that as the
narrator puts it the conquest of the
earth which mostly means the taking it
away from those who have a different
complexion or slightly flatter noses
than ourselves is not a pretty thing
when you look into it too much what
redeems it is the idea an idea at the
back of it not a Sentimental pretense
but an idea and an unselfish belief in
the idea something you can bow down
before and sacrifice to
in response to this sort of logic two
things occur one is that competing
Imperial Powers invent their own theory
of cultural Destiny in order to justify
their actions abroad Britain had such a
theory Germany had one Belgium had one
and of course in the concept of manifest
destiny the United States had one too
these redeeming
ideas dignify the practice of
competition and Clash whose real purpose
is Conrad quite accurately saw was
self-aggrandisement power Conquest
treasure and unrestrained self- pride
I'd go so farce to say that what we
today call the politics or the rhetoric
of identity by which a member of One
ethnic or religious or national or
cultural group puts that group at the
center of the world derives from that
period of Imperial competition at the
end of the last
century and this in turn provokes the
concept of Worlds at War that quite
obviously is at the heart of
Huntington's article in the related
fields of political economy geography
anthropology and historiography the
theory that each world is self-enclosed
has its own boundaries and special
territory is applied to the world map to
the structure of
civilizations to the notion that each
race has a special Destiny a psychology
and an ethos renal said for example that
the Chinese race its Destiny is to serve
they are docile people and they must
serve the black race must be the you
know the the bearers the uh the laborers
of mankind because they can they're
strong and in in physique and can work
hard that kind
of all of these ideas almost without
exception are based not on the harmony
but on the Clash or conflict between
worlds the second thing that happens is
that the Lesser peoples the objects of
the Imperial gays so to speak respond by
resisting their forcible manipulation
and settlement we now know that active
resistance to the white man began the
moment he set foot in places like
Algeria East Africa India and
elsewhere later primary resistance was
succeeded by secondary resistance the
organization of political and cultural
movements determined to achieve
independence and Liberation from
Imperial control at precisely the moment
in the 19th century that among the
European and American Powers a rhetoric
of of self of cultural
self-justification begins to be
widespread a responding rhetoric among
the colonized people develops one that
speaks in terms of African or Asian or
Arab or Muslim Unity Independence
self-determination in India for example
the congress party was organized in 1880
and by the turn of the century had
convinced the Indian Elite that only by
supporting Indian languages industry and
commerce could political Freedom come
these are hours and hours alone runs the
argument and only by supporting our
world against theirs note the US versus
them construction can we finally stand
on our own one finds a similar logic at
work during the mag period in modern
Japan something like this rhetoric of
belonging is also larged at the heart of
each independent movement's nationalism
and it achieved the result shortly after
World War II not only of dismantling
over a period of about 20 years the the
classical Empires but of winning
Independence for dozens of countries
thereafter India Indonesia most of the
Arab countries Indochina Algeria Kenya
Etc all these emerged onto the world
scene sometimes peacefully sometimes as
the effect of internal developments as
in the Japanese instance or of ugly
colonial wars and Wars of National
Liberation in both the colonial and
postcolonial context therefore rhetorics
of General cultural or civil ational
specificity went in two potential
directions one a utopian line that
insisted on an overall pattern of
integration and Harmony between All
Peoples the other a line that suggested
as to how all cultures were so specific
and jealous as to reject and war against
all the others among instance of the
utopian are the language and
institutions of the United Nations
founded in the aftermath of World War II
and the subsequent development out of
that of various attempts at World
Government predicated on coexistence
voluntary limitations of sovereignty the
integration of peoples and cultures
harmoniously among the second are the
theory and practice of the Cold War and
more recently the idea of the Clash of
civilizations uh which appears to be a
necessity for a world of so many parts
and uh indeed even a certainty according
to this cultures and civilizations are
basically separated from each other that
is to say the core of Islam is to be
separated from everything else the core
of the West is to be separated from all
the
others I don't want to be invidious here
in the Islamic World there has been a
Resurgence of rhetoric and movements
stressing the innate opposition between
Islam and the West just as in Africa
Europe Asia and elsewhere movements have
appeared that stress the need for
excluding or
Exterminating as in Bosnia others as
undesirable white apartheid in South
Africa was such a movement as is the
Zionist idea that Palestine should be
for the Jews only and the Palestinians
as non-jews should have a lesser Place
afro centricity Islam acentricity are
movements that also stress the
independence and separateness of uh
cultures within each civilizational camp
we will notice there are official
representatives of that culture who make
themselves into its
mouthpiece who assign themselves the
role of articulating our or for that
matter their Essence this always
requires compression reduction
exaggeration so in the first and most
immediate level then statements about
what our culture is civilization is or
ought to be necessarily involves a
contest over the definition that's why I
think it's more accurate to say that the
period we're living in is not the Clash
of civilization but the Clash of
definitions anyone who has the slightest
understanding of how cultures really
work knows that defining the culture
saying what it is for members of that
culture is always a
major and even in undemocratic society
is an ongoing contest there are
canonical authorities to be selected
regularly revised debated selected
dismissed there are ideas of Good and
Evil belonging or not belonging
hierarchies of values to be specified
discussed rediscussed
each culture moreover defines its
enemies what stands Beyond it and
threatens it and other to be despised
and fought
against but cultures are not the same
there is an official culture the culture
of priests academics and the state it
provides definitions of patriotism
loyalty boundaries and what I've called
belonging it is this official culture
that speaks in the name of the whole but
it's also true and this is completely
missing from uh The Clash of
civilization argument as we hear it in
in in
Huntington in addition to the mainstream
or official culture there are dissenting
or
Alternatives unorthodox heterodox
strands that contain many
anti-authoritarian themes in them that
are in competition with the official
culture these can be called the
counterculture an ensemble of practices
associated with various kinds of
Outsiders the poor immigrants artistic
Bohemians workers Rebels
artists from the counterculture comes
the critique of authority and attacks on
what is official and Orthodox no culture
is understandable without some sense of
this everpresent source of creative
provocation from The Unofficial to the
official to disregard the sense of
restlessness in the West in Islam in
Confucianism within each culture and to
assume that there's complete homogeneity
between culture and identity is to miss
what is vital and fertile in
culture um
a couple of years ago Arthur schinger
wrote a book called The disuniting of
America which is a kind
ofur about the way in which
American uh in which American history
which for him is the history of uh bankr
and Adams and so on is dissolving into
uh uh into something quite
different and he says that new group
groups in American society want the
writing of History to reflect not only
in America that was conceived of and
ruled by patricians at land owners but
an America in which slaves servants
laborers and poor immigrants played an
important but as yet unacknowledged role
the narratives of such people silenced
by the great discourses whose Source was
Washington the investment Banks of New
York the universities of New England and
the great industrial fortunes of the
middle and Far West have come to disrupt
the slow progress and unruffled Serenity
of the official story they ask questions
interject the experience of Social
unfortunates and make the claims of
lesser peoples of women Asian and
African-Americans and various other
minorities sexual as well as
ethnic there's a similar debate inside
the Islamic world today which in the
often hysterical outcry about the threat
of Islam Islamic
fundamentalism and terrorism that one
encounters so often in the media is
often lost sight of completely like any
other major world culture Islam contains
within itself an astonishing variety of
currents and countercurrents I would say
that it is this extremely widespread
attitude of questioning and skepticism
towards age-old Authority that
characterizes the post-war World in both
east and west and it's that that
Huntington cannot handle and therefore
resorts to the business of The Clash of
cultures and The Clash of
civilizations two theorists of that sort
civilization identity is a stable and
undisturbed thing like a room full of
furniture at the back of your house this
is extremely far from the truth not just
in the Islamic world but throughout the
entire surface of the globe to emphasize
the differences between cultures is
completely to ignore the literally
unending debate about defining the
culture or civilization
within those civilizations including
Western ones these debates completely
undermine any idea of a fixed identity
and hence of relationships between
identities what Huntington considers to
be a sort of ontological fact of
political existence to Wi The Clash of
civilizations too much attention paid to
managing and clarifying The Clash of
cultures obliterates something
else the fact of a great often silent
exchange and dialogue between them what
culture today whether Japanese Arab
European Korean chines Indian has not
had long intimate and extraordinarily
Rich contacts with other
cultures there is no exception to this
exchange at
all much the same is true of literature
where readers for example of Garcia
Marquez Nagib mAh kenzaburo
exist far beyond the national or
cultural boundaries imposed by language
and nation in my own field of
comparative
literature there's a
commitment to the relationships between
literatures as to their reconciliation
and Harmony despite the existence of
powerful ideological and National
barriers between them and this sort of
Cooperative Collective Enterprise is
what what one misses in The Proclaimers
of an dying clash between cultures the
lifelong Dedication that has existed in
all
modern and ancient societies among
Scholars artists musicians Visionaries
and Prophets to try to come to terms
with the other with that other Society
or culture that seems so foreign and so
distant it seems to me that unless we
emphasize and maximize the spirit of
cooperation and humanistic exchange and
here I don't speak simply of uninformed
Delight or amateurish enthusiasm for the
Exotic but rather profound existential
commitment and labor on behalf of the
other unless we do that we are going to
end up superficially and strident
banging the drum for our culture in
opposition to all the
others and we know also in another very
important study of the way cultures work
uh the book co-authored or co-edited by
uh Terrence Ranger and Eric Hobs bam
that even tradition can be invented that
I mean the idea of a culture and a
civilization being something that's
stable and fixed is completely disproved
by this notion of how in Traditions can
be invented manufactured for the
occasion so the Traditions are really
not the wonderfully stable things that
we are but
rather uh but rather uh abstractions
that can quite easily uh be created and
destroyed manipulated and so on as I've
argued in several of my own Works in
today's Europe and the United States
what is described as Islam for instance
because this is where the burden I think
of clash of civilizations the thesis
goes what is described as Islam belongs
to the discourse of orientalism a
construction fabricated to whip up
feelings of hostility and anti antipathy
against a part of the world that happens
to be of strategic importance for its
oil its threatening adjacent to
Christianity its formidable history of
competition with the West yet this is a
very different thing than what to
Muslims who live within its domain Islam
really is there's a world of difference
between Islam in Indonesia and Islam in
Egypt by the same token the volatility
of today's struggle over the meaning and
definition of Islam is evident in Egypt
where the secular powers of society are
conflict with various Islamic protest
movements and reformers over the nature
of Islam and in such their circumstances
the easiest and the least accurate thing
is to say that is the world of Islam and
see how it is all terrorists and
fundamentalists and see also how
different how irrational they are
compared to
us but the truly weakest part and I
conclude here or the weak the weakest
part of the Clash of cultures and
civilizations thesis is the rigid
separation assumed between them despite
the overwhelming evidence that today's
world is in fact a world of mixtures of
migrations and of Crossings over of
boundaries
traversed one of the major crises
affecting countries like France Britain
and the US has been brought about by the
realization Now dorning everywhere that
no culture or Society is purely one
thing sizable minorities North Africans
in France the African Caribbean and
Indian populations in Britain as Asian
and African uh uh elements in this
country dispute the idea that
Civilization that prided themselves on
being homogeneous can continue to do so
there are no insulated cultures or
civilizations any attempt made to
separate them into the watertight
compartments alleged by Huntington and
his ilk does damage to their variety
their diversity their sheer complexity
of elements their radical hybridity the
more insistent we are on the separation
of cultures the more inaccurate we are
about ourselves and about others the
notion of an exclusionary civilization
is to my way of thinking an impossible
one the real question then is whether in
the end we want to work for
civilizations that are separate or
whether we should be taking the more
integrative but perhaps more difficult
path which is to try to see them as
making one vast hole whose exact
Contours are impossible for any person
to grasp but whose certain existence we
can Intuit it and feel and
study in view of the depressing
actualities around us the presence of
many
inter cultural interethnic
conflicts it does seem to me ostrich
like to suggest that we in Europe and
the US should maintain our civilization
which Huntington calls the West
by holding everyone and all the others
at Bay increasing the Rifts between
peoples in order to prolong our
dominance that is in effect what he
argues and one can quite easily
understand why it is that his essay was
published in foreign affairs and why so
many policy makers have drifted toward
it as allowing the US to extend the
mindset of the Cold War into a different
time and for a new
audience much more productive and useful
is a new Global mentality ity or
Consciousness that sees the dangers we
Face from the standpoint of the whole
human race these dangers include the
polarization of most of the globe's
population the emergence of virulent
local National ethnic and religious
sentiment as in Bosnia Rwanda Lebanon
cnia and elsewhere the decline of
literacy and onset of a new liter
illiteracy based on electronic modes of
communication television and the new
information Global Super Highway the
fragmentation and threatened
disappearance of the grand narratives of
emancipation and
Enlightenment our most precious asset in
the face of such a dire transformation
of history is the emergence not of a
sense of clash but a sense of community
understanding sympathy and hope which is
the direct opposite of what Huntington
provokes if I may quote some lines by
the great martinian poet a c that I used
in my book on culture and imperialism
and I never Tire of quoting these
lines and he speaks here of man uh Lum
in French but the work of man is only
just beginning and it remains to conquer
all the violence entrenched in the
recesses of our passion and no race
possesses the Monopoly of beauty of
intelligence of force and there's a
place for all at the rev Vu of victory
in what they imply these sentiments
prepare the way for a dissolution of
cultural
barriers
as the so as a kind of blockage between
cultures as well as of the pride that
prevents the kind of benign globalism
already to be found for instance in the
environmental movement in scientific
cooperation in the women's movement in
the Universal concern for human rights
in concepts of global thought that
stress community and sharing over racial
gender or class
dominance it would seem to me therefore
that efforts to return the community of
civilizations to A Primitive stage of
narcissistic struggle needs to be
understood not as descriptions about how
in fact civilizations behave but rather
as incitements to wasteful conflict and
unedifying chauvinism and that seems to
be exactly what we don't need thank you
thank
you well I think there are already all
kinds of commonalities I think the first
step is to recognize them as actually
having taken place that uh I think also
for me the idea that cultures are
somehow separate entities and
exist all by themselves with occasional
interruption by you know people with
darker skin or whiter skin or whatever
is simply wrong I mean I think the first
thing and I I think this is where
education is terribly important and
probably one of the reasons why um the
the conservative movement not just here
but in in in in in most countries of the
world has something very important in
common and that is the the the
constantly
accented uh cry about tradition we
should go back to our tradition we
should learn our languages should
concentrate on our books and our culture
we that sort of thing and I think that's
bankrupt I mean I think all systems of
Education alas are still deeply
sometimes unconsciously nationalistic so
I think we have to denationalize
education and realize and and and make
it possible for people to understand
that we live in a very complex and mixed
World in which you can't separate uh
cultures and civilizations from each
other but in fact history ought to be
taught as the exchange and of course the
Clash of civilization so I think that's
the first step and once you go from
there then I think we have a better
understanding of the way certain kinds
of conflict are are wasteful and and and
uh and hopeless I mean ethnic cleansing
the idea of apartheid all of these
schemes for isolating
people uh and and so on and so forth I
mean I think it's it's it's fairly clear
and and straightforward alas it requires
a lot of work because uh you're bucking
a very very strong entrenched position
which says that we are the center of the
world whoever we are and much of what
all of what I've said is really intended
as a critique of that kind of
monotheistic
position what I was talking about was
not and I I I don't I'm glad you brought
it up because I don't want to be
understood as suggesting that we're in
in in the in the kind of attitude I'm
trying to describe I'm I'm trying to
eliminate difference I mean there's a
great deal of difference between uh
flattening everything out into some kind
of you know uh
univocal homogene
homogenized philosophy
and so that's one possibility and I'm
obviously against that I'm also against
the idea of saying well everything is
clashing and it's different and so on
and so forth and that strikes me as the
major flaw in in Huntington's proposal I
think it's a prescription for war and
and he actually says it is and third is
the other alternative which is what I
call coexistence but coexistence with
the preservation of difference I mean in
other words that you be able to live
with those who are different from you in
all kinds of ways assuming that there's
a kind of as the English poet Jared
Manley Hopkins says is a kind of
radical inscape to each individual
there's a kind of different kind of
construction or constitutivist to all
people in some way and which applies to
all languages to all uh to to all
cultures if you want to use that phrase
and so it's the idea of of respecting
the difference but living with it uh
human history is really a long history
of compelling difference either by
assimilation or by extermination uh uh
by by domination and I'm certainly not
suggesting that what we need is a is a
is a is a unified and simplified and
reduced uh culture that includes
everyone without distinction everybody
should wear the same uniforms and so on
that that's not what I'm talking about
I'm really talking about the
preservation of difference recognizing
that difference is
all uh but coexistence between them
rather than saying well we are different
therefore you have to stay away from us
or we have to protect ourselves against
you or we should destroy you that's
that's that's very very dangerous and I
think there are indications of as I
suggested at the end of my talk in uh in
in in in movements of what might be
called the benign Global Consciousness
in for example the environmental
movement where uh environments differ
but they're all threatened and they
differ in different ways and have to be
preserved and studied according to those
differences not according to some
Universal
model how to combat it well I mean this
is one way to combat it you know I mean
is to to reveal it for what it
is uh and to debate it and through the
various kinds of uh processes of
Education I talked about plus I think
you know one of the things that's very
striking to me as somebody who travels
in and out of the United States a fair
amount is is the fact that you know most
American intellectuals are really not as
conscious as they perhaps ought to be of
how
uh powerful the effect of us
intervention is in throughout the world
I mean you know I think therefore the
main duty for an American intellectual
is to think about the responsibility of
addressing this vast interventionary
power which is scattered all over the
world where us interests are to be found
I mean I think that's an important moral
and uh and political uh task that has to
be defined and in this period of
basically inertness where there isn't
much debate
on intellectual and uh and policy issues
outside you know the the the great uh
think TXS and centers like the Rand
Corporation and the Pentagon and so on
and so forth that is seems to be
terribly important what what are we
going to do with all these nuclear uh
devices that are secreted all over the
country and all these you know these B
uh B2 bombers and Etc I mean this is a
vast military budget that is supposed to
uh police the world
no I I think that the the situation of
the Palestinians is at this moment
really quite well it's verging on the
catastrophic I'd say I mean it's not a
happy moment uh not only is there really
a
quite crazy in my opinion well egregious
is the word I sometimes use for
Netanyahu um but I mean he's a bloody I
mean he's something quite bloodthirsty
about him uh and this is the head of the
as Mr arat calls him our peace Partners
um on the one hand and on the other you
have the United States pretty much
backing Israel I mean there are a few
bleats here and there from uh Albright
and a couple of others saying well
please time out on the settlements I
mean the suggestion being if you count
to 10 and during the count of 10 you
don't build any settlements you're
somehow being a nice guy and then after
10 you can build all the settlements you
want which is the theory I think um and
supplying Israel with billions of
dollars a year they say three billion
there was a there was a letter in the
times yesterday exactly about that say
well why I mean what why don't we say
something to them about we we keep on
punishing the Palestinians we withhold
$100 million of Aid and here for the
Palestinians because they're not
fighting terrorism enough which means
pretty much lock everybody up uh so why
don't we withhold some of the aid to
Israel was the question I think it's a
very good question it's never asked and
then
I mean it's a it's a it's a catalog of
it's a catalog of woes and then you know
we're at a moment in our history as I
mean as Palestinians that we are uh led
by I don't know words fail me I don't
know what we're led by but uh not a very
bright leadership uh and um you know
going from one mistake after another
without a you know and there's a kind of
natural thing that occurs amongst most
people that in times of trouble you
don't want to change horses in Midstream
I mean and there's a leader and we're
beset on all sides we can't move the
refugees can't have no passports they're
unable to work they're unable to travel
you know there's 7 million Palestinians
in the world today more or less uh
facing the same problems some obviously
worse than others and the people on the
West Bank in Gaza have lost you know 50%
of their income over the last four years
since the peace process began
uh and unemployment is up to anywhere
between you know 30 and 60% uh and
houses are constantly being destroyed
and property is taken from Palestinians
and new settlements are being built in
Jerusalem Jerusalem is being judaized I
so in all of this it's very difficult to
say that uh that there's uh there's much
brightness on the horizon I think it's a
particularly bad period which I think
I'm afraid will get worse because uh the
leadership is very shaky uh out ofat has
very little popularity now for obvious
reasons I mean he hasn't delivered
anything except problems and he keeps
rounding people up as the Israelis tell
him to do and his men in Washington keep
on conceding more to the Israelis
agreeing to more humiliating terms and I
think the main problem and I think this
will probably help a great deal in the
near future uh will be the clarification
of what it is that we're all about I
mean you know for years we used to say
that we want to liberate Palestine and
then we say we want to liberate a part
of Palestine then we want sovereignty on
that then we accept autonomy on that we
don't even get that so our The Horizon
keeps shrinking people don't know what
the whole struggle is all about and
until that is made clear unless it's
some kind of consensus which is bound to
Arise at some point uh I think our
situation will get worse and
finally um you know it's been my shares
the same uh I think view it's been our
view that you know that the United
States plays an extremely important role
and I think the view of most people I
mean I'm talking about you know citizens
like ourselves is that the situation in
in the in the Middle East especially
with regard to Israel and the
Palestinian simply unacceptable I mean
this is you know the most extraordinary
kind of flouting of the rules of
international and even National Behavior
Uh Collective punishment is the order of
the day uh people are killed all the
time and you know the idea is that
Israel can do this and we can continue
to pay for it so what I've been
surprised by the absence of a movement
in this country of people who are
willing to take this quite important
issue and it's a movement I think that a
lot of Jews have to be involved in it I
don't think it's a I mean I know it's
rashash Shana so I I don't think but but
I think it's not something that you can
turn your head away from because this is
done in the name of the Jewish people uh
and I think it's a it's a quite
important political and historical
struggle and at the bottom is a question
of fairness and Justice not of the
United States but of the you know of the
future of of these two peoples who have
to in some way share Palestine but I
think the role of the United States and
the United States citizenry is is
absolutely Central uh raised
Consciousness and asking questions and
not allowing these things to happen in
the name of the West and uh the Great
and the good and the Beautiful uh
without without uh uh without uh without
demeral and I think if I might just say
one more thing uh to my uh Jewish
friends that I think the the crisis is a
crisis of conscience that is to say
until there's a there's an there's a
widespread recognition and
acknowledgement of what Israel cost the
Palestinians uh and that the the present
identity of Israel today is
fundamentally uh intertwined with the
tragedy of the Palestinians one caused
by the other uh we will there will never
be peace because you can't continue to
sweep
away the fact that Israel was
constructed on the ruins of another
society and by the dis mass
dispossession of another people who are
remain unacknowledged as just sort of
obscure natives in the background back
to the desert let them let them go to
one of the other Arab countries that's
when the position are we bear no the
also Accord say specifically that Israel
Bears no responsibility for the costs of
the occupation this after 20 years 26
years of military occupation no
responsibility as an Israeli journalist
said he said we took over the country in
1948 from the British the British left
us the port of hia a road system an
electrical system a large number of
municipal buildings and lots of prisons
and we could build Israel without that
there would be no state today if we had
taken Palestine in 1948 the way we left
Gaza for the Palestinians there would be
no Israel we destroyed the economy we uh
deported most of the capable people we
forced the people to live in HS and
refugee camps over a period I mean if
anybody's been to Gaza it's one of the
most criminal places on Earth because of
Israeli policy of occupation and they
bear no responsibility for it I mean
that's simply unacceptable even for the
Jewish people who have suffered so much
it's unacceptable you cannot continue to
victimize somebody else just because you
yourself were a victim once there has to
be a
limit
