positive and negative Opposites Attract
it's a taale As Old As
Time H oh wow there's a whole bunch of
positives and a whole bunch of negatives
I wonder what's going to happen oh
they're mixing around and relaxing and
well look they end up in a nice little
Arrangement very nice the crystal is
born this is just a simple collection of
atoms so take it as a grain of salt but
um crystallinity in general is the
relaxation of atoms into their low
energy
configuration but we don't just have to
look at Crystals we have
technology so suppose we have a whole
row of positives up top and negatives
down below now if we shoot a positive
test particle through it's going to be
pushed away from the positives and
attracted towards the negatives so it
path is going to curve like
so likewise if we send a negative test
particle through it's going to be pulled
towards the positives and pushed away
from the
negatives H it's kind of weird how the
charges know where all the other charges
are I mean how does that actually work
is it like telekinesis like all the
charged particles in the universe are
talking to each other at a distance
telling each other how much to be pushed
around and in what direction that
doesn't seem right whatever is going on
here in this universe you'd think that
something at some place shouldn't just
be able to push around something else in
another place so we come to the strange
and inevitable conclusion that there
must be some kind of a something
throughout space and time let's call it
a field that charged particles interact
with so in this example suppose these
stationary charges give rise to a vector
field like so with the vectors pointing
away from the positive charges and
towards the negative
charges then as we shoot our test
particles through the vector field is
going to push them around in accordance
with their charge positive charges will
be pushed along the direction of the
vector at each point in
space while negative charges will be
pushed in exactly the opposite way
anti-parallel to the vectors at each
point meanwhile the particle without
charge will just Float On by it's like
yo I'm not doing all that charge stuff
I'm just going to float on
by okay so electric fields are a
thing and also if you've ever done the
thing with the magnet and the iron
filings you can see that magnetic fields
are a thing too so for some reason there
are
fields and you know electric and
magnetic phenoma were actually known
about since
Antiquity both the words electric and
magnetic come from ancient Greek
electric comes from the Greek word for
Amber because Amber has some cool static
electric effects and magnetic comes from
a region of ancient Greece where people
used to find these cool magnetic rocks
and for the longest time these were just
sep things but later on in the 1800s as
people got better at wielding
electricity and playing around with
magnets it was discovered that the
electric and magnetic fields are
intimately related actually they're two
sides of the same coin and they're
locked in an eternal Dynamic interplay
and when they Splash around that's what
light is as well as radio waves x-rays
microwaves and so on so a wonderful
picture began to emerge where all of the
electric phenomena and all the magnetic
things and light itself and even a whole
bunch of invisible frequencies of light
all emerged as specific manifestations
of more fundamental more elegant
underlying patterns these patterns can
be described
mathematically the patterns taken on by
the electric and magnetic fields are
encapsulated by Maxwell's equations the
four equations shown
here each of these equations is Cosmic
Ally powerful on its own so if you equip
yourself with all four of them you'll be
unstoppable the four Maxwell's equations
reveal to us the patterns in the
electric and magnetic fields but to do
physics with these fields we also have
to know how they push around charged
particles and for that we have the
Loren's Force law which tells us that
charged particles will be pushed along
the electric field while they're going
to be pushed in a swirly way around the
magnetic field depending on their
velocity in both cases the direction of
the force depends on the charge with the
field pushing on positive and negative
charges in opposite ways the four
Maxwell's equations combined with the
Loren's Force law comprise the
mathematical framework of classical
electromagnetism which describes the
electromagnetic phenomena to a very high
degree of
accuracy in practice one also encounters
material properties things like
resistivity which can be understood
within the framework of Maxwell's
equations and the Loren Force law
material properties just think of those
as things that emerge in the statistical
limits of a very complicated condensed
matter system well anyway so at the end
of the day it's all about Maxwell's
equations and theen force law and you
can study this and you can take classes
on electrodynamics and you can solve
these differential equations in every
which way and you can develop an
understanding of all these different
electromagnetic phenomena in technology
and in nature
but even if you become a wizard with the
vector calculus even if you become a
sage with the Maxwell's equations
there's going to be a question that will
keep you up at night and you'll become
obsessed with this question and this
question is why is
electromagnetism a
thing because it feels like it's an
expansion pack that you have to put on
your world viiew like it's one thing if
you're learning physics right you learn
about space you learn about time you
learn about force and acceleration and
all of that kind of makes sense you can
kind of see that those things are things
in the world but then when it comes to
electromagnetism you're supposed to
believe that there is such a thing as an
electric field and a magnetic field and
the magnetic field is a pseudo Vector
field it's not even a real Vector field
and these things interact and they flop
around and that's what light is it's
like okay hold on now what like why like
philosophically why right okay so that's
the question and this entire video the
whole purpose of it the whole everything
we're going to do today is in service of
answering that question because that
question does have an answer and it's
actually a pretty satisfying answer like
it's actually remarkably satisfying the
extent to which we can understand why
electromagnetism is a thing now the
answer is simple enough to State why is
electromagnetism a thing the answer is
because the derac field has local U1
phase symmetry simple as that right and
it is simple as that once you learn the
math once you learn the physics you see
it really is as simple as that but of
course okay what does that principle
even mean what is the derck field what
is local phase Symmetry and how exactly
does that principle imply
electromagnetism so that's what we're
going to be talking about today here is
a brief overview of what we're going to
be talking about in this video first
we're going to take it on faith that the
derac equation has local phase symmetry
so we're going to go into what is the D
equation what is Phase Symmetry and then
we're going to demonstrate why matter
and antimatter have equal and opposite
charge why photons are massless with the
four Vector wave function why the
electric field exists as a 3D Vector
field why the magnetic field exists as a
3D pseudo Vector field why these
electric and magnetic fields interact
we're also going to derive Maxwell's
equations so gauss's law for magnetism
and electricity Faraday's law of
induction and ampers law with Maxwell's
addition as well as the Loren's Force
law and we're also going to see why
electric charge is conserved so as you
can see here we're going to be able to
turn this simple principle about phase
symmetry into
electromagnetism which is remarkable I
mean this is going to be very profound
um it's a beautiful topic for better or
worse this topic involves some pretty
sophisticated math and physics that you
normally encounter for the first time as
an upper division undergrad and then
contend with in a more serious way in
grad school school so this video is
going to be more hardcore than my
previous ones and so it might appeal to
a narrower and more technical audience
but this subject matter is too beautiful
not to talk about so I have to make this
video okay so here's the brief list of
the prerequisites that you'll want to be
familiar with to get the most out of
this video first of all you'll want to
have some experience with classical
electromagnetism the reason being this
video is all about why electromag ism is
a thing and so you have to know the what
before the Y is going to make any sense
so you'll want to have some familiarity
with Maxwell's equations Loren's Force
law electric and magnetic fields voltage
magnetic Vector potential uh basically
if you've taken an introductory class on
electrodynamics you should be okay for
this
video likewise and this goes along with
electromagnetism you'll want to have a
good understanding of vector calculus at
least you'll want to be comfortable with
the idea of like a gr ran Divergence
curl flux integrals that sort of thing I
actually am going to not get too too
mathematical in this video like for
example I'm not going to get into
differential geometry or Fiber bundles
uh even though that kind of math does
have some really interesting
applications to the topic of
electromagnetism as a gauge Theory my
goal today is to teach you the main
concept of how symmetry gives rise to
electromagnetism and I want to do that
in the most accessible possible way so I
am going to be using the language of
vector calculus because because that's
kind of the lingua franka of stem people
and anyway once you learn these ideas
you're always welcome to translate them
into whichever mathematical framework
you prefer also you're going to want to
have some familiarity with quantum
physics so you'll want to know the
shinger equation the Klein Gordon
equation the derac equation and I only
mean up to the first quantization so you
don't have to worry about second
quantization you don't have to get into
the quantum field Theory everything
we're doing today is going to be first
quantization meaning Quantum particles
but classical Fields so for example sigh
is going to be the wave function of an
electron and even though the electron
position and momentum or these fuzzy
Quantum things Sai itself is going to be
a field whose values are precisely
defined at particular moments in space
and time and that is in contrast with
Quantum field Theory where Sai itself
becomes like a fuzzy field but actually
Quantum field theory is not necessary to
understand how electromagnetism arises
from Symmetry and so we're not going to
do the second quantization
today and also you'll want to have some
familiarity with special relativity so
you'll want to be familiar with the
concept of lenen variance and the mass
shell which is the relativistic energy
momentum Mass relation in particular
you'll want to understand how the mass
shell relates to the Klein Gordon
equation and how taking the square root
of the mass shell gives you the dck
equation and if you like you can refer
to my videos on the Klein Gordon
equation as well as the deriving the D
equation for more information on that in
addition there are some relativistic
kind of mathematical things you'll want
to be familiar with so for example the
difference between a covariant and a
contravariant four Vector you also want
to be familiar with things like the four
gradient and just in general being able
to think in terms of um unifying space
and time momentum and energy uh
probability flux and probability density
that sort of thing so you want to have
some exposure to special relativity as
well and I know you know it's kind of a
tall order to say okay you'll want to be
somewhat familiar with relativistic
quantum physics before getting into this
video but actually a lot of these
concepts are pretty accessible and you
can find them in the book introduction
to Elementary particles by Griffiths
this book will get you up to speed on
all of the quantum physics and special
relativity Concepts that we're going to
use in today's video uh this is actually
one of the best textbooks ever and I
can't recommend it enough uh if you're
interested in these ideas this is one of
the best investments you can make by the
way nobody's paying me to say that I'm
just speaking the truth anyway in this
video If I say that an equation can be
found in Griffith's chapter 7 or
whatever well that's the book I'm
referring to okay also I should mention
the conventions that we'll be using in
this video we're going to be using
gaussian units which are the cleanest
most elegant units for exploring the
theory of
electromagnetism so be aware this
differs slightly from SI units but the
difference in units is not going to
really make a profound conceptual
difference you know at the end of the
day you can always convert from one
system of units to another so uh but
yeah today we'll be using gausian units
and also we're going to be using the
mostly minus metric which is sort of the
standard convention in particle physics
uh and the mostly minus metric is not as
pessimistic as it looks because we're
going to have a positive time
sorry oh also I should say if you're not
familiar with all of these Concepts
don't worry you might still get
something out of this video and you can
always think of this video as a way of
learning through
and besides when you're learning math
and physics it's often helpful to take a
look beyond your current Horizon to see
what's coming up you just remember that
the concept we're talking about today is
one of the most beautiful most amazing
Concepts in physics and uh so you know
but it is difficult and that's okay if
it doesn't make sense all at once it's a
big topic you know so if you're not sure
whether you're ready for this topic just
give it a shot all right let's get into
it so we're going to start with the D
equation without any electromagnetic
field so this corresponds to a particle
that's chilling in the vacuum of space
and the equation can be written as I
gamma mu partial mu sius mc equal
0 okay now first and foremost unlike the
Schrodinger equation or the Klein Gordon
equation which both use a complex scalar
field for sigh in the D equation s is a
four component complex Vector which
actually should be regarded as a pair of
spinners
at each point in SpaceTime so SII is not
a four Vector it's a b spinner and it
transforms differently under Loren's
boosts but we're not going to go into
detail on that today and naturally one
wonders why is it that Sai is
complicated like this and the answer for
that as we saw in the deriving the D
equation video is that the defining
characteristic of the D equation is that
it's first order in space and time while
also unifying quantum physics and
special relativity and the only way you
can do that is to take the Klein Gordon
equation and like really squish it down
to be first order in space and time the
equation really does not want to do that
because it's intrinsically like when you
apply the mass shell and the quantum
mechanical energy momentum operators the
thing that you get is sort of inherently
the second order thing but if you push
hard enough so hard that the commutative
property of multiplication shatters then
poor little sigh is going to get
squished and it's going to go from this
complex scaler to this B spinner
situation where the different components
of it are going to be kind of spinning
around and that spin structure is
actually necessary in order to
accommodate the full range the full
degrees of freedom that we need in order
to have a relativistic quantum physics
well at the same time describing the
theory using only first derivatives in
space and time now in this equation the
gamma mu partial mu term uses the
Einstein summation convention where if
an index appears twice in a single term
it implies that the term is summed over
all values of that
index in general by the way Greek
indices like mu and mu and Alpha and
beta these are placeholders for the
numbers 0 1 2 or 3 uh Zer being Tim like
and 1 2 and 3 being like X Y and
Z okay now in this expression we see the
four contravariant gamma matrices which
are 4x4 matrices containing a bunch of
zeros and some ones and I's these gamma
matrices have the properties required to
have a first order differential equation
which uses the quantum mechanical energy
momentum operators and also satisfies
the relativistic mass energy momentum
relation also known as the mass
shell now these partial terms are the
partial derivatives with respect to each
component of
SpaceTime and it's helpful to think of
these as components of the four gradient
which you can write partial mu and here
notice there's only one index so we're
not summing over when you see partial me
think of it as all possibilities for me
in a four Vector so partial me we can
say this is a partial zero partial 1
partial 2 partial 3 and that is defined
as the partial derivative with respect
to X mu where X mu with the MU upstairs
is now actually the contravariant uh
SpaceTime position the four position and
if you look at Griffith's section 3.2 as
well as equation 7.6 you can see more
information on that
but for today all we have to know is
that the symbol partial mu corresponds
to the four Vector which is 1 over speed
of light time the partial derivative in
time and then a partial derivative in X
and Y and in
Z and as with all four vectors the
factor of the speed of light is just
there to make the units the same for the
time component as for the spatial
components so in this video when we see
partial mu that corresponds to that four
gradient think of that is the space-time
gradient and the individual components
partial 0 that's 1/ C * the time
derivative partial 1 is the X derivative
partial 2 is the Y derivative and
partial 3 is the Z derivative now the
signs on the four gradient are a bit
confusing usually when a four Vector has
a downstairs index that is when it's a
covariant four Vector the spatial
components are going to have a different
sign than the time components but in
this case the covariant for gradient is
actually made of partial derivatives of
the contravariant for position so the
signs are actually all
positive now if you're not super
familiar with the D equation just yet
don't worry about it uh we're not going
to have to know everything about it
today just a few things and we'll just
have to visualize a couple of Simple
Solutions to it which is going to give
us Insight that we can then
mathematically generalize to more
complicated scenarios so first of all
let's just go ahead and write out the D
equation like so where we're going to go
ahead and expand everything thing so you
can see the gamma matrices and the
derivatives and all that now you can see
here that the D equation says that a
combination of first derivatives of s
each one Modified by a gamma Matrix
equals s itself multiplied by some
imaginary valued
constant this equation has a rich
landscape of solutions but by far the
simplest one is for a particle in free
space whose momentum is known to be
precisely zero
now because the momentum is precisely
known and because this is quantum
physics what do we know about the
position nothing nothing whatsoever we
know nothing about the position and so
when we solve for the zero momentum igen
State we should expect to find a wave
function which is spread uniformly
throughout space I went into this in
detail in my previous video on solving
the D equation for a particle at rest
but we'll briefly review the solution
here as a segue into the next topic
so we can solve for the zero momentum
igen state by recognizing that it won't
have any spatial gradients since those
encode momentum and so the spatial
derivative terms are going to vanish
from the
equation now we're left with something
where there's just one time derivative
and a gamma 0 and an MC overh and a s
well anyway if we write out the
definition of gamma 0er and show SII
explicitly as a by spinner with four
complex components and while we're at it
we'll multiply both sides by the speed
of light
then we get this equation which can be
thought of as an igen Vector igen value
problem and it admits two distinct
families of solution so first of all we
have the solutions for which s 1 and S 2
are nonzero while S 3 and S 4 are zero
as it turns out these correspond to
electrons and they have the form s
electron equals AB 0 * the exponential
of I mc^ 2 H * time
and when you look at that equation what
you see is there's this by spinner and
the top two channels are occupied so A
and B think of those as comprising a
spinner and then the time evolution of
that thing is the same as we would
expect to find in the Klein Gordon
equation it's just a unit length
exponential that's vibing in time with
the frequency of the mass energy of the
particle divided by H bar likewise there
are solutions for which s 1 and S 2 are
zero while S 3 and S4 are non zero and
those are the positron solutions so you
can write them as 0 0 c d for some
arbitrary complex number C and D times
the exponential of I mc^2 H bar * time
now in both of these cases a b c and d
are all just complex numbers and they're
typically normalized so that magnitude
a^ s+ magnitude B2 = 1 and magnitude c^2
Plus magnitude d^2 equal 1 and actually
you'll typically see this written as
just a one symbol for a spinner in the
top component or bottom component uh but
I'm actually going to write it out in
terms of the complex components just so
that we can really see what's going on
now the time of ution of these two
solutions is very very similar both are
just phase factors which oscillate in
time with the frequency MC s of H bar
and the only difference between them is
the way in which the phase goes around
the complex plane in time so the two
solutions are oriented backwards with
one another relative to time and that is
the fundamental and essential difference
between matter and antimatter as we're
going to elaborate on later in the video
you don't have to take my word for it
that these two solutions correspond to
electrons and positrons we'll
demonstrate later in this video why
that's the case and why these have
opposite charge but for now we should
just notice that the structure of the D
equation gives us two completely
different ways for S to represent a
particle with zero momentum which differ
in their orientation in time and this
branching of the equation into these two
different modes of solution even though
we've only demonstrated that for the
very specific case of the igen state of
a particle at rest that branching is
still broadly a factor of any
conceivable solution of the Dr equation
so if you want to Loren boost the
solution and you get some nonzero
momentum igen State and then consider
the set of all possible momentum igen
States and then you're just a forier
transform away from whatever wavy waves
you want in general you're going to have
a solution which is either occupying the
top two channels or the bottom two
Channels with one little tiny little
Nuance or caveat which is that
technically the top two channels and the
bottom two channels they do kind of
bleed into each other just a tiny little
bit uh especially in the relativistic
limit but this can normally be ignored
but if you want to see an example where
the two sides can kind of bleed into
each other look up the Darwin term for
the hydrogen atom that's something we'll
get to in the future by the way I have
not forgotten about hydrogen part 3 in
fact the last few videos including this
one is still kind of a tangential note
between Parts two and three so um I will
get back to that someday hopefully
someday soon okay so the derac equation
branches into these two different modes
of solution matter and antimatter let's
go ahead and consider the electron
solution first and you'll notice that
the spinner AB can be thought of as some
linear combination of the Spinners 1 0
and 01 because a is just a * 1 0 + B * 0
1 now the spinner 1 Z corresponds to a
purely spin up electron while the
spinner 01 corresponds to a spin down
electron so if the electron has spinner
AB with magnitude a^ S Plus magnitude
b^2 = 1 that is normalized then it's in
a superposition of spin States and when
it spin is measured there's going to be
a magnitude of a^ squ probability of
measuring it spin up and a magnitude of
b^ squ probability of measuring it spin
down and it's one of the weird quantum
mechanical things that when you measure
the spin it's either spin up or spin
down um hey I don't know that's just one
of the weird things about reality uh you
can think of the electron as containing
one bit of spin information so it's
either up or down it's super weird but
anyway is what it is so now here's
something interesting to think about
look at that exponential term which is
just a unit length phase factor that
thing is going to swing around A and B
in the complex plane but it's not going
to change the size of a or b so if an
electron is chilling in free space with
zero momentum its spin state is not
going to change over time in terms of
likelihood of measuring spin up or spin
down but instead its components are just
going to rotate around in the complex
plane let's put some visual Insight on
this we'll use the same flag animation
as in my previous spinner video where on
the right half of the screen we see two
components of the spinner and on the
left we'll see the flag that this
corresponds to because as we saw in the
spinner video each unit spinner evolving
under some su2 transformation can be
mapped to a flag which represents a 3D
rotation s SO3 element and in fact su2
double covers s SO3 so for each FL flag
orientation there are actually two
spinners corresponding to that which
only differ in the complex plane picture
by a minus sign and to transform one
possibility into the other you want to
do a 360° rotation that is a Class one
rotation anyway see my spinner video see
also the paper an introduction to
Spinners by Andrew M Stein for more
information on this flag
diagram you can also download this
python code on my patreon and that's
something I want to get better at you
know on patreon I post the PDF video
notes for these videos but I also want
to start posting more animation codes so
that those of you who are supporting my
channel can actually get your hands on
some real genuine for real codes that
not only make these pretty animations
but also use the math behind them so
hopefully that'll be a good Learning
Resource for you shout out to all my
supporters on patreon I'm really
grateful for all of you okay well so
remember what we're doing here is
looking at a zero momentum igen state
that is a state that has no spatial
variation no spatial dependence and so
we don't have to imagine these states as
an entire field throughout space because
instead we can just imagine what a
single spinner would look like and watch
it evolve in time and then we can
imagine that the whole wave function is
just this spinner vibing like this at
everywhere in space so for example what
I'm showing here now is the electron
solution for AAL 1 and B equals 0 that
is a spin up
electron you can see that as the complex
phase Factor rotates the spinner in the
complex plane the flag rotates around
its
axis imagine this flag rotating at every
point in space that's the D field for a
spin up electron with precisely zero
momentum of course it's not actually a
flag the flag is just a way of Imagining
the spinner which makes a lot of its
algebraic properties much more visually
intuitive by the way shout out to Kurt
jongle for introducing me to these flags
for years I had to feel my way around
the D equation algebraically but these
flags have given me a whole new
perspective on the math so instead of
lines of algebra with these flags you
can just imagine it and jump right to
the solution or at least an outline of
the solution so I can't overstate how
much this has improved my life so thank
you Kurt sincerely and everyone watching
this please consider checking out Kurt's
YouTube channel theories of everything
uh if you like my videos you'll probably
enjoy his channel too
oh something else about this flag look
at the way it's rotating take your right
hand and curl your fingers around the
way the flag is going around your thumb
will point up along the flag pole and
that's why they call it spin up so right
now in your mind before you see it on
your screen I want you to imagine what
the 01 solution is going to look like
that is the spin down
electron how will the flag be oriented
and how will it be rot rotating and what
will the spinner look like in the
complex plane are you imagining it are
you examining the solution with your
mind's eye are you visualizing the
solution okay let's see if you are right
boom there it is a spin down electron in
the zero momentum I State it's the same
as spin up but down apply the right hand
rule again and now your thumb is
pointing down and again as the complex
phase Factor rotates the flag around its
axis in time it does not change the
orientation of the axis so remember what
I said earlier about how the spin state
is going to remain the same over time
for an electron at rest in a vacuum so
then what about some superp position of
spin up and spin down how about for
example 1/ &lt; tk2 1 1 which has an equal
probability of being spin up or spin
down by the way the square root of two
is just there to normalize the spinner
so what do you think this is going to
look like how will the axis of the flag
pole be oriented and how will it be
rotating well here it is you can see
that the flag pole is halfway between up
and down and as before the rotation in
the complex plane simply rotates the
flag clockwise around its
axis but wait why is the flag pole
pointing in this particular direction
and not some other direction while still
being horizontal isn't there actually a
circle of possibilities for a spinner
that's equal parts spin up and spin down
well yeah actually there is and it all
has to do with the complex phase
difference between the two components of
the
spinner see both components will pick up
the same time evolving phase Factor but
throughout time there will be some phase
difference between them and that phase
difference can be anything between 0 and
2 pi so notice that multiplying the
whole Spinner by some complex phase
isn't actually going to change the
relative phase difference between the
two components and as it turns out that
phase difference between the two
components is going to track with that
azimuthal angle of the flag pole so for
example here's the state 1/ &lt; tk2 1 I
which is the same amount of spin up and
spin down as before so it's still
horizontal but now it's pointing 90°
away from the previous state because the
previous state with one and one had no
phase difference between the components
but now with one and I there's a 90°
phase difference between the components
and so the flag is rotated 90° relative
to what it was
before so in light of this what do you
think the state one over &lt; tk2 1 1 would
look like in that state the 1 and the
negative 1 have a 180° phase
difference and sure enough the flag
points oppositely as the one one
state cool well how about 1/ &lt; tk2 1 I
can you see this spinner in your mind
can you imagine how it looks can you
mentally do this quantum
physics well there it is so the phase
difference between the components of the
spinner has a visual
interpretation it plays a role in
determining the flag pole orientation
and specifically it determines the angle
around horizontally the longitude if you
will Azimuth is probably a more
technical word so on this topic what if
the superposition of spin States is not
equally balanced but is more of one than
the other so you know for example 1
overun 5 to 1 which is mostly spin up
but kind of spin down and here again the
root 5 is just a normalization constant
so that the spinner has unit magnitude
so given everything we've talked about
so far which way should the flag pole be
pointing notice that two and one have no
complex phase difference between them so
the flag pole looks like this by the way
this has an 80% chance of being measured
spin up and a 20% chance of being
measured spin down
cuz 2 squ is four and 1 squ is 1 so it's
4 to one odds of being spin up and that
doesn't come as a surprise cuz if you
look at how the flag is pointing it kind
of makes sense man I love these flags
such a useful way of looking at the math
okay a couple more examples here so uh
what about 1un 5 to I well same as
before but now with that 90° phase
difference and so the flag is rotated
90° you see how this all fits together
okay so isn't this neat neat little
algebraic structure
by the way you put a bunch of different
flags in there and you can rotate them
all in the complex plane and in the
three-dimensional view with the flags
each one is just going to rotate around
its axis so this math is like so cool I
love it I think this is just remarkable
and what's amazing is that this spinny
Behavior this Rota Behavior was not put
in by force or by Fiat it's an
inevitable consequence of writing a
first order equation which is both
quantum mechanical and relativistic dck
is isn't that correct that is correct
yes and that forced me into a different
kind of equation and this different
equation brings in the spin of the
electron it was very unexpected to me to
see the spin appearing in this way I
thought one would first get a
satisfactory theory of a particle
without Spin and then what would proceed
to a more complicated theory of the
particle with spin but it turned out
differently the simplest kind of
particle does have a
spin now then what about the positron
solutions well in terms of the different
possibilities for the flag pole
orientation it's exactly the same ideas
as before all the ways the flag pole can
be oriented are encoded in the relative
sizes of the components of the spinner
and the complex phase difference between
the
components then that whole flag just
spins around same as before but in the
opposite direction due to the sign
change in the
exponential so you know you often hear
positrons described as electrons that
are moving backwards in time I think
that description is misleading because
you know if you drop a grain of salt in
a glass of water it dissolves as time
goes on well if you drop an anti-rain of
anti- salt into an anti-glass of
anti-water it's still going to dissolve
as time goes on okay so there's no time
traveling going on here so I like to say
that a positron is just an electron that
goes the other way because um that's
just ambiguous enough to kind of convey
the message and also for things like
dissolving and like thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics you can see that
an ensemble of things if you reverse the
direction of all the little constituents
you know the behavior at the macro scale
can still be the
same okay so now we've seen the
connection between multiplying a durac
spinner by a complex phase factor and
rotating the flag about its axis and the
key points there is that when we
multiply s by a complex phase Factor all
we're doing is turning the
flag now there are two things that we
should keep in mind first there's an
angle doubling between the complex phase
angle and the flag rotation angle so a
phase factor of e to the I Theta is
going to rotate the flag by an angle of
2 Theta and this pertains to the fact
that su2 double covers s
SO3 so if we sweep the phase Factor all
the way around in the complex plane a
full 360 then the flag will rotate twice
during that process and that's just part
of the weirdness of Fons with their half
integer spin but for today we can just
notice this detail in passing and
otherwise ignore it um the factor of two
doesn't really matter for
today and now the second Point has to do
with the difference in time Evolution
between matter and
antimatter as we've seen these two
options are oriented backwards relative
to each other in time but it's important
to notice that this time reversal arises
due to the reversal in the direction
that the time dependent complex phase
Factor evolves in the complex plane and
that the reversal is not due to a
difference in the connection between the
complex phase factor and the flag
rotation in other words if we go
clockwise in the complex plane the flag
is going to rotate like an electron
solution and what makes positrons go the
other way is that they go
counterclockwise in the complex plane
it's not that a complex phase Factor
rotates positron Flags the other way
it's that the complex phase Factor
itself is going around the other way in
time and so the connection between the
complex phase angle and the dire ction
of the flag rotation is the same in
either
case okay so now let's explore the
concept of local phase
symmetry which means that if we apply an
arbitrary local phase transformation to
SAI nothing observable will
change so first let's look at what a
local phase transformation is what that
means and what it does and then we'll
talk about what it means for nothing
observable to change so first to look at
what a local phase transformation is we
should look at not just a single flag
but a field of flags at least a
two-dimensional slice of the dck field
since we'll want to see how things
change over space when we transform our
wave function and you know looking at a
full three-dimensional picture would be
a little bit too cluttered but that's
okay 2D is good enough for
now so here on the left we have a spin
up electron and on the right we have a
cross-section in the XY plane of the
zero momentum IG state for that electron
and notice that we're looking at it from
below so the base of the flag pole is
closer to your eyes and the top of the
flag is pointing into the screen so you
see how the view of the single flag kind
of maps on to The View with the flags in
the field and can kind of see like the
orientation there okay our eyes are in
the negative z-axis looking up okay so
what we're looking at here is just a
very particular cross-section of a very
specific and simple solution of the D
equation so we have to remember that the
electron's wave function can actually be
much more complicated than this and in
general the amplitude can vary so
imagine that the flags will be larger in
some areas and smaller in others and
infinitesimally small throughout most of
SpaceTime for a localized particle but
fortunately just by looking at these
simple igen States we can get some
valuable insight about how Sai is
affected by local phase
Transformations and this will give us a
mental image that will be a great
starting point that we can warp and
trans form as needed when mathematically
generalizing from this specific case to
more General
situations okay so let's get into it
then what exactly is a local phase
transformation well it's simply the act
of multiplying s by some phase Factor e
to the I Theta where Theta is a phase
angle that can change in both space and
time and that's what makes the
transformation local rather than Global
so a global transformation is just
multiplying by constant phase Factor
everywhere in space and time which is
basically just a redefinition of the
phase angle and that's not very
interesting or physically meaningful but
a local phase transformation that's a
much stronger transformation because
that means we can change the phase by a
different amount here versus there now
versus later and so this gives us
infinitely many ways to mess around with
Sai and remember multiplying sigh by a
complex phase Factor has the effect of
rotating the flag about the flag pole so
these local phase Transformations are
going to twist the flags around
arbitrarily in space and time depending
on how we Define our Theta field but the
transformation is not going to be
changing the orientation of the flag
poles themselves it's just going to be
turning the flags around their flag
poles okay so let's look at a specific
example so here on the left we have the
zero momentum IG state of a spin up
electron oh and let me say this you know
for everything we're about to look at
the direction of the spin really doesn't
matter matter these local phase
Transformations because they're going to
turn the flags around their flag pole
but they're not going to change the flag
pole Direction it doesn't really matter
which spin we want to look at and the
reason I chose spin up with the XY
cross-section is just so that we can
have a nice easy view of a flag going
around and the reason I'm picking this
particular orientation is so that the
way the flag goes around looks a lot
like the time evolution of the phase
factor in the complex plane okay so then
let's define our Theta field for the
local phase
transformation for starters we'll keep
it simple and we'll just use a field
where the phase angle varies along some
Direction with a constant rate and
because phase is a circular thing if you
vary it at a constant rate it'll look
wavy and periodic so that's what the
phase field is going to look like here
I'm using colors to represent the
complex phase in accordance with our
usual color map and I'm also using
arrows to represent the complex phase
angle and this view is technically a
little bit redundant but I hope it's
helpful as especially when you're
comparing the color of the flags to the
color of the complex phase Factor well
anyway uh one more thing to note about
this phase field is that Theta is the
phase angle and that can be whatever we
want it to be but e to the I Theta the
thing that we're actually plotting here
that complex phase factor is always
going to have unit length right it's an
element of U1 so the amplitude or the
magnitude of the elements in the phase
field are all going to have the same
size and that's important because then
when we multiply this field on S it's
not going to change the size of Sai it's
just going to slap on a complex phase
Factor all right so given our igen state
sigh and our phase field e to the I
Theta what do the transformed s going to
look like well it'll look like this oh
ho look at that pretty neat huh so check
out what's happening here on the left
side we have our unmodified sigh so
that's just our igen state then we have
the phase field that we're going to use
to transform that sigh and on the right
side we have have what appear to be
these propagating waves but notice that
all this is is basically just the phase
gradients put onto the wave function and
bear in mind the angle doubling and all
that and then all of that's being
animated just by the fact that the flags
are turning around at some constant rate
and so imposing a phase gradient on S
gives us these propagating waves and by
the way this is basically what a
non-zero momentum igen state looks like
okay in the non- relativistic limit but
um the relativistic limit it gets more
complicated at with the way Spinners
transform but anyway it is how it looks
okay when you put in this kind of a
phase transformation on S it's no longer
a particle at rest now it's a particle
in motion okay so we kind of messed up
sigh because this is changing things
right this idea about local phase
symmetry that you can do local phase
Transformations and nothing observable
will change uh well that's not looking
too good because here uh we're doing
this local phase transformation and we
seem to have put some momentum into the
electron so um hm so that seems weird is
it like that right that kind of goes
against our deeply held belief that the
D field should have local U1 phas
symmetry so okay so we're going to talk
more about that in just a moment but uh
while we're here let's explore this a
little bit more so you know of course if
our Theta field varied along some other
axis then we're going to see momentum
appearing along that direction okay so
we notice that there's a connection
between phase gradients in space and
momentum okay well I mean the question
comes up what about time let's have a
phase field where for now there's no
spatial stuff going on but let's just
rotate it in time and see what happens
right well this is going to have the
effect of either speeding up or slowing
down the rate at which the flags
rotate because I mean it's how it is I I
don't know what words to put into it but
you know the the phase transformation is
either going to be helping the flag
along or it's going to be slowing it
down and bearing in mind that the
rotation rate of the flags is directly
proportional to the energy of the
particle we can see that there's a
connection between phase gradients and
time time and
energy now here I should point out that
in reality these flags rotate
extraordinarily fast for an electron
with a mass energy of 511 K the flags
are going to spin around like 100
quintilian times per second so the phase
transformation I'm showing here whose
frequency is of a similar order of
magnitude as SII is actually super
aggressive like many many orders of
magnitude more so than anything that's
relevant to what we'll be talking about
about
today so in case you were wondering what
happens if the phase transformation goes
so fast in time that the flag's rotation
direction starts to go the other way the
answer is don't worry about it uh that
corresponds to preposterously extreme
scenarios that are well beyond the scope
of this video all right well what if we
do some crazy phase field that changes
in both time and space well it's the
same basic idea about energy and
momentum and phase gradients and time
and space but it's just like more wild
and complicated
but at the end of the day the waya is
changing in space and time will affect
the distribution of how the flags are
turning around and that's going to give
rise to these momentum and energy
changes in the wave
function okay so the key insights of
these animations are that when we do a
local phase transformation on sigh
gradients in the Theta field both in
space and in time will change the
momentum and energy of the particle
respectively this can be stated more
elegantly from a relativistic
perspective the four gradient of the
Theta field changes the four momentum of
the
particle well okay so it actually seems
like sigh really doesn't have local
phase symmetry right I mean local phase
Transformations are able to mess up sigh
in all kinds of different ways creating
a whole four Vector of a mess in the
particles energy and momentum yeah so
the idea that the derac fields doesn't
actually have local phase symmetry at
least not on its own that's actually
true and we're going to get back to that
in just a moment but while we're here
let's see how antimatter fits into the
picture so for this animation what we
have here is an electron's wave function
on the left and a positron wave function
on the right in both cases we're looking
at them from the bottom up with the
flags pointing into your screen now the
expert viewer will say hey if we're
charge conjugating then shouldn't we
also reverse the flag pole Direction and
yeah that's a good point but as
mentioned earlier what we're looking at
now doesn't have much to do with the
spin orientation so we can get away
without having to flip the positron flag
pull around because this way it's easier
to compare the two plots especially as
it relates to time reversal now if that
bothers you and you want to flip the
positron around you're welcome to
imagine the positron flags flipped the
other way but then since they'll appear
to be turning clockwise like the
electron you'd have to carefully parse
out the nuances about the complex phase
time Evolution versus the phase to flag
rotation direction and with a lot of
mental effort you'll end up at the same
same conclusion but just you know in a
more circuitous route so the way I'm
showing it here is easier to look at so
let's just go with this and then we'll
recognize later that the conclusions we
come to don't actually depend on the
spin state of the particle so this is
okay everything's fine oh and so now in
this animation we're just going to plot
the transformed wave functions on the
same plot so for example first we'll use
a phase field that's just the number one
everywhere and we see the untransformed
wave functions of both the electron on
the left and the positron on the right
now if we hit the fields with a
spatially varying phase field check this
out in the electron field we see the
same waves as before but in the positron
field they're going the opposite way
what wow why are they moving the
opposite way well because the flag
rotation is brought to life by a Time
dependent complex phase factor which
goes the opposite ways in the complex
plane for electrons versus positrons and
so the same change in the complex phase
is going to have an opposite effect on
the time evolution of the flag and this
is easiest to see from the orientation
where the flag rotation looks just like
the complex phase Evolution which is why
we're showing it here with the flags all
pointing into the screen well anyway at
the end of the day the facts that
electrons and positrons are oriented
backwards in time relative to each other
means that the same phase gradient is
going to affect the momentum of the
particle in an equal and opposite
way okay and now of course the question
is what about time well if we look at a
phase field that's uniform in space but
varies in time we find unsurprisingly
that it'll speed up one of the wave
functions and will slow down the other
so how the phase transformation changes
the energy will also be equal and
opposite whether we have an electron or
a
positron and again if we use some crazy
phase field we get crazy results but
this thing about equal opposite
disturbances in sigh is still
true so that's basically all I'm going
to say about antimatter today uh from
now on when talking about Sai we'll
assume it's an electron and as we
construct electromagnetism from local
phase symmetry all we have to do is
remember this picture about matter and
antimatter being disrupted in equal and
opposite ways by local phase
Transformations and we'll see and we'll
be able to Intuit it that electrons and
positrons have identically opposite
electron magnetic behavior that is they
have equal and opposite
charge all right so now we've seen what
a local phase transformation is and how
it affects the derck field sigh and
based on what we've seen about changing
the energy and the momentum of the
particle we strongly suspect that the
derac field does not in fact have local
phase symmetry that is local phase
Transformations are not going to leave
all observable quantities unchanged
because it's going to mess with the
energy and momentum so and that's just
like how it seems to be but to elaborate
on this we need a precise definition of
what it means to leave all observable
quantities unchanged and for that we
turn to the framework of lran mechanics
the lran way of looking at physics is
based on the principle of least action
which says that there's some quantity s
called the action which will naturally
be minimized as things happen in
nature so then if we can write an
equation for the action in terms of our
field variables then we can see what has
to be true about our fields in order for
the action to be minimized and in that
way we can derive the laws of physics
for our
system when working with fields that
vary in space and time the total action
of the system is calculated by adding up
integrating over space time a quantity
fan L which I like to think of as the
activity of the system by which I mean
the infinitesimal amount of action which
at some point in SpaceTime is happening
right there and right then the word
activity feels right as a sort of
intensive version of the extensive
action but anyway fancy L is not
actually called the activity it's called
the lran density oh but everyone calls
it the
lran so think of the lran as a seed that
grows into the laws of physics later in
the video when we derive the
inhomogeneous Maxwell's equations we'll
see how this works in gory detail but
for now the only thing we have to
recognize is that the lanan encodes the
laws of physics in a condensed format
and this gives us a great way to define
what it means for some transformation
not to change any
observables if the lran isn't Changed by
the transformation then neither will the
laws of physics and neither will any
observable
quantity so now we can define local
phase symmetry very
precisely the D field has local phase
symmetry if and only if its lanan
remains unchanged by any arbitrary local
phase
transformation so to answer the question
of whether the derac field has local
phase symmetry all we have to do is
write out the Derren which depends on
sigh and then apply a phase
transformation to sigh and see if the
lran
changes in the interest of time I'll
just write out the derac lran here and I
won't go into exactly why it has this
form but I'll point out that this lran
directly implies the same good old durac
equation we've been working with and
uses all the same characters and
ingredients so the form should not be
too surprising and we're not sneaking
anything in here that's
electromagnetic oh actually there's one
ingredient here that we don't see in the
derac equation and that's this thing SAR
so SAR for the darac equation is much
like s star is for the Schrodinger
equation s star is just the complex
conjugate of the scalar s but when s is
a by spinner we have to upgrade that
notion to the D ad joint which is SAR
and you can make it in Three Easy Steps
step one you take the column that is
sigh and flip it over into a row step
two is you complex conjugate every term
in s and step three is you multiply the
last two terms by NE 1 and there you
have it that's
SAR okay but other than that all the
symbols in the lran are the same as what
we've already used for the D equation
and so we can go ahead and start
exploring this
lran okay so now what we're going to do
in order to see how the lran is affected
by a local phase
transformation is we're going to replace
every s in the equation with the
transformed wave function e to the I
Theta Time s where again Theta is this
phase field this phase that can change
in space and time and by the way now in
this equation s does not have to be a
simple igen state it can be a totally
General solution to the D equation so
this goes beyond the particular examples
we've been looking at but those examples
will still help us make sense of this
math because they give us like a visual
starting
point okay so to evaluate the
transformed lran we're going to
substitute the transformed S Prime with
e to the I Theta s now first if we look
at the S Bar term what we can do is we
can pull the complex scaler e to the I
Theta out of the bar by recognizing that
when you take the d adjoint of something
you can pull out a scalar by taking its
complex conjugate and the complex
conjugate of e to the I Theta is e the I
Theta then for the S Prime on the right
side of the equation we're going to
distribute that through to the left so
we're going to let the four gradient act
on E I Theta s and we're going to have
that mass term mc^ 2 * e the I Theta s
and next up we want to clean up that
four gradient term so when you're
calculating the four gradient of e to
the I Theta SI we can apply the product
rule and first take the four gradient of
e to the I Theta multip S Plus e to the
I Theta * the 4 gradient of
s so that's just your normal application
of the product rule and so now if we
evaluate the four gradients of E I Theta
and we're going to keep things
topologically trivial uh then we end up
with an expression I * e the I Theta *
the 4 gradient of theta so now what we
can do is if we look at both of the
terms in that expression we see that
they both have an e to the I Theta so we
can factor that out now if we look at
the term of the transformed lran you see
those blue terms I'm highlighting the e
to the I Theta * I and you see how that
multiplies through the four gradients of
e to the I Theta SI so let's bring that
together and we'll let the e to the
netive I Theta cancel out the e to the I
Theta and we'll multiply through by I
and we see that the product of that blue
and yellow term ends up being simply
Nega s * the 4 gradient of theta plus I
* the 4 gradient of s so now we can
write the transform lran as shown simply
by replacing the blue and the yellow
terms with this green term and while
we're at it you'll notice that the mass
term with the mc² e to the I Theta SI
we've taken out the e to the I Theta by
Distributing through that e to the I
Theta so there's no more e to the I
thetas okay and next up what we're going
to do is simply rearrange the equation
as shown so here I've color coded the
characters so we can kind of see like
how it is so basically we've switched up
the equations and kind of move things
around and massage the equation a little
bit but we haven't actually really done
anything other than that we're just
rearranging terms and the reason we're
rearranging terms like so is because now
look at the left side look at that left
term SAR i h Bar C gamma mu parti muus
MC s s that is the original lran wow and
so that means that the transformed lran
is our original lran minus H C partial
mu Theta cyar gamma mui and so if we
assume that term is not zero then we see
that the transformed lran is actually
not the same as the original lran
because it's picked up this extra term
and so no the D equation very much does
not have local U1 phase symmetry shoot
that contradicts the one thing that we
were hoping would blossom into
electromagnetism darn it so uh we have
two options here option number one we
can give up to do that just turn off the
video okay well now that all the
quitters are gone option number two is
we do whatever it takes to do what we
got to do this means being creative
thinking outside the box just whatever
has to be done so what exactly is the
problem that we're trying to solve well
we want the derac field to have local
phase symmetry but based on what we just
saw we can say confidently that the dck
field does not have local phase symmetry
on its own wait on its own the D field
does not have local phase symmetry on
its own but what if we added something
to our model of the universe something
that might exist that could play a
supporting role in giving the durac
field local phase symmetry is there any
way to do that without it just being
some kind of mathematical trick is there
any physically realistic way in which
the derac field might be given local
phase symmetry hm well we know exactly
how the dck field fails to have local
phase symmetry because we can say with
Precision exactly how the lran is messed
up by some arbitrary local phase
transformation if you multiply Sai by
some arbitrary phase field then the lrin
will be changed by a factor of negative
HR C partial mu Theta fibar gamma musai
so if we want to give the derac field
local phase symmetry we need to find a
way to counteract that term for all
possible phase
Transformations at first this seems
overwhelming because of the infinite
variety of phase fields we can use to
mess up the
lran how can we possibly correct for all
of these possible things but that
infinite variety is actually helpful
because it means that the solution to
the problem has to fit the problem like
a glove fits a hand in other words we
don't have to think about any particular
phase field and come up with some
complicated contrived solution which
accounts for multiple different
categories of phase Transformations no
we just have to completely erase
negative HC partial mu Theta cyber gamma
mui for arbitrary Theta and so that's
the answer right there that's what we
have to do we have to erase that term so
to give the D field local phase symmetry
we simply redefine its lran to include a
term which is equal and opposite to the
mess that the local phase transformation
creates this new modified lran is
manifestly unaffected by local phase
Transformations you can see this by
starting with the field theta equals 0
in other words no transformation in
which case the term we've added goes
away and it's just the
derian but then if you switch to some
arbitrary Theta field you'll find that
our new term precisely cancels out the
mess that otherwise would have been
created so that's great we know exactly
how we need to transform the lran in
order to give the dra field local phase
symmetry but now the problem becomes how
on Earth is this a legitimate move I
mean this feels totally like we're
cheating or hallucinating or just making
up some nonsense that just so happens to
solve our problem but has no underlying
reason or justification to it if we're
being good physicists we should call
Shenanigans on this we can't just go
like redefining things just because it's
how we want it to be when it's not if it
is if it isn't what well okay let's
investigate this in more detail and see
what we've actually done here and see if
there's a legitimate way to tell a
convincing story to justify why this is
an acceptable move and not just a bunch
of
nonsense okay so this is kind of an
exercise in rationalizing the irrational
but it'll actually turn out to be true
and very deep so okay we have our lran
and this is the derian plus this other
thing that we're adding on there and
hopefully it's actually real so that
we're not just talking crazy talk right
now so what is that thing well let's
break it up into two parts first there's
the orange part which is HR C partial mu
Theta set that aside for the moment and
we also have the purple part which is
cybar gamma
musi now cybar gamma mui is actually a
very important quantity and you see this
quantity all the time when you're
dealing with the D equation this is the
probability for current divided by the
speed of light and what that is is a
four Vector where the time like part is
the probability density and by the way
here I'm using Row for probability
density confusingly enough later on it's
going to mean charge density but you
know in context it makes sense okay
anyway now J1 J2 and j3 that is the
spatial parts of the probability for
current are going to be the probability
current so the way that probability
density flows from one place to the next
so this purple term has to do with how
much of the electron is at some point in
space and how much it's flowing and this
is a contravariant four
Vector now if you look at the orange
term you see the downstairs mu in the
four gradient and a couple of constants
so that's going to be a covariant four
vector and we know that because the lran
density has units of energy density this
orange term is going to be some kind of
covariant four Vector that that's going
to couple to the four current in an
energetic way which by the way that
sounds a lot like the electromagnetic
four potential you know so the
electromagnetic four potential is a four
Vector where the time like thing is
voltage or in SI unit V over C and the
spacial part is the magnetic Vector
potential and that's the kind of thing
that if you multiply it by the four
current you're also going to get this
energy associated with voltage acting on
the probability density and the vector
potential acting in a momentum kind of
way on the currents so we're getting
hints of the four potential in here and
that's good because that means that
maybe we can ascribe a physical meaning
to this but I don't want to import any
expectations or intuitions or
assumptions about the electromagnetic
for potential for now we're just going
to regard this orange term as some kind
of four vector and we're not going to
impose any constraints on it other than
that it has to be real and we're
assuming that it's real and we're going
to predict its properties and we're
going to see if they map on to real
it well anyway so starting with this
really blank slate perspective of just
saying look this is aarant four vector
and so let's just call it a sub mu like
the most generic thing you can imagine
calling a four Vector right so that lets
us write the orange and purple
expression as a mu cyar gamma mu SI but
actually you know what here we're going
to do something here so the way we've
defined a mu you'll notice that we don't
have the freedom to change the of a mu
because a mu is very directly defined in
terms of H bar and c and the four
gradient of a phase angle so let's go
ahead and do this we'll Define the four
Vector capital A mu and it'll be the
same as a mu but we'll bring in a factor
of -1/ Q where Q is just some number and
right now we'll leave it undefined but
what that does is that doesn't lock us
in a particular unit scale for a right
because we can always kind of r Define
what we mean by q and we can say now our
base unit for a is going to be smaller
or bigger or whatever it is and we can
adjust Q accordingly so we're building
in a degree of Freedom there without
really changing anything in a meaningful
way and what about the minus sign that
is the Benjamin Franklin minus sign this
is purely conventional in an Ideal World
we wouldn't have to put it there but
you'll notice if we write out the orange
and purple expression now in terms of
capital A mu we're going to have
negative Q capital A mu cyber gamma mu
SI and so when we bake into our
definition of am mu this -1/ q that ends
up manifesting as a Nega Q * am mu in
the lanan term so at the end of the day
those cancel out so that's fine right so
whatever magnitude we put for Q that's
going to cancel out by the definition of
AMU and that just gives us the freedom
to scale the units of AMU to whatever we
want them to be which as we'll see later
in the video that's going to be helpful
but then the minus sign and the other
minus sign cancel out so we're not
actually changing any physics by
bringing in this minus sign here okay so
we're starting to massage this term in
the lran into this covariant four Vector
times the contravariant four currents
we're starting to get hints of the
electromagnetic four potential and so
this is kind of starting to be credible
and kind of starting to make sense but
there is a problem here and this is if
we want to believe that a actually
exists and that it's not just something
we're making up in order to solve a
problem and just making stuff up
randomly but if we want to say no there
is actually this four Vector field it
actually exists and it actually couples
energetically to sigh then we have to
give a a life of its own because you'll
notice that as it's defined here a is
directly dependent on the four gradient
of theta so if we don't apply a phase
transformation say Theta is just zero
then a is zero a goes away just because
we didn't do a transformation
so the way we've defined it here we have
way too much control on the existential
status of a just based on whether or not
we're actually messing around with Theta
and so what we need to do instead is say
no a is not defined in terms of the four
gradient of theta a is whatever a is but
it has the ability to be
transformed by the addition of the four
gradients of any arbitrary Theta
field okay hold on now so what what have
we done here well we have a derian that
doesn't have local phase symmetry we
realized the only thing to do to give it
local phase symmetry is to add a term
that cancels out the mess then
interpreting that term we recognize that
it corresponds to the existence of a
four Vector field that couples
energetically to sigh and in order for
this to be credible we have to let the
four Vector field have a life of its own
but then one wonders what kinds of
energy are going to be contained in the
life in the independent life of the four
Vector field a because if we're really
saying that a exists then we have to let
it exist and existence has consequences
and when a flops around there's going to
be some kind of energy in that right
there has to be otherwise a doesn't
really have an existence on its own and
in order for any of this to be credible
we should hope to see at least one way
that a can manifest energetically
independent of its relationship to SAI
because if all a does if A's only claim
to existence is its interaction with Sai
that's kind of dubious you know I don't
know if I trust that but if a actually
exists on its own in some way then that
lends a tremendous amount of credibility
to this idea and it gives us testable
predictions of what does it look like
when a manifests energetically and how
is a constrain and what patterns are
there and what can we say about this and
what kind of theory grows out of the
logical consequences of symmetry in the
D field and the corresponding freedom in
a it's like okay there's something we
can now explore we need to find a way
that a can exist on its own independent
of its relationship with
Sai okay so we're looking for ways that
a can exist on its own outside of its
interaction with Sai and one of the most
natural questions we can ask is does a
have
mass and the way to answer this question
is to say okay well if a had Mass ask
how would that contribute to the lran
and is that allowed or would that spoil
the phase symmetry of the D
field so one of the things that we've
seen about a is that it has to be able
to come in and clean up the lanan no
matter how much we mess around with the
phase field when we multiply Sai by an
arbitrary phase field and we're creating
all these energy and momentum gradients
and we're messing up the
lren our four Vector field a has to come
in and off set that and clean that up
and but meanwhile we have to have total
freedom to do whatever kind of phase
field we want to do so it follows that
there can't be an energy cost or an
energy benefit associated with how much
or how little of a we have we want to be
able to pull in as much as we want it's
like imagine uh imagine you spill a
gallon of milk on the floor and you will
grab a whole bunch of paper towels to
clean it up or maybe you just spill a
couple drops of water on the floor and
you grab one paper towel to clean it up
that's not a great analogy but the point
is if a is going to be the best picker
uper of a mess that we're making in the
lran then we have to be able to pull in
as much or as little as we want and we
can't meet any resistance that comes
along with well you're pulling in too
much a or well you're not pulling in
enough a no no no we we need to be able
to pull in as much as we want and what
this implies is that a has to be a
massless four Vector field because if a
had mass then the amount of a you have
changes the energy landscape and so
therefore it can't clean up the mess
that we're making because then a itself
self would actually violate the Symmetry
that its whole purpose is to come in and
provide the Dr equation but similar
reasoning would also seem to suggest
that the derivatives of a can't
contribute to the lren either because
depending on how you mess with the phase
field sometimes you might need to bring
in an a field to clean it up that's a
little bit scrunched or maybe not as
scrunched or is floppy or not so floppy
and so when you think about the space
and time derivatives of a if any of
those contained any energy that is if
the field were like kind of elastic you
know then it would seem like that would
also violate the local phase symmetry of
the D field because in just the same way
that we need to be able to pull in as
much a as we need or as little a as we
need uh we should also be able to pull
in as scrunchy or as floppy of an a as
we need without there being any change
in the
lren but if that's the case then a
really can't do anything on its own
because if the amount of a can't contain
energy and if the derivatives of a can't
contain energy then A's only claim to
existence would be the way that it
augments the energy momentum landscape
of saigh and that's not very satisfying
but fortunately it's not very true
either because there is one secret
loophole where you can set a derivative
against another derivative and so even
though each of these terms is affected
by arbitrary phase Fields the way in
which there affected is equal and
opposite and so it cancels out such that
the whole expression is completely
agnostic to completely unaffected by any
arbitrary local phase
transformation so this loophole has a
very particular form a very specific
form and it has to be of the form
partial mu a new minus partial new a mu
because then the changes are going to
cancel out let's look at an example just
so you can see specifically how this
works so consider partial 1 A2 minus
partial 2 A1 or in other words the
derivative of the Y component of a with
respect to x minus the derivative of the
X component of a with respect to Y now
if we apply a phase transformation on S
then a is also going to have to
transform so it's going to pick up that
term of negative H C / Q * the 4
gradient of theta and so therefore if
you want to split that up in components
ax is going to pick up a term that has
to do with the derivative of theta in X
and A Y is going to pick up a term
relating to the derivative of theta in y
so now if we evaluate this expression
partial x a prime y minus partial y a
prime X that is the derivative
expression applied to the transformed a
we can evaluate both terms one of them
is going to be the X derivative of the
transformed ay component including that
y derivative of theta term that gets
picked up during the transformation and
the other term is going to be the Y
derivative of the ax component minus
that X derivative of theta term now
based on the Symmetry here you can kind
of see how these things are going to
cancel out but if you go ahead and
evaluate this through let's go ahead and
separate out the derivatives of a from
the derivatives of those Theta terms and
we can see partial x a y minus partial y
ax minus H C over Q times this term that
involves the X derivative of the Y
derivative of theta minus the Y
derivative of the X derivative of theta
and because the order doesn't matter
when you're taking a second derivative
those terms are going to cancel each
other out and what we're left with is
the partial x a y minus partial y a x
which is exactly the form of the
expression applied to the unmodified a
field so in other words no matter what
Theta field we put in this expression
involving partial x a y minus partial y
ax is going to end up being totally the
same because each half is is going to be
affected by an equal and opposite amount
and this generalizes to all
possibilities for me and new and so in
general the expression partial mu a new
minus partial mu a mu is going to be
completely insensitive to any arbitrary
local phase transformation so this is
like a special trick that allows a to
escape the tyranny of the phase field
and notice that the form of the trick
the Contour of the trick fits like a key
and a lock to the constraints of local
phase symmetry the reason that this
loophole the reason that this trick has
the form of a derivative minus a
derivative is that the way the phase
field affects a takes the form of a
derivative and so the nature of this
trick follows necessarily from the
nature of local phase symmetry in the
derac field now naturally the question
arises how many different ways are there
of applying this trick and so therefore
how many different ways can we expect a
to flop around on its own independently
of its relationship with
Sai well in our universe there are three
dimensions of space and one dimension of
time for a total of four dimensions of
SpaceTime and if you think about the
different combinations of things there's
actually six ways to pick two of those
Dimensions see because there's three
ways to pick time and a space Dimension
you could do T in X you could do T in y
you could do T in Z and and also there
are three ways to pick a space and a
space Dimension because each of those
ways is going to leave one dimension
unselected so for example you can do not
X not Y and not Z so in other words YZ
and XZ and
XY okay and for each one of these ways
we can write the expression which
corresponds to the derivative of this
component of a with respect to that
component of space time minus the
derivative of that component of a with
respect to this component of space time
and what each one of these things is is
actually going to be a scalar field at
every point in space and time because a
is a for Vector that's defined
throughout SpaceTime and so this
combination of its derivatives of its
components is going to manifest as six
scalar fields that can actually contain
energy like real energy like for real
actual
energy so this is quite an interesting
situation if we're taking this gauge
Theory stuff seriously if we really
thinking that there must be this four
vector and it must be able to flop
around and there's six ways for it to do
that without being affected by arbitrary
phase
Transformations then we should expect to
find six scalar Fields pervading space
and time which can contain
energy now how are we supposed to think
about six scalar Fields I mean that's
kind of a good number of scalar Fields
well if you look at the patterns that
I'm showing here you can see that we
have three ways to pick a time and a
space and there's three ways to pick a
space into space but first let's look at
the options that involve a time in a
space so those three options those three
scalar fields are all basically the same
thing the only thing is one of them has
to do with X and one of them has to do
with Y and one of them has to do with z
and so naturally we can compile those
three scalar Fields into a
three-dimensional Vector field because
the one involving X that's just going to
be the X component and the one involving
Y is just going to going to be the Y
component and the one involving Z is
just going to be the Z component and
this Vector field is what people have
been calling the electric
field so now it's a profound and subtle
point that I want to make here I'm not
saying import your intuitions and
assumptions about the electric field I'm
saying that these three scalers that
involve a time and a space by virtue of
their common origin and by virtue of the
nature of their definitions with regards
to the derivatives of a
these three scalers can naturally be
compiled into a vector and that Vector
has exactly the properties of the
electric field and so this field that
people have been calling the electric
field from the Greek word for Amber it
doesn't really have anything to do with
Amber right so you can forget about the
biases that come in when you think about
the word electric no it's just a
straight up Vector field that comes out
of the math so I'm going to call it the
electric field and I'm going to prove to
you that it is the electric field as we
derive Max equations but notice that you
know earlier I mentioned that it feels
like electromagnetism is an expansion
pack that you have to put on your world
view because you have to take it on
faith that things like the electric
field and the magnetic field exist but
you don't have to do that anymore you
don't have to believe as a first
principle that there is such a thing as
an electric field you just have to
believe that the D field has local phase
Symmetry and then you get the electric
field automatically for free by virtue
of three of the six ways that a can flop
around on it own so you probably see
where this is going what about those
other three ways the ones involving
space and space well here it's less
obvious how to make a vector out of
these and in fact you can't but you can
make a pseudo vector and you know a
pseudo Vector is a thing that looks like
a vector but secretly it's not because
when you look at Its Reflection in a
mirror it picks up a minus sign that a
vector wouldn't pick up so for example
if you imagine a angular momentum Vector
it's actually a pseudo Vector because
it's based on the way things are
swirling around and if you reflect that
it's going to swirl the other way so the
vector is going to flip and so every
pseudo Vector is secretly an oriented
plane well anyway so let's call the
pseudo Vector B for Pudo
vector and the X component of b is going
to be the way that doesn't include x so
the one that includes Y and Z and it's
actually going to be the negative of
that way and the negative sign is there
so that we can compile these ways into
the curl of the spatial part of a as
we'll see in a moment but it's okay to
put a minus sign on this because the
minus sign doesn't actually give us a
different degree of Freedom it's still
the same thing right it's still the same
mode that a can flop around in okay so
then for the Y component of b for that
one we're just going to take the second
option involving x and z we're not going
to put a minus sign and then for the Z
component of b we're we're going to take
the minus sign of that third option that
includes X and
Y and that if you compile into a vector
and you recognize the definition of the
curl you'll see that this Vector like
thing is the curl of the spatial part of
a that is the curl of the magnetic
Vector potential and that is none other
than the magnetic
field okay wait a minute now hold up
this is really an astonishing thing to
say that the electric and magnetic field
are just ways of mathematically
encapsulating the six ways that a can
flop around on its own like whoa like I
remember the first time I saw this I was
like dizzy like I had to sit down in a
chair and take a moment to reflect and
be like wait a minute what that's all
the electric and magnetic fields are
like they're it's math It's All Pure
math like whoa and you know once you see
this you realize that you don't really
even have to talk in terms of electric
and magnetic field if you don't want to
you know cuz e and B these things are I
don't want to say it's a useful fiction
cuz I think that's not quite accurate
but it's sort of an arbitrary convention
and if you studied electromagnetism you
may have heard of the Faraday tensor
that's the tensor whose components are
the components of the electric and
magnetic fields and that's sort of a
more uniform more holistic way of
describing the situation with the six
ways that a can flop around but even the
Faraday tensor itself which we'll talk
about in a moment but even that tensor
itself is just one way of describing
what's going on so the core concept here
is don't take the electric and magnetic
fields too literally don't even take the
Faraday tensor too literally okay well
maybe take that one a little bit more
literally but the point is examine the
roots of these Concepts and you'll find
that all it is is just the six degrees
of freedom that a has available to it
without disrupting thecal phase symmetry
of theck field now I'm going to share
with you a pneumonic device that has
been stuck in my head and for better or
worse because it's really effective and
it's really memorable but it's also kind
of silly and Whimsical which now that I
think about it is actually this is just
a good thing okay so here's the thing in
order to put in your mind a permanent
understanding of the connection between
the electromagnetic four potential and
the electric and magnetic fields and or
the Faraday tensor what you can do is in
your mind create a category called the
six
ways and regard this category with a
kind of mystical
significance so imagine there's some
meditation music playing maybe a little
bit of pan flute and in your mind think
about oh yes okay we have this four
potential and then there are the six
ways that it can flop around on its own
and when you think about this in your
mind pretend that it's kind of a
spiritual fact you know like some
spiritual knowledge that you've gained
access to that you've tapped into you
know like you you now you can see the
six ways that a can flop around and
remember that because I know it's silly
I know it's like there's no logical
reason to think about it in that way but
the point is if you keep that in mind
and remember that it's just six ways
that a can flop around then you'll
always remember what the electric and
magnetic fields are and you'll always
remember what the Faraday tensor is and
in general you'll feel a more
comfortable with all of this math and
you'll also be able to go kind of like
underneath the electric and magnetic
fields where you don't take them so
literally and you can kind of see where
they come from and this will give you
some real genuine Insight so for example
let's use this perspective about the six
ways to derive the homogeneous Maxwell's
equations we're going to start off with
gauss's law for magnetism and this law
states that the Divergence of the
magnetic field is zero which implies is
that every magnet has a North Pole and a
South Pole so to do this derivation all
we have to remember is that b the
magnetic field is the pseudo Vector part
of the six
ways and in particular B is the curl of
the spatial part of
a now if we want to calculate the
Divergence of B all we have to do is
calculate the Divergence of the curl of
the spatial part of a right of that
Vector po
potential and here if you've learned
Vector calculus then you'll know what
this is right away the Divergence of the
curl is zero and this is a general
mathematical
statement and so there in one line
there's the proof right so the
Divergence of B is the Divergence of the
curl of the spatial part of a and so
therefore the Divergence of B is zero
that's literally the proof of Gus's law
it comes right directly out of the
nature of the equations it's beautiful
okay you know this proof was so short
that let me actually go ahead and just
give a quick proof that the Divergence
of the curl is always zero for those of
you who haven't seen that before this
might be helpful and it also kind of
shows like what's going on here in a
little bit more detail so if you take
the Divergence of the curl of any Vector
field a then you can write that out by
putting in the definition of the curl
which is this expression that has a
bunch of partial derivatives minus other
partial
derivatives and to take the diver of
that you just go ahead and take the
derivative of each component along that
Dimension and then you just add that all
up so that's the Divergence operator and
when you do that and you factor things
out you get a bunch of second
derivatives and then you'll see that
they actually pair up and cancel each
other
out and so anyway you end up with a zero
so that's a really General mathematical
statement and that is why gauss's law is
a thing at the end of the day it comes
down to the fact that the B field that
pseudo Vector field is the curl of
another Vector field so yeah no it can't
diverge it can't converge it's just zero
Divergence oh and by the way you'll
often see gauss's law written in two
different ways there's the differential
form but then there's also the integral
form so the differential form is what we
just derived that's the idea that the
Divergence of B is zero but that can
also be written in a more macroscopic
way using the integral form where we can
express the same fact in terms of a flux
integral of B through any closed
surface these two things are directly
related by the Divergence Theorem which
tells us that the volume integral of the
Divergence of a vector field is equal to
the flux integral of the closed surface
containing that
volume the Divergence Theorem basically
just tells us that one way to think
about what the Divergence is is as like
a flux integral volume density or vice
versa one way to think about what a flux
integral is is like the accumulation of
sources and sinks within a closed
surface so if you take the Divergence
Theorem and you plug in the fact that
the Divergence of B is zero then you can
prove that the flux integral of B
through any closed surface is also zero
both ways of saying this are conveying
the same basic idea which is that
magnetic fields they don't source and
they don't sink they don't poke more out
than they poke in uh they just kind of
swirl
around okay so that's one Maxwell's
equations down three to go next up we'll
do Faraday's law of induction and this
tells us that the curl of the electric
field is -1 over the speed of light
times the time derivative of the
magnetic field in other words the way
the electric field is swirling around in
space has to do with the way the
magnetic field is changing in time so
the proof of this fact is very similar
to the proof of gauss's law for
magnetism all we have to do is write the
definitions of e and B in terms of the
components of a uh because you know as
we saw earlier e and B both come from
the six
ways and so when we write that out we
get that e is -1 / C partial a partial T
minus the gradient of the time component
of a which by the way here I'm writing
as a subt it's kind of a non-standard
notation normally at this point you'd
write it as V in gaussian units V over C
and SI units um because that's voltage
right so the time component of the four
potential is voltage but I'm writing it
here as a subt because I want to
emphasize the unity of all these
equations I know when I was learning
this stuff I would see a and v and they
kind of felt like different things so
you know I don't want to split that out
unnecessarily although of course you
know it is voltage so well anyway and
now looking at B again it's just the
curl of the spatial part of a so the
curl of the vector potential
Okay cool so let's just go ahead and
calculate the curl of e and see if it
equals -1 C partial B partial T and if
it does great that's the proof of
Faraday's law of induction so let's do
it okay so to calculate the curl of e
we're going to take the curl of the
definition of e which is 1 / C partial a
partial T minus the gradient of the time
component of a and the curl is a linear
operator so we can go ahead and break up
that expression we can take the Cur of
both parts and so that gives US1 C * the
curl of the time derivative of the
vector potential minus the curl of the
gradient of the time component of a well
you know earlier we saw that the
Divergence of the curl of a vector field
is zero and similarly the curl of the
gradient of a scalar field is zero and
so that term negative curl of the
gradient of a subt that just goes away
that's Zero by the way the proof for
that you can Imagine by if you've ever
seen that drawing of the stairs where
it's like four stairs and it goes up in
a spiral and somehow it's like it's
always spiraling upstairs that's not
real that can't happen in real life
because the slope of something doesn't
curl right so the curl of the gradient
is uh zero you can prove that in a more
formal way if you want of course using
the definitions of curl and gradient
well anyway so that term goes away and
we're left with1 over c times the time
derivative of the curl of the vector
potential that is the spatial part of
a and well wait a minute the curl of the
vector potential that's the definition
of b and so that expression is -1 C *
the time derivative of B so yeah that's
totally true and so we've just proven
Faraday's law of
induction so to convert Faraday's law of
induction from the differential form to
the integral form typically what you
want to do is take the flux integral of
both sides of the equation through some
C surface and this is usually imagined
as a circle just to keep things simple
but it doesn't actually have to be a
circle okay and now all we have to do is
apply Stokes theorem to the left hand
side of the
equation so Stokes theorem is the idea
that the flux integral of the curl of a
vector field through some surface is
going to be equal to the circulation
integral of that Vector field dotted
with the line element around the surface
and one way to think about what stokes's
theorem is is if you're like okay what
is the flux of the curl of a vector
field through a surface that's just how
swirly the vector field is around the
edge of that surface anyway what that
lets us do is that lets us write the
left hand side of the equation in terms
of a circulation integral or a line
integral instead of a flux integral and
that is Faraday's law of induction
written in integral form and this is the
form of Faraday's law of induction that
you'll typically see when you have those
experiments where you're like poking a
magnet through a solenoid you know and
it's like hey the rate of change of
magnetic flux is inducing a swirly
electric field in the solenoid and so
you can make electricity just by moving
a magnet and wow isn't that amazing but
now that we're hip to the six ways we
know that it's actually not too
surprising that this is the case okay
well that is the homogeneous Maxwell's
equations they are baked into the nature
of the electric and magnetic fields and
in a moment we're going to see how to
calculate the inhomogeneous Maxwell's
equations these ones also have to do
with the nature of the electric and
magnetic field
but they also include electric charge
and electric currents and so if we want
to derive the inhomogeneous Maxwells
equations we're going to have to take
that into account as well and we're
going to have to look not just at the
nature of the electric and magnetic
fields but also the details of how they
couple to the electron field and all of
that so anyway we'll get to that in just
a moment but before moving on from the
homogeneous Maxwell's equations I want
to make a point about the philosophical
status of these equ
so imagine that I came up to you and I
said hey I've made a discovery I've
noticed that whenever you add the
magnetic field to itself the result is
the same as doubling the strength of the
magnetic field so B plus b equal 2B so
wow isn't that amazing you know hey
maybe this can be a fifth Maxwell's
equation let's call it be Hill's law of
magnetic addition so can I get a Nobel
Prize I mean isn't this an amazing
Discovery it's like no it's not at all
not even remotely but why I mean is it
not true well no it is true so the
question isn't to be or not to be but
rather should the Mind suffer the slings
and arrows of outrageous and irrelevant
equations and of course the answer is no
if an equation is obvious it's
unnecessary and it doesn't have to be a
thing and from a gauge theoretic
perspective the same is true when it
comes to the homogeneous Maxwell's
equations when you think about a and the
ways that it can flop around
energetically you realize that there
going to be a vector there's going to be
a pseudo Vector if you want to talk
about it in that language and if so then
the pseudo Vector is going to be the
curl of the spatial part of a and curls
don't diverge so we don't really need to
say that it doesn't diverge it just
doesn't diverge right based on the
definition based on the nature of how it
is so ga's law for magnetism is sort of
like B plus Bal 2B it's like well yeah
okay but you know we don't necessarily
need to even say it anymore and the same
is true with Faraday's law of induction
that just comes straight out of the
common definition of the electric and
magnetic fields so it's actually really
neat because when you think about things
from a gauge Theory perspective you
realize that when you understand the
homogeneous Maxwell's equations they
disappear they vanish philosophically
they vanish they're still useful look
from an engineering perspective if
you're writing software you'll still use
these equations I mean they're fine
they're true but philosophically you
don't need to rely on these anymore they
don't hold anything up they're just
manifestly true in so far as the DFI is
local U1 phase
symmetry on the other hand we also have
the in homogeneous Maxwell's equations
and these equations involve charge and
current and while they also are logical
consequence of local phase symmetry
they're a bit harder to derive actually
they're quite frankly a lot harder to
derive because in order to derive it we
have to think not just about the nature
of the electric and magnetic fields but
we have to think holistically about the
interaction between Sai and a and
derivatives and space and time and a lot
of different things so in a few moments
we're about to bust out the variational
calculus and we'll actually derive those
equations but first in order to do that
we have to introduce a couple of
Concepts so first we're going to talk
about the Faraday
tensor and then we're going to use the
Faraday tensor to write the lrin of
quantum
electrodynamics okay so we saw earlier
in the video that there are six ways
that a can manifest energetically
independent of local phase
Transformations on S and we saw that if
you arrange them so that the time and
space options are on one side and the
space and space options are on the other
side then you see the electric field and
the magnetic field but there's no law of
physics that says that we have to
arrange our thoughts in that way the
only thing we're really constrained by
fundamentally is the fact that there are
four dimensions of space and time so
suppose we want to have some equations
that are more unified and more conceptu
elegant than equations involving
electric and magnetic fields like let's
say we want an equation where maybe it
leverages Matrix algebra um maybe it's
something that lends itself better to
computation and is a little bit more
structured and organized well one way to
go about that is to say okay well we can
make a table where each row in each
column is going to correspond to one of
the four dimensions of SpaceTime and
then we can populate the table with each
option of picking those two dimensions
and applying the loophole that lets a
flop around energetically independent of
local phase
Transformations so this table goes by
the name of F muu and this is called the
Faraday tensor also known as the field
strength tensor this is an object whose
components are components of the
electric and magnetic fields but the
tensor is not inherently fractured in
the same kind of way that equations
involving electricity and magnetism are
going to be
fractured now when we look at this table
it's quite a mess I mean there's a whole
bunch of characters and a whole bunch of
different options but there's a couple
of things we should notice first of all
each one of these options has the same
form so each element in F mu new is just
partial mu a new minus partial new a mu
and so even though it's a lot of things
it's all the same kind of thing but now
the thing is wait a minute is this 16
ways 4X 4 that's 16 I thought there were
only supposed to be six ways so
something's wrong here right but don't
worry this situation is not as dire as
it seems because if you focus on the
diagonal terms you can see that each one
of these diagonals is just a thing minus
itself and so those are all zero so what
we have here is a tensor whose diagonal
is zero and then it has an upper
triangle and a lower triangle okay so
there's not actually 16 ways
well wait a minute there's still 12 ways
and that's twice as many ways there
should not be 12 ways there should be
six ways but now notice the symmetry of
this tensor so for example look at the
blue term that I've highlighted here and
compare it to the red term well if you
multiply the blue expression by1 and
then switch its components around you're
going to end up with the red expression
so in another words those two elements
are the same thing up to a minus sign
and so actually collect ly they comprise
only a single degree of Freedom only a
single way not actually two different
ways and if you pick another pair you
can see that it's the same thing so for
example the ones involving zeros and
threes each term is actually the
negative of its diagonal counterpart and
if you apply this to the whole tensor
you can see that the top triangle and
the bottom triangle are like mirror
images of each other but with a minus
sign and that's okay like if you look in
the mirror technically you're backwards
but uh it's still just you there's
nothing like like you look in the mirror
and it's like someone else in there so
if you think about the degrees of
freedom you can see that actually yeah
there's only six ways well now if that's
the case then we should expect in each
of these triangles to find the
components of both the electric and the
magnetic fields so first if we start
with the components in the time row and
the space columns we can see that these
are the definitions of the components of
the electric fields that we identified
earlier now because the tensor is mirror
reflective with the minus sign and by
the way this is called anti- symmetry so
that we can say that the Matrix is anti-
symmetric then the time column and the
spatial rows are just going to be the
negative components of the electric
field okay and now if we look at the
space and space components in the top
triangle what we see here is just the
components of the magnetic field that we
identified earlier there's some
differences in minus signs because of
the way the cross product is and the
definition of the magnetic field my
advice honestly don't worry about minus
signs in any of this okay I mean be
careful about it but like don't try to
memorize them all there's just so many
minus signs I don't know about you but
personally the hardest thing about
physics is knowing where to put the
minus sign and knowing where to put the
factor of two so the philosophically
important thing is just to see that the
Faraday tensor contains the electric and
magnetic fields and don't worry too much
about minus signs especially when you
factor in like index lowering and index
raising and it's like it's okay if you
drop a minus sign when you're learning
the stuff that happens that's natural um
I still do it to this day so okay and
once again if we look at the bottom
triangle we see a reflection of the same
thing so down there we also have the
magnetic field
components now when you look at this
Square you see it's actually quite
redundant and you don't really need to
imagine it as a square you can just
focus on one of the triangles whichever
one you prefer that's fine and in your
mind you can imagine it that there is an
electric field row and then there's like
this little magnetic
triangle one thing I should say is I
know this seems a bit unnecessary I mean
we have a 4x4 Matrix with 16 possible
terms and we're only caring about six of
them that's only like 40% real estate
utilization so it seems not ideal and in
a way it isn't I mean there are
advantages of using electric and
magnetic fields in that it's it's kind
of cleaner in some sense but notice the
conceptual Simplicity of having all of
these degrees of freedom in one object
and think about the computational
benefits that come along with that with
being able to write it as an array and
then think from like a Zen perspective
that anything that has computational
benefits is also going to be kind of
more elegant and maybe more in line with
a more concise and meaningful
description of nature so this Faraday
tensor is actually a really cool thing
and as we'll see later in the video this
is going to let us write the equations
of electromagnetism in a much more
elegant way oh yeah and also one more
thing is when you think about this it's
like okay you can do electromagnetism
any calculation without using the the
electric and magnetic fields so when you
embrace the Faraday tensor you see that
even the word electromagnetism is almost
like an Antiquated portm you might as
well call it faridism or something or
light or I don't know local phase
symmetry whatever you want to call it
well anyway while we're here I should
also tell you about the upstairs Faraday
tensor so first of all if you notice
that the me new on this Matrix is
downstairs uh you can also have an
upstairs version and that you get just
by raising the indices
and all that means and and by the way
this depends on the metric you're using
here again we're using mostly minus um
but when you take it upstairs the
electric field components pick up a
minus sign and again don't worry too
much about that there's like minus signs
and not minus signs everywhere and it's
confusing but that's okay um this is
similar to having like a contravariant
or a covariant four vector and you're
going to multiply them together and uh
you know so this kind of goes to the
structure of special relativity but um
we're going to kind of see how this
appears equations later on so um don't
stress too much about trying to memorize
where the minus signs go it's all good
and also you can always refer to
Griffith's equation 7.71 to see the
definition of the upstairs Faraday
tensor okay so now that we've seen the
tensor F muu let me tell you about the
scalar quantity f muu f muu and what
this is is like the magnitude squared of
the Faraday tensor and this is a very
important ingredient in the lren of
quantum
electrodynamics so to understand what
this is the first thing we have to do is
recognize that we're using the Einstein
summation convention and because mu and
new are both repeated they're both
summed over and so this is actually
going to be a sum over 16 terms one for
each possibility of me and new and what
each one of these terms is is the
product of a downstairs Faraday tensor
element times the corresponding upstairs
fad tensor element we have to be mindful
of the downstairs and the upstairs and
the signs but that's all good you don't
actually have to do this calculation
like more than ones so I just want to do
this real quick and I'll show you what
it equals and then you can just remember
what it equals okay so first of all if
you look at the terms where mu equals
new and you think about the zero
diagonal in the Faraday tensor you can
recognize right away that all of those
terms are going to be zero so those are
not going to contribute to the sum and
now if we look at the terms where one of
the indices is zero we can substitute in
the definition of the components of the
Faraday tensors and we can see that
these are all just going to be the
electric field components times
themselves with a minus sign and so that
just becomes negative components of the
electric field squared and if you want
you can add those all up as just the
negative magnitude squared of the
electric field and similarly if we look
at the terms where neither of the
indices are zero we see the components
of the magnetic field and in this case
they either have two minus signs or no
minus signs and so those all end up
being
positive and so you end up with the
Positive squares of the magnetic field
components now to add this all up we
just have to draw a diagonal line and
recognize that the top and bottom halves
are the same thing and so this
expression when you add it all up it
ends up being just two * the magnetic
field magnitude squar minus the electric
field magnitude squar so remember this
whenever you see f muu f you new if you
want to think about that in terms of
electric and magnetic fields all that is
is twice the magnetic field squar minus
the electric field squared and this is a
special quantity because you know how
magnetic fields arise from moving
charges so let's say if if I'm
electrically charged and I'm just
sitting here and we're sitting together
on the couch or whatever then I'm
putting off an electric field but I'm
not putting off a magnetic field but if
you're walking by then now all of a
sudden relative to you I'm a moving
charge and so now just by walking by you
sense a magnetic field in the room
admittedly a very weak one unless you're
walking by very quickly but anyway all
that's to say is that the electric
fields and the magnetic fields on their
own are not Loren inv variant quantities
different inertial observers are going
to disagree on how strong the electric
and magnetic field is at any particular
point in SpaceTime but all inertial
observers are going to agree on this
quantity that is the difference in the
field strength squared this is similar
to the invariance of the space time
interval or any other Len and variant
quantity now conventionally this f muu f
muu term you often see it divided by 16
Pi in gaussian units and so on the right
side that just ends up being 1 8 Pi *
the magnitude of the magnetic field squ
minus the electric field squared and
what each of those expressions is think
of it as the energy density of the
magnetic field minus the energy density
of the electric field and you know what
now that I'm looking at this we've got
the b^2 minus the e squ but we're using
the mostly minus metric and so we kind
of want something where the time like
thing is positive and the space like
thing is negative so let's actually
multiply through by a minus sign and
this is basically just the same thing as
before but now the time like thing has a
positive sign and the space like thing
has a negative sign which kind of aligns
more nicely with the whole mostly minus
thing you know so a quantity like this
is just asking to be popped into a lran
and in fact it is so this is the
photon's kinetic contribution to the
lrin of quantum
electrodynamics now when you first see
this you're going to think wait a minute
1 over 16 Pi where does that come from
and the answer is that's put there in
order to make the equations pretty and
the reason we can do that is because
remember earlier we said that we're
going to make the charge this letter Q
instead of just the number one we're
going to say let's make this Q because
then we have the flexibility to define
the scale of a well now we're cashing in
on that and we're going to say okay
we're going to define the scale of a
such that the coefficient on this part
of the lran can be a nice clean 1 over
16 Pi so this is an acceptable
legitimate move but it is a little bit
unsatisfying that we have this degree of
Freedom here and that we get to make
this choice in the first place um in an
Ideal World it'd be nice if the scale of
the photon's kinetic contribution were
locked in by some kind of deeper
principle and that's the problem of the
fine structure constant so we'll talk
about that more in a moment but first I
want to write out filigran of quantum
electrodynamics so we can see how
everything fits together first up we
have this term SAR I Bar C gamma mu
partial muus mc^ 2 s and that is the
freed dck term that's the electron
kinetic and mass
energy then we also have the interaction
energy which is qsar gamma mu SI * a mu
and you can think of that as the
electron's four current coupled to the
four potential so that is the energy
associated with the interaction between
the electron field and the photon field
and then finally we have the kinetic
energy of the photon field which as
we've just seen is this quantity 1 16 Pi
f muu f muu and one thing that I haven't
really done is I haven't really
Justified why it is that the kinetic
energy of the photon field should have
the form that it does I mean as we've
seen we can arbitrarily choose what we
want that constant to be so that's okay
and also if we're thinking about it
relativistically we do need a Loren and
variant quantity and fmu F muu is the
Loren invariant quantity the simplest
one that we can make out of the Faraday
tensor and we have to use the Faraday
tensor because that encapsulates all of
the degrees of freedom by which a can
flop around independently of local phase
transformation and so if we tried to use
anything outside of the Faraday tensor
going to spoil the phase symmetry so the
form of this component of the lran is
very very plausible uh it's actually
it's kind of like the simplest thing it
could be but the question arises well
why couldn't it be that squared or that
cubed or some expression involving
higher orders of this term well there's
a couple things I want to say about that
and oh by the way shout out to Jonathan
gorard for helping me figure this out
and and think this through um follow him
on Twitter that guy's like a super
genius so first of all if the term f muu
f muu were more complicated with higher
powers and that sort of thing then we
wouldn't be able to derive the
inhomogeneous maxell's equations and
we'll see that in a moment part of the
derivation is going to be involving
taking derivatives of the Faraday tensor
and you'll see when that time comes that
it's a good thing that it's f muu f muu
and not something else so to the extent
that we want these ideas to be coherent
with Maxwell's equations we need this
term f muu f muu because otherwise we
would end up with nonl linear equations
and Maxwell's equations are famously
linear so okay but technically that kind
of feels like we're cheating because
it's like we know we want to get
Maxwell's equations we know they're
linear and so therefore we're kind of
preempting that and so we're making sure
that f muunu f muu is simple and that's
actually a good point so let me just
confess that right now we're leaning a
little bit on aam's Razer and we're just
saying look this is the simplest Loren
invariant scaler that we can make out of
the Faraday tensor
and so in some sense this is
mathematically the most plausible form
of the lran that we can come up with
then we're going to realize that it
leads to electromagnetism and so we're
going to sort of take this as true but
strictly speaking just the constraints
of local phase Symmetry and special
relativity on their own do not
necessarily imply that this part of the
lran has to have precisely this term but
anyway it just so happens that in the
universe in which we find ourselves and
at the kind of energy scales that we're
typically interested in electromagnetism
takes the form of linear differential
equations and that's precisely what we
get when this term in the lran has the
simplest form that it can have so okay
oh and remember technically this
expression with the fancy L it's
actually the lran density everyone calls
it the lran but it's the lran density so
if you integrate this over space then
you get the
lran and if you integrate it over
SpaceTime you get the action and then
the principle of least action lets you
turn the lran into the governing
equations of whatever system you're
looking at so that's kind of how this
plugs into
physics okay so let's reflect on this
for a moment what we have here this
equation this iconic beautiful equation
is the QED
lran and this is the seed that grows
into the electromagnetic phenomena so
the blossoming of this equation is
responsible for like most of the worlds
that we see around us it's an amazing
thing and you can think of it as the
derran with the local U1 symmetry
upgrade so if you take the derran for a
free electron and say I want to do
whatever minimal thing I have to do to
give that local phase symmetry then this
is what you end up getting and so
fundamentally that's all this really is
so now let's go ahead and use this lran
to calculate the inhomogeneous Maxwells
equations and we do that by minimizing
the action which is the integral of the
Lan density over space time with some
arbitrary sigh so some arbitrary
electron field sigh and we allow the
photon field and its derivatives to vary
and flop around as needed to relax the
lren okay so before we get into the
calculation for the inhomogeneous
Maxwell's equations I want to draw an
analogy to a famous problem in
variational calculus that can serve as a
kind of imaginative metaphor for the
calculation that we're about to do so
this is the catenary curve problem and
the problem is how do you calculate the
shape that a telephone wire takes on
between two telephone poles and the key
to solving this problem is to say that
it's going to be the shape that
minimizes the gravitational potential
energy because that's going to be the
most relaxed shape and you also have to
put in your boundary conditions so you
say okay it'll be connected to this pole
here and that pole over there and it's
going to have some constant length and
so given all the curves that have those
constraints which one minimizes the
gravitational potential energy and then
the key Insight at the core of
variational calculus is to recognize
that the optimal curve is going to be
the one where if you give it some
arbitrary infinitesimal nudge in any way
that it can be nudged then to first
order you're going to get zero response
in the variable that you're trying to
minimize so in this case if we took the
telephone wire and we imagined giving it
a little tiny nudge up and down here and
there the variation that we'd find in
the gravitational potential energy for
the optimal curve is going to be zero
and that's a special property of the
equilibrium solution and this is roughly
analogous to doing an optimization
problem in calculus where you can look
for the optimal points by looking where
the derivative is zero when you're doing
variational calculus you can look for
the optimal curve or Surface or whatever
by looking at the point where the
variation in the variable that you're
trying to minimize is zero Rel relative
to small infinite tmal nudges in every
which way that the thing can be nudged
of course the nudges have to respect the
boundary conditions of the problem so
for example in the case of the telephone
wire you see that the wires are
connected to the poles and the nudges
don't change where they're connected
they only change in between the
boundaries um that'll be relevant later
as we'll see and so anyway to solve the
problem what you end up doing is you
calculate the gravitational potential
energy is an integral over the curve
subject to some constraints and then you
analyze that while adding to the curve
some arbitrary nudge profile some
arbitrary function of X that vanishes to
zero at the boundaries and you'll find
that the only way to ensure that is zero
that is the only way to ensure that the
curve minimizes the gravitational
potential energy is going to be to
satisfy some constraint in the integrand
and that ends up giving you a
differential equation that you can then
solve for the optimal shape of the curve
of the telephone wire and it ends up
being a fairly tedious differential
equation but at the end of the day you
find that it is a coine hyperbolic
cosine and anyway so that's kind of a
lot of work just to be able to say you
know technically it's not a parabola but
that is what it is and so the reason I
bring that up is because the calculation
for the inhomogeneous Maxwell's
equations is actually very very similar
in essence to the calculation for the
curve taken on by a telephone wire
between two poles now instead of a
telephone wire it's going to be the
photon field and its derivatives that
are allowed to vary the condition is
going to be that we're going to have
some arbitrary electron field sigh that
a is going to couple to and instead of
minimizing the gravitational potential
energy we're going to be minimizing the
action S as defined by the lran of
quantum
electrodynamics and instead of working
in a two-dimensional space we're going
to be working in A four-dimensional
relativistic Spacetime but other than
that it's a very similar problem so the
reason I bring up this telephone poll
analogy is to show you that even though
what we're about to do is quite a
calculation in your mind you can have an
image of the photon field relaxing
around Sai and the constraint that makes
this happen the thing that a has to be
like in order for that to be the case is
ultimately going to be an equation that
describes how a has to be given some
electron field sigh and when you talk
about that in the language of charge and
current we're going to find that that is
indeed the inhomogeneous Maxell
equations this calculation is not for
the faint of har uh we must approach it
with current and
determination we start with the
principle of least action first we
recognize that the action s is defined
as the integral of the lran density over
some chunk of space
time then applying the principle of
least action we're going to minimize
this quantity this occurs when the first
variation in the action is zero sort of
like optimizing by setting the
derivative equal to zero the action is
minimized
when any arbitrary infinitesimal nudge
on the photon field has a vanishingly
small effect on the
action so now suppose we have some
arbitrary electron field sigh we want to
know then what must be true of the
photon field a which is coupled to sigh
in order to relax the action s into its
minimum value out of all possible field
configurations what must be true about a
in order for the princi I of least
action to be satisfied H well we can
write out the variation in s as the
variation in the integral of the lran
density over space time because that's
the definition of s and that's all fine
and good but now we want to know what
happens when we give our Photon field a
little bit of a nudge and we can nudge
it not only in the value but also in the
derivatives of the field because as
we've seen the photon field contributes
to the lanun in two ways one its value
its magnitude at a particular point in
space is going to contribute to an
interaction term with the electron so we
for sure have to vary it with respect to
its magnitude but also we notice that
derivatives of a appear in the Faraday
tensor that is in the photon's kinetic
contribution to the lran and so we're
also going to have to vary the lran with
respect to derivatives of the four
potential so the question is how much
does the action vary when we nudge the
photon field and we nudge its
derivatives and the answer is it's going
to be the partial derivative of the lren
with respect to each of those things
that we're nudging you can think of the
partial derivative terms as a kind of
sensitivity and it's almost tological
right the amount to which the lran is
going to be sensitive to a nudge in some
variable is going to be the partial
derivative of the lran with respect to
that
variable so now what we have here is an
expression involving partial derivatives
of the lran with respect to a as well as
with respect to derivatives in a
here I should make a point to note that
mu as well as new can each take on a
value between 0 and 3 01 2 3 and so in
this expression we actually have 20
terms I know it looks like two terms but
that first term involving nudges in a
that's actually four terms one for when
new is zero and then one and then two
and then three and the second term
involving the derivatives of a is
actually 16 terms one for each of the
possibilities of mu and new being 0 1 2
and 3 and that corresponds to the
derivatives of each component of a along
each dimension of SpaceTime so in the
integrand we actually have 20 terms but
thanks to the convenient notation that
we're using we only have to write two
terms that correspond to the general
category of terms that are in this
equation and so we can carry them all
through systematically without having to
always write down each and every one all
right so now the next thing we'll want
to do is write the variation in the
derivative of a as the derivative of the
variation in a because if we can write
that second term in terms of variations
in a that is nudges in the photon field
then we can factor out the nudges in the
photon field and we can bring together
both of these
terms so because the variation and the
derivative are independent we can go
ahead and write the variation of the
derivative as the derivative of the
variation now we're getting somewhere
because you can see that the variations
in the integrand are on the four Vector
themselves we're no longer taking the
variation of the derivative but on the
right hand side we do have the
derivative of the variation and as long
as we have the derivative of the
variation we can't factor out the
variation so we need to do an
integration by parts integration by
parts is the idea that the integral of
UV is equal to UV minus the integral of
V duu this is a standard calculus
procedure and when we apply it to this
expression just the right hand side of
the integrand that is the one with the
partial derivatives of the lran with
respect to derivatives in a we can
expand this as the partial derivative
the lran with respect to the derivatives
in a times the variations in a evaluated
at the boundary of our space-time hyper
volume minus the integral of variations
in a times the derivative of the partial
derivative of the lrin with respect to
derivatives in a confusing right yeah
okay but you know what there's one thing
that actually really helps us out here
which is that just as in the case of the
telephone wire the nudges vanish to zero
at the boundaries of our analysis so
we're only nudging the stuff inside the
thing that we're looking at I mean if
you want you can use an arbitrarily
large SpaceTime hyper volume don't get
me wrong but we can go ahead and set the
nudges equal to zero at the boundaries
and what that's going to do is when we
evaluate that term on the volumetric
boundary of our SpaceTime hyper volume
it's going to go to zero because the
nudges are zero out there and so
therefore that variation in a term also
known as the nudge uh doesn't exist on
the volumetric boundary of the SpaceTime
hypervolume so that's just a long-winded
way of saying we don't have to worry
about that boundary term because all of
the nudges happen within the region of
space time that we're
analyzing well okay so having done that
integration by parts and having set the
boundary term to zero we now see that we
have a way of rewriting the second part
of our integrand in a way that actually
does have variations in the four Vector
just directly there right we popped it
out of a
derivative and so now what we can do is
if we combine that back in to that top
integral up there uh and go ahead and
factor out A variation in the photon
field that is a nudge in the photon
field now we have an expression where we
have some partial derivatives inside of
the integrand and that whole quantity is
Multiplied also inside of the integrand
by a nudge in the photon
field but here's the thing in this
analysis we're allowed to nudge the
photon field Any Which Way at any point
in space and time we can give it any
kind of directional nudge we want and so
the only way that Delta s is going to be
zero that is the only way that the
variation in action is going to be zero
is if that term that multiplies the
nudge is zero
and this constraint this differential
equation makes it so that the variation
in action is zero and therefore the
principle of least action or technically
stationary action is satisfied so all we
have to do now is solve this equation oh
by the way this is called the oiler
lrange equation and it's basically a way
of writing the principle of least action
in differential form so you know with a
maxel equations we have the differential
form we have the integral form it's kind
of the same thing in two different ways
well in so too we have the principle of
least action which is kind of This
macroscopic Global integral kind of
statement but then we have the oiler
lrange equation which is the local
microscopic differential equation that
must be true in order for the action to
actually be optimized so nature doesn't
somehow magically psychically conspire
to minimize the action but uh instead
the principle of least action is
actually a global kind of integral way
of stating something which is actually a
differential
equation and the equation we're showing
here the oiler the equation this is
actually very generic and you'll see it
in all kinds of problems now this
particular form is what you get when you
try to minimize the action with respect
to variations in a four Vector field but
you'll see a very very similar equation
if you have like a scalar field or
whatever the case may be well now all we
have to do is solve the oiler lrange
equation how hard can it be it's hard
but that's okay ask not for easier
equations but for stronger coffee by the
way if you happen to have any coffee now
is the time to drink it we're not done
yet we still got a ways to
go okay well let's go ahead and write
out our Oiler lrange
equation so this equation has a whole
bunch of derivatives of the lran with
respect to a and with respect to
derivatives of a and just a reminder the
letters MU and new are both just
placeholders for 0 1 2 and 3 in this
equation you can think of it as new
taking on any particular value 0 1 2 or
3
and meanwhile mu takes on all values and
is summed over so if you want you can
think of this as a four Channel equation
where each Channel corresponds to a
single value of new and then the right
hand side of each channel is actually
the sum of four terms one for each
possible value of me uh 0 1 2 and 3 so
now to solve this equation let's write
out our
lren of course now that we're experts on
the lran of Quant electrodynamics and we
see how it arises from local phase
symmetry of the D field we immediately
recognize this term involving the
electron field and the interaction term
involving both s and a and a term
involving the kinetic part of the photon
field which is expressed with those
Faraday tensors hold on wait a minute
now normally when we write the lren we
write it in terms of mu and new but here
we have it written in terms of Alpha and
beta no worries same exact concept these
are all just placeholders for 0 1 2 and
3 the reason we're writing it with Alpha
and beta now is because we already used
mu and new in the oiler lrange equation
and what we have to do if we want to
evaluate the oiler lrange equation is we
have to take all those derivatives and
stuff with regards to the MU and the new
and we have to apply that to each of the
components of the lren with regards to
the Alpha and the beta components so
from a combinatorics perspective there's
going to be an enormous number of terms
in this equation when we combine these
two things so don't be alarmed but when
you Dice this up into scalar components
we're dealing with a four-dimensional
partial differential equation of like
hundreds of terms fortunately most of
those are going to turn out to be zero
so that's nice but anyway thank goodness
for the Einstein summation convention so
that we don't have to write out all of
those terms because that would take like
forever you know Einstein that guy had a
lot of good ideas it's probably why
everyone called him Einstein well anyhow
uh let's go ahead and evaluate the left
hand side of our Oiler lrange equation
first so on that side of the equation
we're going to take the partial
derivative of the lren with respect to
the newth component of the four Vector
field now before we take this partial
derivative let's look at the form of the
lren and we'll notice a couple of things
first of all we're taking a derivative
with respect to the components of the
four Vector so the term involving purely
the electron field that has no
dependence whatsoever on the components
of the four Vector so therefore the
partial derivative of that term with
respect to the four Vector is zero
that's going to vanish so nice however
the next term that one involving the
charge and the interaction that does
directly depend on the components of the
four Vector so that is going to stay in
that doesn't vanish out but then the
kinetic term the term involving the
Faraday tensors remember those are made
out of derivatives of the four Vector
field so when we're taking this partial
derivative with respect to the
components of the four Vector the term
that depends on the derivatives of the
four Vector is not going to be directly
affected by the derivative in the four
Vector itself so therefore that term is
also going to vanish because it only
depends on the rate of change of the
four Vector in space and time but not on
the value of the four Vector components
okay sweet so we only have to worry
about the interaction term and that term
directly depends on the components of a
where um just go ahead and imagine that
negative Q SAR gamma alpha s that's all
a constant with respect to the component
a alpha and so therefore if we evaluate
this partial derivative we can go ahead
and Pop That constant outside the
derivative and then we just have the
partial derivative of the alpha
component of a with respect to the new
component of a now a partial derivative
like that can only be one of two things
first of all it's zero if Alpha and new
are different so if you're taking for
example the partial derivative of the X
component of a with respect to the Y
component of a that's zero because those
are two totally different things so you
know there's no derivative there but by
the same reasoning if Alpha and new are
the same so suppose we take partial
derivative of X component of a with
respect to the X component of a then
that derivative is one because the
derivative with respect to itself of
anything is
one and so this is interesting because
what this means is that this partial
derivative is going to delete everything
except for when Alpha equals
new so if you examine this expression
with the gamma Alpha in the SI sandwich
and the partial derivative that's going
to reduce to a gamma new in a size
sandwich which because that's the only
term that remains that doesn't get
deleted by the partial derivative
becoming zero Bear In Mind by the way in
this equation with the alphas it's a sum
over Alphas because that Alpha is
repeated in the term involving the gamma
and the partial derivative but all of
the non- new possibilities for Alpha get
deleted by the partial derivative okay
anyway I think I've belabored that point
so where does that leave us well let's
go ahead and recognize something this
term on the right VI SAR gamma s in
order to make sense of this term we have
to look to the definition of the four
current the for current written in
contravariant form we can write as J
with a new upstairs and that's going to
equal the speed of light times the
electric charge
density combined with the electric
current and that is the charge of the
particle times the speed of light times
cyar gamma
newai okay so now do a bit of pattern
matching and these terms only differ by
a negative
C so I'll go ahead and Factor this out
and you end up with 1 over c times the
newth component of the four
current bear in mind this equation has
four channels for new new can be 0 1 2
or 3 we're not summing over new they're
just four equations in parallel one way
to think about this is as an equation
involving four vectors so if you want to
think about the partial derivative four
Vector of the lren with respect to the
components of a we can see now that that
is equal to the four current up to some
factor of speed of light and a minus
sign this actually makes a lot of sense
because think about it how sensitive is
the lren going to be on changes in the
four Vector field a well just consider
the new equal 0 term that is the time
term of a the sensitivity of the lran on
the voltage is going to be proportional
to the charge density right and likewise
if you consider the spatial parts of a
that is the magnetic Vector potential
how much does the lrin depend on changes
in the vector potential well that has to
do with how much electric current you
have somewhere so this equation actually
makes a lot of sense and lends itself to
physical interpretation so we're on the
right track now let's go ahead and mosy
on over to the right hand side of our
Oiler lrange
equation there we find a derivative of a
derivative with respect to another
derivative
yo dog H how are we supposed to deal
with this well let's look at the lanen
if we start off with the electron term
that only involves s and not a then we
can recognize that the derivative of
that part of the lren with respect to
the derivatives in a is going to be zero
so that term's not going to contribute
at all to this mess of a derivative
situation that we have so we can safely
ignore that by the way notice that in
both sides of the oiler the gr equation
we were able to ignore the first term
involving only the electron wave
function and the reason for that is that
remember we're assuming that there is
some arbitrary electron field sigh and
we're letting a relax that is we're
letting the photon field relax around
that sigh and what that's going to do is
that's going to give us the constraints
on a that minimize the lran given some
electron field so at the end of the day
what that's going to give us is some equ
about how the photon field has to be
given some distribution of charge and
current and that is precisely what the
inhomogeneous Maxwell's equations
are okay so moving on to the interaction
term here we notice that it is from the
perspective of partial derivatives
involving a it's basically a constant
time
a but in this term on the right hand
side of the oiler lrange equation we're
actually taking the derivative with
respect to the derivatives in
a so even though the interaction term
involves the values of the components of
a it doesn't actually involve the
derivatives of a so therefore when we
take the partial derivative of that term
with respect to a derivative in a the
result is actually zero see because
we're not taking the second derivative
with respect to a we're taking the
partial derivative with respect to a
partial derivative of a so it's a little
confusing but hey at the end of the day
what it means is we can safely ignore
that interaction term so that's
wonderful but now we turn our attention
to the ktic term of the photon field and
uh we see these Faraday tensors and what
are Faraday tensors made out of a bunch
of derivatives in a shoot that's exactly
what we got to take the derivative with
respect to so this term is not going to
vanish okay so now we get to evaluate
this messy derivative of this Faraday
tensor thing well all right let's do it
so the first thing we'll do is notice
the -16 Pi that's a constant so let's
just go ahead and pull that outside of
the derivative and uh now we can write
this expression involving the
derivatives and just the product of
those Faraday
tensors and now what actually what we're
going to do is let's go ahead and
combine the left hand side and the right
hand side of the oil lrange equation
we'll bring these two things together so
on the left side we have that factor
involving the electric four current and
on the right side we have this of a
derivative with the Faraday tensors
let's go ahead and stick them together
and I'll do a little switcher so the
left is now the right and the right is
now the left but it's all good okay well
now we have a whole mess to deal with
cuz there's derivatives and fad tensors
and four currents and like
whoa but you know what this equation it
actually smells like the inhomogeneous
Maxwell's equations because think about
it what is the Faraday tensor it's made
out of derivatives of the four potential
and what is the electric four current
it's electric charge and electric
current and so what this equation is
telling us is that there is some
relationship to the way that the photon
field flops around and the electric
charge and current and it turns out
that's going to be the inhomogeneous
Maxwell's equations so now all we have
to do is unfold and simplify this
equation think of it like a Rubik's Cube
you know it's all scrambled up but we
just got to make it clean and when we
clean it up we'll find the maxell's
equations that we're looking for and a
bonus surprise equation which I'll tell
you about in a moment all all right well
we've got no other choice than to start
to evaluate this derivatives with the F
terms and it's like okay well we can
apply the product rule and we're going
to go ahead and break up that derivative
so first we're going to let the
derivative act on the downstairs Faraday
tensor then we're going to multiply that
by the upstairs Faraday tensor and then
for the second term we're going to have
the downstairs Faraday tensor multiplied
by the derivative acting on the upstairs
Faraday tensor so that's like your
standard application of the product
rule while we're at it let's go ahead
and multiply everything by -6 Pi just to
scoot that constant on over to the right
side of the equation and okay so what
should we do
next well if you look at these two terms
the derivative of the F and the F and
the F times the derivative of the F
these two terms actually look like kind
of like the same thing right I mean one
of them is derivative of downstairs
times upstairs one of them is downstairs
times derivative of upstairs but uh as
it turns out these actually are
identical the reason being that the only
difference between the downstairs and
the upstairs that is the covariant and
the contravariant is just the minus sign
on some of the terms and when you
multiply the upstairs and the downstairs
Faraday tensors you get the same thing
whether you do the uh the downstairs
first then the upstairs or the upstairs
first and the downstairs the point there
is that the derivative isn't going to
change that fundamental fact because the
derivative operator isn't going to
change the signs of any of the
components asymmetrically depending on
whether it's covariant or contravariant
so so that's all good so what that means
is that we can go ahead and let those
terms absorb into the same term doesn't
matter which one we pick we'll just pick
the first one cuz why not and then we
pick up a factor of two on the outside
of that equation so they just merge
together all right well we're getting
somewhere but we still have this very
complicated thing partial derivative of
the Faraday tensor with respect to the
partial derivatives of the four
potential times the Faraday tensor oh my
gosh what have we gotten ourselves into
what what do we do to deserve this you
know are we put on this Earth just to
suffer but we're in too deep now we
can't quit we're actually almost at the
end of the derivation so bear with me
here well first of all might as well go
ahead and divide by two so the two goes
away and the 16 Pi becomes 8 pi and now
what we want to do is let's go ahead and
get rid of the Faraday sensor term in
the derivative and instead we're going
to write that explicitly in terms of
partial derivatives of the the four
potential a because remember that's all
the Faraday tensor is it's made
completely out of the six ways that a
can manifest without violating the phase
symmetry of the D equation you know and
so therefore to take the derivative of
the Faraday tensor all we're doing is
taking the derivatives of the
derivatives and then there's a minus
sign because there's another derivative
because the Faraday tensor is a
derivative minus you know it's hard to
say but you see what it is right okay
but now the problem is we have quite a
predicament here because we still have
an equation involving Alpha Beta mu and
new and so each of these terms that
involve all four of those letters
actually represent
256 terms I think 256 cuz what you have
4 * 4 that's 16 * 4 64 * 4 256 yeah so
each one of these terms is actually 256
terms Now new is any possibility so
remember we have four channels in new
but Mu Alpha and beta we're all summing
over so think of this as four equations
in parallel or a four vector equation if
you like but then within each of those
equations all of these terms involving
the alpha the beta the MU the new each
of those is going to be 64 terms per
equation so you know if you're one of
those people like me where the first
time you see the Einstein summation
convention you think oh this is kind of
cryptic and burdensome well I hope now
you see the mess that it saves us from
Imagine writing that all out by hand no
there's no way okay
anyway how do we actually solve this
well here is some very good news this
term the derivative of the partial
derivative with respect to the other
partial derivative this is almost always
zero I think like 15 out of 16 times
it's zero because the thing is if you
take the partial derivative of a partial
derivative with respect to another
partial derivative it's just like before
remember when you had the partial
derivative of one component of a with
respect to another component of a
usually
there is no connection there that's zero
they don't depend on each other they're
different independent things right and
the only way that's not the case is if
you're taking the partial derivative of
a partial derivative with respect to the
other partial derivative that is in fact
itself I don't know if that makes sense
anything you take the partial derivative
with respect to itself is one and so
what that means is that there are a few
cases where this partial derivative is
one and that is when Alpha equals mu and
beta equals new because then on both
sides of this partial derivative it's
the same thing it's the derivative of a
thing with respect to itself so what
effects does that have on the equation
well just like we saw when evaluating
the left hand side of the oiler lrange
equation and the partial derivative term
deleted everything except for the new
component well here what it's going to
do is this complicated partial
derivative term is just going to delete
everything except for the Mew new
component on the left term or on the
right term you see the betas and Alphas
are switched so that one is going to
delete everything except for the new Mew
component but in either case at the end
of the day look how wonderfully simple
these become the partial derivative just
vanishes and it also takes out with it a
lot of the different possibilities for
Alpha and beta we see now that they're
just mu and new and so finally now we're
back down to an equation with only two
of these indices so we don't have to
worry about all the crazy combinatorial
explosion that we had to deal with ear
now the equation actually simplifies
quite a bit and now we can actually go
ahead and simplify this further because
remember that the feraday tensor is
defined as just the partial derivative
of this component of a with respect to
that component of space time minus the
partial derivative of that component of
a with respect to this component of
space time and so if you switch mu and
new around then you can see that F new
mu is the same as just netive F mu new
in other words the tensor is anti-
symmetric so what that means is that if
we have F mu new minus F new mu we can
absorb those together and write that as
2 F mu new now we're getting something
really nice I mean this is like very
elegant but we can clean it up just a
little bit by dividing by
two this my friends brings us to the
equation that we were seeking this is a
beautiful profound equation it's one of
my favorite equations of all time and
why is that you might ask ask because
this one equation is actually both of
the inhomogeneous Maxwell's equations
it's both Gus's law for electricity and
Amper law with Maxwell's addition but
look it's like one equation it's
beautiful and don't worry we're going to
unpack that in a second I'm not going to
leave you hanging but I just want to
linger on this for just a moment and
point out the fact that not only have we
accomplished what we set out to
accomplish that is deriving the in
homogeneous Maxwell's equations but we
did it in a way that unifies them into a
more elegant equation which is very nice
very deep so in one equation we get
gauss's law for electricity but we also
get ampere's law with Maxwell's addition
amazing but wait there's more this
equation also implies that electric
charge is locally conserved I mean it's
like
whoa so this is why we do variational
calculus
the pain is worth it because it's such a
powerful method and it gives us such
beautiful
results okay so let's go ahead and
unpack this
equation so this equation we just
derived it's actually four different
equations in one one equation for each
value of new or another way of thinking
about it is this is a four vector
equation and as it turns out the new
equals 0 component of this equation is
Gus's law for
electricity and now all we have to do is
translate this equation into the
language of derivatives and charge and
electric fields and all that stuff so
I'm going to put all this information
here just for reference so that we can
refer to this while doing this
translation so first of all let's go
ahead and expand the equation and write
out each one of those
terms now right away we notice there's
this term involving F0 0 and that's
going to equal zero CU if you look at
the Faraday answer F0 is zero so that
term goes
away what we're left with is this sum
over derivatives of fub1 0 F2 0 and F3 0
and first if we look at this term
involving partial 1 F1 0 we see that
partial 1 is the derivative with respect
to X and F10 is the X component of the
electric field so therefore that term
becomes the partial derivative of the
electric field with respect to X
likewise for the next term we have the
partial derivative in y acting on the Y
component of the electric field so we
end up with the partial derivative of
the Y component of the electric field
with respect to
Y and you can probably see where this is
going because the third term we're going
to have the partial derivative of the Z
component of the electric field with
respect to Z Now on the right hand side
of the equation we recognize that j0 is
the speed of light times the charge
density row so when we plug that into
the equation the speed of light cancels
out with the 1/ speed of light and we
end up with 4 pi times the charge
density now all we have to do is
recognize that the left hand side of
this equation is the definition of the
Divergence of the electric field and we
can write this equation as the
Divergence of the electric field equals
4 Pi * the electric charge density and
that is none other than gauss's law for
electricity wow wow what a deal it's all
coming together so now we've got three
Maxwell's equations by the way this
equation you can also write in integral
form using the same math that we saw
earlier with gauss's law for magnetism
just apply the uh Divergence Theorem and
you'll end up writing it integral form
all right so now we've got three out of
the four Maxwell's equations and to get
the last equation all we have to do now
is look at the new equals 1 2 and 3
components so here we're going to have
three three equations in parallel and if
you like you can think about this as an
equation involving three vectors and the
way I've written it here emphasizes the
three Vector
perspective now let's go ahead and look
at this term partial mu F mu1 and just
go ahead and expand that out unpacking
the Einstein summation convention and
just expanding it as a sum over the
different possibilities for me and you
get partial Z f01 Plus dot dot dot and
right away we see that one of of those
terms is f11 and if we look at the
Faraday tensor we see that f11 equals z
so that term goes away which is nice and
then if we follow the same procedure for
that second component the partial mu F
mu2 again we expand it as a sum over the
different possibilities for me and now
we find that there is a term including
F22 which is zero so that term cancels
out finally we're going to go ahead and
write out that third component partial
me f mu3 expand that as a over the
different possibilities from you and we
see that the f33 component cancels out
now then if we take that top equation
and we expand each of those partial
derivative F terms in terms of the sums
that we've just written out we can write
out this equation with the vector on one
side and a vector on the other side and
here again we can use the definition of
the four gradient as well as the Faraday
tensor to translate this into an
equation involving derivatives of
different components of the electric and
magnetic fields first of all if you look
at the derivative terms you can see that
partial 0 is 1 / C partial T likewise
partial 1 is partial X partial 2 is
partial Y and partial 3 is partial Z and
then if you look at the various
components of the Faraday tensor that
start with zero so f01 f02 f03 you'll
see there the negative components of the
electric field and if you look at the
terms that don't start with zero so F21
F31 F12 F32 f13 f23 you see that these
are the components of the magnetic field
and some of them have a minus sign and
some of them
don't so now on the left side of the
equation we have this Vector involving a
whole bunch of derivatives of components
of the electric and magnetic fields
let's go ahead and separate that out
into a vector with just the magnetic
stuff and a vector with just the
electric stuff and now if you look at
that magnetic term you'll recognize that
as the curl of the magnetic field B and
if you look at the electric term you'll
recognize that as -1 C time the time
derivative of the electric field e and
what do you know sure enough this is
ampers law with Maxwell's Edition
wow and that brings us to four out of
four Maxwell's equations and by the way
if you want to convert this to the
integral form you can use the same
methods that we used for Faraday's law
of induction well okay you know what now
we have actually done something very
profound and if you've made this far in
the video you should be proud of
yourself because you've leveled up
because now you know where Maxwell's
equations come from you don't have to
take it on faith anymore you don't have
to say okay these are like these sacred
equations that I just have to believe no
well okay you still have to believe in
local phase symmetry of the D field but
that's like one thing and now you see
where these four things come from so
philosophically this is uh the next
level you know I know in our culture
it's kind of fashionable to think of
physics as like this dry boring esoteric
sterile Endeavor but this is actually a
thoroughly shamanic exercise like when
you really incorporate this math and
these ideas into your world view it's
amazing you're like wow all these
different electromagnetic phenomena
arise from the simple principle like are
we living in a kaleidoscope I mean what
is going on here why it's like I'm at a
loss for words so that's my cue to move
on to the next topic oh I almost forgot
so in addition to the inhomogeneous
Maxwell's equation
the same equation that we just derived
with the partial mu F mual 4i CJ new
well it's kind of a tongue twister well
anyway it also implies that electric
charge is locally conserved and local
charge conservation is just the idea
that the rate of change of charge
density somewhere in space is going to
be balanced by the Divergence of
currents at that location in space this
actually has a very intuitive
interpretation uh all this is to say
that if you want to remove charge from
some location it has to flow out of that
location or conversely if you want the
amount of charge somewhere to increase
it has to flow in to make it
increase so you can think of local
charge conservation as a way of saying
that charge cannot
teleport and what's really neat is if
you look at our relativistic notation we
can write this a lot more simply as
partial new J new equals z and here
because new appears twice we're summing
over that term so so in other words
partial 0 j 0 plus partial 1 J1 plus
partial 2 J2 plus partial 3 j3 equal 0
so that's just another way of writing
the condition of local charge
conservation and you'll notice that this
is a loren invariant property all
inertial observers are going to agree
that this quantity is zero because the
expression combines the covariant for
gradient with the contravariant current
so to prove that electric charge is
locally conserved we just have to prove
that partial new J new equals z
and to do that we can take our equation
and now what we want to do is we want to
substitute that J new into the equation
partial new J new and see if it actually
does equal zero so when we write out
partial new J new we can write that as
partial new C over4 pi partial mu F mu
new so many mu's and news it's hard to
say anyway so we can pull out the C
over4 pi as a constant and now what we
have is the derivative of a derivative
of an F mu new and because both new and
mu are repeated in this term this
expression is actually a sum over all of
those different indices so we're going
to have 16 terms here and each one of
those 16 terms is going to have the form
of a second derivative of a component of
the Faraday tensor and as it turns out
because the order of the differentiation
doesn't matter and because of the anti-
symmetry of the Faraday tensor that is
because F mu new equal F new mu these 16
terms are all going to cancel out in
pairs and the result is going to be zero
so for example consider the case where
mu and mu can be 0 and one or 1 and zero
in that case you have two terms
depending on which one is one and which
one is zero and you can look at that as
partial 0 partial 1 F1 0 plus partial 1
partial 0
f01 but because partial 0 partial 1 has
the same effect as partial 1 partial 0
and because f01 equals negative F10 we
can write the second term there simply
as negative partial 0 partial 1 F10
which cancels out with the first term
and so you end up with zero and if you
try that with all the different
combinations of mu and new you'll see
that they all cancel out in pairs and so
yes in fact this expression is zero and
therefore electric charge is locally
conserved this derivation is interesting
it's sort of an implicit constraint you
know because we set out to say okay we
have have some sigh and we're going to
calculate what must be true about a in
order to relax the QED lrin for that
sigh so it's a little bit strange that
what we have now is actually a
constraint on J which because J is born
of SII that that's also a constraint on
Sai um this constraint is required in
order for the consistency of these
equations to all hold together you know
and from our current Viewpoint this
might seem like something of a
mysterious result but if you're
interested you can derive this from
scratch using global U1 phase symmetry
of the rock field as the continuous
Symmetry and plugging that into no's
theorem and that'll give you a proof
that probability for current is
conserved but it's philosophically the
same basic thing so well anyway I just
mentioned that in passing but um yeah
that's another cool result is that
electric charge must be locally
conserved all right so we've come a long
way now we've got all the Maxwell's
equations and we've even got local
charge conservation but we still haven't
yet derived the Loren's Force law so
let's do
that all right well so to derive the
Loren's Force law all we have to do is
apply the oiler lron equation to a
relativistic particle that is immersed
in V4 potential now for this derivation
we're going to take as a starting point
the oiler lrange equation for a
relativistic particle as well as the
lran for a relativistic particle in a
four
potential and from these principles
we're going to be able to derive the
Loren's Force law but first let me say a
few words about where these principles
come from all right let me put this
little note down here so too is the
particle's proper time that is the time
as measured by the particle and X mu is
the contravariant for position so X mu
is a function of too represents the
particle path through SpaceTime and if
you take the total derivative of x mu
with respect to TOA that gives you the
particles four velocity and we're going
to write that as U mu Griffith uses Ada
for the four velocity but we'll use U
either one is fine so if you're
interested in the derivation of the
oiler lrange equation for the
relativistic particle you can pause the
video here and explore this in detail
but I'm just going to gloss over this
for now for a couple of reasons first of
all this derivation is remarkably
similar to what we've already done for
the inhomogeneous Maxwell equations it
relies on the same basic concept of
putting nudges on the equations and
integrating and integrating by pars and
taking out the boundary terms and anyway
at the end of the day remember how the
oiler L Grange equation is like a
microscopic version of the macroscopic
principle of least action so you know in
physics you often just start with the
oiler the grung equation and it's
understood that this comes out of the
principle of least action so we're just
going to go ahead and start off with the
oil Grange equation and in the interest
of time we're not going to reiterate the
process that gets you from the principle
of least action to the oiler lrange
equation okay then moving on to the lran
let's first take a look at the Mass term
so the mass term in the lran is going to
be - 12 M * unu unu and what that is is
just - 1/2 time the masstimes this Loren
invariant quantity that has to do with
the four velocity of the
particle now to derive this in a
rigorous way is actually surprisingly
complicated and tedious especially in
the form that I'm currently showing it
in with this quadratic form in the 1/2
there's a lot of nuance and details
behind there and I worry that we'd go
off on too much of a tangent if I try to
derive that here so let me just say a
few things in passing the first is that
this Mass term is about as simple as it
can possibly be you know there's I mean
if you look at what it's made out of
there's a factor of M which okay yeah we
expect a factor of M and then there's a
len invariant quantity you knew you knew
made out of the four velocity and okay
so that kind of makes sense too by the
way that quantity equals the speed of
light squared but it's worthwhile to
write it out in this form so that we can
derive equations of motion from the
lran okay well anyway if you're curious
about where this term comes from there's
actually a really good Wikipedia page
called relativistic Ling mechanics and
that goes into a lot more detail so
check that out if you're interested but
for now let's just go ahead and accept
that term and we'll notice also it Bears
no resemblance to the Loren Force law so
even if you're a little skeptical of
where does this come from well it
doesn't have like e plus v crossb in
there so we're not like sneaking in the
Loren's Force law so I hope it's not too
unsatisfying that I didn't provide a
rigorous derivation of this term um
right now okay well but to make it up to
you I will provide a decently rigorous
derivation of where the interaction term
in the lran comes from so to get this
term what we do is we start off with the
interaction term in the lran density of
quantum electr Dynamics and as we've
seen that term is just netive Q cyar
Gamma New SI a
new now if we write that in terms of the
four current which is J newal CQ SAR
Gamma New SI
then we can write the interaction term
of the QED lran as1 C J new a new and
now what we have to do is we have to
take this to the classical limit in the
sense of localizing the particle zooming
out thinking about like the big picture
of okay we're in some place and there's
some four potential and relative to the
changes in the four potential our
particle is very small and very
localized and so if we want to get the
Lan that is the integral of the lran
density over space time for the
interaction term all we have to do is
integrate over space this 1 / C J new a
new now while we're doing that we can
notice well okay- 1/ C that's a constant
pull that outside the integral but also
because the particle is going to be
sharply localized the four potential is
not going to vary from one side of the
particle to the other right if we're
dealing with basically a point particle
then there's just going to be some value
of a new there and so we can pop the a
new outside of the integral as
well then if you think about what it
means to integrate the four current over
some volume of space you see that that
ends up being just the charge of the
particle times its four velocity and so
if we put the expression Q new into the
equation we end up with the interaction
term for the lran of negative Q over C
you new a new and so here we can see
that this interaction term does follow
directly from the lran of quantum
electrodynamics and that's really the
important thing right philosophically if
we want to show that electromagnetism
comes out of local phase symmetry we
want to use all of the ideas we've
developed so far and in particular if
we're wondering how the electric and
magnetic fields are going to push around
a Charged particle then it's important
that at least for sure the interaction
term that we're using in our lran is
going to be the classical limit of the
interaction term in the lran density of
quantum
electrodynamics all right well let's go
ahead and solve the oiler lrange
equation first by evaluating the left
hand side
on that side of the equation we have the
partial derivative of the lren with
respect to the four position and if we
plug in the lren we can write that as
the partial derivative with respect to X
mu of the lren which contains a mass
term and also an interaction term by the
way sometimes you'll see the lran
multiplied through by a minus sign so
that these terms are both positive
you'll see that in some derivations and
that's doable because imagine if you
multiply your lran globally by some
constant that's not going to change
anything about the governing equations
that the lran gives you because when you
optimize it a global scale constant is
just going to wash out it doesn't have
any effect on anything so but anyway
we'll just go ahead and keep the minus
signs in for Simplicity all right well
now to evaluate this expression first
let's go ahead and start off with the
mass term that I've highlighted here in
Orange we'll make the observation that
the partial derivative of the particle's
covariant four velocity with respect to
the contravariant position is Z and
notice in this expression the 1/2 and
the M are constants so they're just
going to multiply the derivative so when
you think about this derivative you can
ignore those they are not really
relevant or interesting and when you
take the derivative of the rest of the
expression be in mind that the four
velocity here is to be evaluated as a
function of too the proper time and so
the partial derivative with respect to X
mu is actually going to be zero all
right and now if we shift our attention
over to the interaction term which I've
highlighted in green we can see that
when we take a derivative with respect
to X mu q c that's a constant of course
but also U new as a function of Tao is
going to be a constant relative to the
partial derivative of x mu and so we can
write that expression as Q over c u new
partial a new partial X mu so at the end
of the day what we end up getting for
this expression is that the partial
derivative of the lran with respect to X
mu is Q over C * U partial a new partial
X mu so that is the left hand side of
the oiler lrange
equation moving on over to the right
hand side we want to take the total
derivative with respect to the proper
time of the partial derivative of the
Lan with respect to the four
velocity so let's plug in the definition
of the lran and once again we'll focus
first on the mass term and then we'll
focus on the interaction term and first
we'll evaluate the derivative with
respect to the four velocity and never
mind for the moment the derivative with
respect to too so evaluating the
derivative with respect to the four
velocity of the mass term we recognize
that -2 m is a constant so we pull that
out and then the term you knew you knew
we're going to go ahead and split that
up using the product rule and at this
point I'll just go ahead and drop the
parenthesis as a function of too and now
if we look at the interaction term when
we take the derivative relative to the
four velocity we see that Q over C is
going to be a constant so that comes out
of the derivative
and we also notice that a new as a
function of X is going to be a constant
relative to the partial derivative with
respect to U mu and so that's going to
come out as well as a constant and
finally the U new term that's going to
stay in the derivative and so we end up
with the partial derivative of uu with
respect to U muu okay now if we look
back to the mass term let's go ahead and
evaluate the expression that we got as a
result of the product rule and we'll
notice here that these two terms look
very very similar
and also the partial derivative looks
like one of those things where it's
either zero or one and so it's going to
turn off most of the indices except one
and so yeah if you look at the partial
derivative turns out that the partial
derivative of U new with respect to U mu
is going to be one only when new equals
mu and so therefore that whole
expression reduces to the specific case
of U mu all right and likewise the same
thing is exactly true when it comes to
the other term but here let's go ahead
and switch the indices around so we have
an upstairs un New Times the derivative
of the downstairs un new and we can just
go ahead and switch those around so
instead we can have the downstairs you
New Times the derivative of the upstairs
you new because in both cases the minus
signs end up working out the same way
and then here we have the same
expression as before and so we recognize
that as U mu so in that expression in
this sum of the green and the orange
terms we end up having two U
mu so we multiply that through it
cancels out the 1/2 we pull the negative
sign outside the time derivative and we
end up with the negative time derivative
of M * U mu plus something plus the
interaction something so what is that
interaction something so if we examine
this derivative we also see a partial
derivative of U newu with respect to U
mu and that's usually going to be zero
but it'll be one when mu equals mu and
so that term has the effect of
converting that expression into simply Q
over C A
mu all right so we're getting somewhere
the equation is starting to
simplify so here let's go ahead and
recognize the term muu mu as the kinetic
for momentum
pm and now let's go ahead and split out
these terms in the derivatives so we'll
start off with the negative derivative
of the momentum with respect to the
proper time minus whatever happens when
we apply the derivative to the
interaction term so let's go ahead and
do that well first of all the Q overc
that purple term that's a constant so
that's going to be on the outside of the
derivative and the real question is what
is the derivative ative of a mu with
respect to the proper time of the
particle now here this is tricky because
it's not the partial derivative of a mu
with respect to time what it is is the
total amount of change of a mu that the
particle sees as it's moving through
space time and so to calculate this
total derivative with respect to the
proper time we have to imagine from the
particle point of view what changes does
it see as its clock ticks forward and so
what that proper time derivative is
going to be is the product of the
partial derivative of a mu with respect
to X New Times the total derivative of x
new with respect to Tao and by the way I
know you're not supposed to pretend that
derivatives are fractions but if you
pretend it's a fraction this kind of
makes sense you know well anyway we can
recognize the total derivative of x new
with respect to Tao as the definition of
the four velocity you new and therefore
we can write this expression having
taken the total proper time derivative
as Q over C partial a mu partial X new *
U
new so now that we have the left hand
side and the right hand side of the
oiler lrange equations we can stick them
together and now if you look at it you
can kind of parse it up and see like
what are the different things in this
equation we've got some Q over C's we've
got some u news we've got some partial
derivatives and stuff and so we can
write this equation in a cleaner way we
can move the blue term over to the left
and the yellow term over to the right
and factor out the orange term and
factor out the purple term and we end up
with an expression for the total
derivative of the kinetic for momentum
with respect to the proper time in terms
of charge and in terms of partial
derivatives of a and in terms of the
four velocity of the particle so that's
cool that really feels like we're
getting to the Loren Force law that
feels like we're on the right track and
you know what's really neat is check
this out so look at that term in the
brackets we have partial mu a mu minus
partial mu a mu well that's just our
good old friend the farad tensor F muu
so we can write this equation as Q over
c f muu new wait hold up Q over c f muu
you man this is tough to say
qfu okay so it ends up being just the
charge of the particle divided by the
speed of light times the field strength
tensor multiplied by the four velocity
of the particle and as it turns out this
is the Loren Force law in relativistic
notation and if of course we're going to
unpack this in a second but before we do
I just want to emphasize the Simplicity
of this
equation what we have on the left side
is basically a Time derivative of
momentum so that's like the definition
of force and what we have on the right
side is kind of the simplest thing it
could be I mean there's a factor of
charge there's a speed of light to make
the units make sense there's the field
strength tensor which is you know a
relatively simple object that we can
make out of the various ingredients of
our Theory and we also have the four
velocity of the particle you know so
this is not like some crazy complicated
equation and also it's more elegant than
what you normally see for the Loren
Force law where you have that term with
the electric field and the cross product
between velocity and the magnetic field
and it's like what's going on there and
what are these fields and why does
velocity come into the picture it's like
okay in the relativistic version of the
equation these kinds of questions don't
really come up it's more like oh wow
look at this neat little elegant result
so anyway what we have here is yet
another example of relativistic notation
making the laws of electromagnetism look
a lot more concise and elegant and
unified okay so now we're going to see
how the Loren's Force law pops out of
this relativistic equation DPM D equals
Q over c f muu
fuu so first what we'll do is let's go
ahead and expand that term involving the
fs and the M's and new and 's and we'll
just write that out as a sum over each
possibility for new because those
indices are repeated so we're summing
over new
and you can see that what we have here
is an equation for the Muth component of
the proper time derivative of the four
momentum so let me put a bunch of stuff
here for reference and we'll go ahead
and translate this into an equation
about forces in XY and Z first off let's
go ahead and consider the mual 1
component of the equation so we just
write out the equation and we replace mu
with
one now if we look at all the stuff on
the right we we can see that those
Faraday tensor terms are going to be an
electric field and a zero and some
magnetic field terms and the components
of the four velocity are going to be the
Loren Factor gamma times speed of light
for the time component and negative
velocity components for the 1 two and
three components and the minus sign
comes from the fact that this is the
covariant for
velocity okay so if you substitute those
into the equation we get the equation
shown here and I've gone ahead and
pulled out the Loren Factor outside of
the equation to clean it up a little bit
and now what we're going to do is we're
going to pull the gamma factor that
Loren Factor over to the left hand side
of the equation so we're going to have 1
over gamma * the derivative of the X
component of the momentum with respect
to the proper time and then if we write
out all these blue terms and clean it up
a little bit we see that that equals
some expression involving electric and
magnetic fields and components of the
Velocity so this is looking very
promising I think we're on the right
track now to make sense of this equation
we have to use the fact that a
differential step in coordinate time is
going to be the Loren Factor gamma times
a differential step in the proper time
and if we make that substitution into
the left hand side of this equation we
get an expression for the derivative of
the X component of momentum with respect
to the coordinate time which is exactly
the force in the X Direction on the
particle so that's awesome it's like
this is the Moment of Truth we're
finally going to see if we get the right
Force so now take the right hand side of
that equation go ahead and distribute
through a 1 over C so that's going to
cancel out the C on the ex and that's
going to give us a 1 / C on the magnetic
and velocity terms and then we're going
to recognize bz V Yus B VZ that is the X
component of the cross product of the
velocity and the magnetic field just by
pattern matching right just by looking
at the definition of the cross product
and so this is indeed the X component of
the Loren Force law wow we've done it
well okay let's just make sure so let's
repeat the argument with the mual 2
component and we can see that with
exactly the same reasoning we can derive
the Y component of the force and yes
indeed that ends up being the Y
component of the Loren Force law okay so
two out of three I really think this is
going to be the Loren Force law let's go
to Mu equals 3 and again same exact
reasoning and as you can see if you
follow through these equations yep we
end up with the Z component of the Loren
Force law now we pull these all together
into a vector
and what do you know there it is the
Loren Force law derived from local phase
symmetry of the D field wow how good
does it feel to finally get the
Maxwell's equations that's one thing but
now also the Loren Force law that pretty
much completes the big picture of
showing how youan symmetry gives rise to
electromagnetism
so man it feels good to finally uh get
to this point in the video okay hey well
before we wrap up there's a couple of
miscellaneous things I wanted to say
that didn't really fit into the flow of
the video but are kind of interesting
little tangents so I want to mention
those briefly and I want to talk about
some Mysteries too while we're here um
because you know physics is not done yet
there are still open questions and
problems and Mysteries and it's
important to reflect on those too and
you know now that we've done all this
math and stuff we're in a really good
position to wax philosophical about what
it all means so we'll do that for a few
minutes before we get going here
so in this video I have intentionally
avoided the topic of the covariant
derivative but I know that if I don't
mention it at least in passing I'm going
to get a million comments like hey why
didn't you talk about the covariant
derivative like how can you talk about
gauge Theory without talking about the
covariant derivative so okay let me just
say a couple of words about it first of
all I think that when you're first
getting into electromagnetism as a gauge
Theory you should not worry about the
covariant derivative this is a concept
that I think hides more than it
simplifies and when you're trying to get
oriented in all of this and kind of feel
your way around and get familiar with
stuff uh in my opinion the covariant
derivative is kind of a cryptic thing
that doesn't give you a ton of benefits
until later on especially if you're
thinking in terms of fiber bundles and
really getting into it but at first it's
not super useful in my opinion well
anyway it is something you should be
aware of and the idea is basically just
to redefine the derivative operator
relative to the four potential so you
can say that capital D mu is just going
to be partial mu plus I * Q over H Bar C
A mu and and when you do this then you
can write the QED lran in a simpler way
where you have a capital D instead of a
partial and you don't have to explicitly
write the interaction term because it's
been absorbed into the definition of the
covariant derivative anyway look take it
or leave it you don't have to use it if
you don't want to I like to write out
the interaction term but I can see if
you're working with fiber bundles or
something where like the interaction
term is kind of unnecessary to write and
you want to think about it in a more
elegant way okay I get it I'm not look
I'm not hating on the covariant
derivative I'm just saying it's kind
kind of optional at least from an
introductory perspective so okay oh I
have to say a few words about the gauge
and variance of the four potential and
how it relates to the local phase
symmetry of sigh so you know in
classical electromagnetism if you have
some electric field and some magnetic
field the four potential can be modified
while still describing the same
situation so it's kind of redundant like
uh there can be multiple different for
potentials that correspond to the same
electric and magnetic fields so the
classic example is that voltage can be
raised or lowered by some uniform amount
without changing anything because you
can Define ground to be whatever you
want it to be right so what matters is
the change in voltage from one place to
another it's not really the absolute
voltage itself so that is like a classic
example of gaug invariance but that
concept can be generalized and actually
if you take the four potential you can
add to it the four gradient of any
arbitrary scalar field you can have a
scalar field Lambda that's flopping
around arbitrarily and you can show
using the definitions of e and B in
terms of derivatives of a that this is
in fact the case and one of the
questions you have when you first learn
electromagnetism is why like that's
weird that the four potential is loose
like that you know it's like where does
that come from but from the perspective
of gauge Theory we can see that it comes
directly from the local phase symmetry
of s so for example if you multiply s by
e to the I Theta where Theta is some
function of space time
then as we've seen earlier in the video
the four potential is going to have to
transform and pick up a factor of
negative h c q * the 4 gradient of theta
but let's go ahead and absorb negative h
c q * Theta simply as Lambda because
that's just a scalar right so then the
transformation is a mu becomes a mu plus
the four gradient of Lambda but that's
exactly what the gauge invariance or the
gauge freedom of the four potential is
anyway and so the lesson there is the
gauge freedom in the four potential that
you learn about In classical
electromagnetism is literally just the
same thing as the local phase Symmetry
and sigh viewed from the point of view
of a so that's like one more thing
that's not a mystery if you start with
the perspective of local phase symmetry
you see that it's just like how it
is so now I'd like to talk about the
mystery of the fine structure
constant so one thing that gauge Theory
doesn't tell us at all is why Q should
have the value it has right why the
charge should have the value it has now
it's a little bit subtle and nuanced
because from a purely symmetry oriented
perspective we can say well naturally
wouldn't it make sense if Q was one and
then we just had some weird constant on
the photon's kinetic contribution to the
lran but then you see that it's the same
mystery because then the question
becomes well why does that constant have
the value it has but at the end of the
day the mysterious ratio is the ratio
between the strength of the
electromagnetic interaction and the
energy of a
Photon and so one really clean way to
look at this ratio is to just make a
fraction and on top you put the energy
required to overcome the electrostatic
repulsion of two electrons so if you
bring them together from infinitely far
away and you pull them together to some
distance D then the energy required to
do that in gaussian units is q^2 over D
and then we're going to divide that
energy by the energy of a single Photon
whose wife length is 2 pi times that
distance or in other words the angular
wavelength is the distance that we've
brought the electrons together and the
energy of that given by the plank
relation is HC over Lambda and so when
you simplify this you end up with q^ s
over H Bar C in gausian units in SI
units you also have a 4 Pi Epsilon KN
but that's okay regardless of your
system of units when you calculate the
value of that expression you get a
constant and the constant is this weird
mysterious number that has no units it's
just
0.7 297 35256 43 although usually people
remember the value of its reciprocal
which is about
137.0 35 something and but what nobody
knows is where does this number come
from what determines this number why is
it what it is why is electromagnetism as
strong as it is no one knows and look
don't just take my word for it let's
hear what dck has to
say there is the problem
of
explaining the fine structure constant
the number
137 which plays an important role in
physics and the question is why should
it be
137 instead of some other
number that has not been explained at
all and I feel that it is necessary to
get an explanation of that before one
will make an important
advance in understanding atomic
theory so now that we've seen that local
phase symmetry gives rise to
electromagnetism we can ask the question
of what happens if we break local phase
Symmetry and so for example this is what
happens in a superconduct conductor but
don't worry it's not as destructive as
it sounds actually the local U1 phas
symmetry still applies to the laws of
physics in a superconductor but the
superconducting ground state is going to
pick out a phase and thereby effectively
break the
Symmetry and as a result you have
photons acquiring an effective Mass via
the Anderson higs mechanism consequently
magnetic fields become expelled and you
get the mner effect and you get lossless
flow of currents without any resistance
that can persist indefinitely and it's
like pretty crazy stuff so but that's
like the exception that proves the rule
right so if we've seen how local phase
symmetry blossoms into electromagnetism
you can understand how breaking local U
face symmetry is going to break
electromagnetism and you can do a lot of
cool stuff with that so we'll talk about
that in a future video and we'll explore
symmetry in superconductors uh and then
going the other way as it turns out our
universe is kind of broken uh because
the U1 symmetry of
electromagnetism is just a fragment of a
more primordial more General symmetry
that electromagnetism used to have back
in the good old days by good old days I
mean the first Pico second after the big
bang before the higs field done went and
took on a non-zero vev well well anyway
you know ever since then it's sort of
like our entire universe has been 75%
superconducting and a superconductor
gets you the final 25% to become 100%
superconducting but uh the 3/4
superconducting nature of our reality is
Manifest in the fact that um three of
the four original electromagnetic or
technically Electro weak bosons have now
acquired mass in much the same way that
photons acquire mass in a superconductor
and so those are now known as the w and
z bosons that mediate the weak nuclear
interaction and meanwhile the photon
which escaped Mass Free from the higs
field is now you know responsible for
electromagnetism so that's a trip uh
turns out electromagnetism and the weak
nuclear force are really two sides of
the same coin but uh that's a story for
another day but it's definitely
fascinating we will return to that topic
someday hey one more philosophical thing
I want to leave you with is uh when we
add local phase symmetry to the laws of
physics epistemically are we adding
something or are we taking something
away right the burden of these ideas the
structure that we're taking for granted
does that grow as we put in the Symmetry
or does it
shrink does our model become more
contrived or more elegant honestly I
have no idea I don't know and think
about that for a while and you'll
realize wait a minute symmetry
redundancy active passive
Transformations what is going on here
like what and that indeed is the
question what like even is going on here
in this
universe will we ever know hey thanks
for watching I really appreciate it this
YouTube thing has been a lot of fun so
thank you all who have been involved
shout out to my supporters on patreon
really grateful for all of you and I
hope you all learn something today and I
hope you all had a great time so have an
awesome day and I'll see you in the next
one
