in this episode this was the ego book
was a result of like a
10year process or like a very kind of
long process of studying altruism
actually and right when I started
studying
altruism I immediately got into these
weird self-interest types which is like
there's group altruism kin
altruism uh reciprocal altruism and I
did some studies about reciprocal
altruism about how you'd think this
would work but people seem to want to
not get things back so like for for
instance if I was to say hey hey mate uh
I'll come over and um or could you come
and help me put my car together versus
like uh versus that might be more
appealing than could you come over and
help me put my car together then I'll go
over and fix your bike if it breaks down
like for some reason this is less
appealing to people even though
concretely you will be getting my
services as a bike repair person and
it's an exchange but people would rather
do something for nothing so this was
like the first kind of thing that I said
that's kind of weird like so there's
this problem with Game Theory which is
Game Theory says what's the most
rational agents you know yeah rational
agents but as as it kind of turns out in
Vivo um there's different processes
going on and you could say these
processes are broadly psychoanalytic in
character and that self-interest really
you know has to go into feeling and
intuition and that's why the book starts
with like dreams as the most reflexive
intuitive core so you can take that and
kind of see this example of uh you know
group altruism or kin altruism like I
will do this because you're a part of my
friend group or a professional group or
a family right um that is more powerful
than I will do it because I will get
something concretely in return hey
everyone welcome to my conversation with
the writer and psychotherapist Elliot
rosenstock and uh apologies for the
background noise it is extremely windy
here today in Melbourne uh leaving that
aside Elliott is the author of two books
uh one of them being J in the clinic and
the other his latest book being uh the
ego and its hyper State and Elliot is an
interesting character if I could say um
he's working on on this broader let's
call it his existential project of
bringing life in Psychology he calls it
hyp psychology but he prefers just
holding it psychology as such where
instead of making psychology this sort
of taxonomic or categorical discipline
where you categorize you know a person's
got ADHD or person's got anxiety OCD or
whatever categories we create we bring
in the broader question of life life
into the practice and even theory of
psychology um and he does this through
bringing in philosophy specifically the
work of Hegel and then the Mana
psychology of
Freud and when I was reading his work uh
well reading the books which I have to
admit I'm still getting through oh I'm
still trying to Gro in some sense
because I haven't really got my head
around all the concepts yet but when I
was reading his books and also listening
to his other podcast and public
interviews one thing I felt intuitively
was that he's trying to bring in the the
the the the the idea or the notion of
human dignity back into the field of
psychology which for me at least in some
sense has become a very mechanical
almost auman alien discipline which
ironically attempts to study the uh the
human subject and it doesn't feel like
it's studying human beings anymore but
rather these abstract
concepts of of what a human being is
through different uh yeah psychological
categories as I did mention and I felt
like he's trying to bring in this idea
of human dignity and life back into
psychology and when when when I did say
that during the conversation I feel like
it really clicked with OT 2 or or I
wouldn't say clicked it rather I could
see that the idea of bringing in dignity
he he almost like let up he really liked
that idea and that for me was a good
thing because I I I felt like that's
kind of what I felt too while reading
his work um and also on top of that he's
never explicitly use that term in his in
his writing uh and I even say which is
one reason why even though I do talk to
a lot of psychologists people and
psychology psychology has never been an
interest of mine uh it's always been
Theory and philosophy because for me
philosophy still goes to that question
of life whereas psychology it's become a
bit more of a a tepid vanilla sort of
dis where you're trying to just
categorize people and for me that
doesn't really do much or at least I
don't find that interesting in any case
uh before we get to the conversation as
I tend to do a bit of a formal
introduction to Elliot Elliot rosenstock
is a psychotherapist and I should add
writer he is the editor of the young
freudians magazine an experimental
philosophy and psychology Journal that
provides ideas on everything from new
ideas and psychodynamic therapy to Eco
Theory he's the author of je in the
clinic and ego and its hyper State and I
probably should mention uh the links to
both those books are in the description
down below uh in fact the J the clinic
you can find it on A's Twitter or just
email him and he'll send you a free copy
he is very uh generous in that way let's
say without further Ado here's my
conversation with Elliot rosenstock I
think I'm still getting my head around
some of the roson talking Concepts you
know um um right like like for example
how do you define or how do you describe
your concept of the ego yeah a part of
me went into hiiga I was thinking of is
this are you talking about something
like the hiigaran
design uh I appreciate you making the
effort because to be honest a lot of
these are technical manuals for myself
really so in terms of like I really want
to get into the true process of
self-interest and it's very common for
people to pick up my books and say like
what the f are you talking about even
Sadler said Sadler said you know on the
first time through I didn't get it but
it it really needs a and Sadler's like a
uber genius who's like a expert on Hegel
and STM so like if he's having to read
it twice and Alfie bound who's written
on Hegel and jokes and he said
like like I know you know what you're
doing but I don't know what you're doing
kind of thing so like I appreciate you
making I would love it if people could
understand my system a little better and
I I have found it historically difficult
for people to pick up my system and
start um using it so I appreciate you
making the effort because it sounds like
you're making the effort to like really
get it so no than thanks I mean mate
like I'm nowhere close to what you'd
call an expert in any of these fields
I'm just a neoi but I think one thing I
do enjoy is I I certainly got it
especially from the ego book that you
could see that you're really writing it
for yourself uh and for me and
personally I think that's the best kind
of writing I enjoy like I I think that's
kind of why I even enjoy more uh you
know kindal philosophers over the more
the analytic types even though my I come
from more like an analytic philosopher
background cuz for for them I think
they've sort of already got it figured
out and they want to express it into to
to a reader whereas I find the
philosophers for them it's like an
ongoing process uh maybe but I feel like
they're trying to figure it out as they
write it
too yeah so this was the ego book was a
result of like a
10-year process uh or like a very kind
of long process of studying altruism
actually and right when I started
studying
altruism I immediately got into these
weird self-interest types which is like
there's group altruism kin
altruism uh reciprocal altruism and I
did some studies about reciprocal
altruism about how you'd think this
would work but people seem to want to
not get things back so like for for
instance if I was to say hey hey mate uh
I'll come over and um or could you come
and help me put my car together versus
like uh versus that might be more
appealing than could you come over and
help me put my car together then I'll go
over and fix your bike if it breaks down
like for some reason this is less
appealing to people even though
concretely you will be getting my
services as a bike repair person and
it's an exchange but people would rather
do something for nothing so this was
like the first kind of thing that I said
that's kind of weird like so there's
this problem with Game Theory which is
Game Theory says what's the most r
AG you know yeah rational agents but as
as it kind of turns out in Vivo um
there's different processes going on and
you could say these processes are
broadly psychoanalytic in character and
that self-interest really you know has
to go into feeling and intuition and
that's why the book starts with like
dreams as the most reflexive intuitive
core so you can take that and kind of
see this example of uh you know group
out ISM or kin altruism like I will do
this because you're a part of my friend
group or a professional group or uh
family right um that is more powerful
than I will do it because I will get
something concretely in return um so
this is why like self-interest like in
terms of ego um I think is worth
thinking of broader than kind of what's
your what's what color is your parachute
what what's your uh you know Myers
Briggs what's your attachment style all
this kind of no really and you know
there's a problem broadly with
psychology that there's a lot of
categorical knowledge in Psychology that
works as this kind of like
answer yeah um or you it's funny if you
watch Hannibal they say and then they
like they're trying to figure it out and
then they say and that means he's a pure
psychopath like
like why is that the answer it's like
the man's murdering he's doing this and
then it's like ultimately there's this
psychological category as if that says
something but I think there's not
there's not a kind of movement of
psychology into this basic kind of
process philosophy starting with like
heraclitis like in the most basic sense
process um and moving into like Hegel
which is static nothingness process
right
um it makes sense because I mean I'm a
I'm a baby hegelian I'm still figuring
out Hegel myself but one way I I see the
dialectic is that it's a movement it's
not you know it's like it's not like a
which is why you can't formalize it the
hegelian dialectic for instance and
right and one thing you you know you hit
the KN on the head there there kind of
categorizing and and creating all these
taxonomies or whatever you may call them
they they do like okay explain he's a
sociopath or like I don't know what
other stuff in the mbgs introvert
extrovert all these things you come up
you're an entp that's my Myers bgs entp
oh that explains it I'm a Leo is it a
coincidence are Leo's entps I'm a
Sagittarius I don't know what that is s
my dad's a Sagittarius actually there
you go it's all lining up it's all
lining up yeah there we go bro but you
can but you can see how you can take
these Universal Cate ories some
Universal categories have stronger
foundation and I would argue that um
categories like ego for instance which
still like I further Define but also
something I don't further Define that I
kind of take almost like directly is
condensation hey everyone editor Rahul
here while I was editing the podcast I
did realize that Elliot used this term
condensation quite a lot in our
conversation uh and so I thought it
would make sense to have a py definition
of what this term or this concept
condensation means or at least what
Elliot means by it when he uses the term
and so I messaged him and I asked for a
definition and here's what he replied
back with OT said condensation in dreams
is the dream object's property of being
motivated by past experiences wishes
anxieties and understanding of the
future or
worries all at the same time
it is the essence of surrealism's motto
more reality and the creation isn't
always intelligible right away you can
analyze it or you can extend the dream
all righty back to the podcast although
I don't talk a lot in the book but a lot
of this is based off of um the
psychoanalytic concept of condensation
which is to say I act with more purposes
than I can understand so this is also
kind of antithetical to like rational
agents I'm acting for this purpose does
it accomplish this P purpose or the
scientific method here's my hypothesis I
test it and S so and not a lot of I
would say thought has got gone into the
process of you know how we actually are
which is to say we M multiple motives
right there's lots of theories of
Multiplicity yeah yeah yeah but like
split subjects but it where's the split
because like the split is in essence
right the it's not actually this is a
lesson of being which is to say like
what do you mean by split is an Essence
split is an Essence so you have so for
instance an Essence okay so so like for
instance I'm speaking to you um there if
I logically analyze my motives I could
see a variety of oh I identify as a
therapist oh I'm being interviewed this
is kind of good oh it's an interpersonal
connection which is like like kind of
enjoyable oh it's kind of schedules my
day oh I can say to my wife oh I got a
podcast in a you so like I you know
various kind of Mo like that once I go
into that it's like you can split it so
that's a split so also conscious
unconscious there's motives I don't know
right um but it's not split in the realm
of being I would argue which is to say I
am a unit a singular kind of bias
logical unit contained um I'm a and my
actual actions is you could say it's
unmediated con condensation which is to
say I'm simply doing the thing I'm doing
right so that's not split it's not split
until I do this reflection yeah yeah I
mean in in brilliant conversation you
had with Cel last on his podcast uh you
know I Cel is like a mentor of mine now
I think I've learned so much from him
and you said something that you're more
focused on this question of life and and
that really me deeply so look we I was I
was going to get to this in the latter
part but here we are we are talking
about it right now so in fact I don't
know if this is connected to this this
idea of of split or the the the the the
living Essence not not being split but
what do you mean by you're that you're
more interested in this philosophy of
life as such so you know after we cut
out because cadel is a really nice guy
so after we stop recording cadel goes
you know maybe life is a spous Infinity
which would have been a good but then we
because you know hegel's all about if
it's a spous Infinity you drop the
category and and start thinking with a
different category right um but for life
is not a spous Infinity I would say
because for instance it is worth
thinking of myself as a like me as a
singular unit of self-interest that I
describe is in fact the tendency of life
and if you don't have that you don't I
would argue you don't have being so
Hegel is all about you know if you have
a category or a concept without being or
Essence you kind of have this empty
concept right um so I would argue that
if you if you kind of stick with you
start if you start with Essence like for
instance a scientific question is like
this is already in essence um like a
split I would argue is already in
essence if you don't start with I would
say the Freudian category of condensed
life which is to say life you can argue
as split but I would say it's simply
like condensed um that it's not a spous
Infinity in fact it's the foundation to
unfold the concept so still sticking
with hegel's meth meth method his messy
method being Essence concept I think
this is a good idea but the problem is
along these lines what you consider
spous and not spous uh is really a
matter it can be a matter of opinion and
certainly like Hegel has his own
opinions about you know Ergo British
parliamentary is not rational Prussian
monarchy is
rational but like obviously you can just
reflect on this concept on its own and
say like well monarchy has these
negative Tendencies democracy has these
negative Tendencies I'd rather have this
parliamentary system even and this kind
of can go wrong so like you can like
ultimately the concepts developed rely
on um you know where you're starting
from what Essences you're taking so when
I I for instance do groups I like I'm
very open to this process in people
which is to say like I do five dream
analysis groups thanks to thanks to the
glory of platform capitalism um no
random people they sign up and then they
they can they can join like a dream
dream group I do and they go wow this is
really called it you called it uh do
Dash therapy right yeah that's what yeah
D when I was talking about Doug like if
I was like a door
Dash I had a good yeah but yeah but like
some people go like wow I can't believe
this platform has it it's like well it
wouldn't have it unless I was you know
doing it but but I would like more
people to get this like you know deeper
skill so like in these groups um
the idea is dreams themselves are
being so the dream the idea of a dream
is it has condensed experiences wishes
anxieties that what's present in Now
problem solving for the future but also
anxieties about the future so it's it's
kind of like indeterminate if it's if
it's um an anxiety or if it's a fact and
all this presents itself in the dream
and you create this right away and you
don't know what it means so which this
is to say your subjectivity is
understanding things faster than your
psyche consciously reflects on it and
this is why people describe it as a
split you know like there's the but in
reality the split only happens um I for
oh it's embarrassing I'm forgetting the
Conan word apost Ori there it is after
you after yeah yeah after you reflect on
it so before you reflect there is no
split
no yeah there's no pre Hawk split in
some sense yeah yeah there's there's no
pre Hawk to a or whatever there only
that was a good one I saw um I saw I
every time I see this Hawk now I'm
always like I saw I saw this thing I I
took I was like I can't post that but I
was like it was like a bed and breakfast
it was called like the hawk I was like I
forget what it was called fully but I'm
just like a anyway yeah um so but the
split only happens after I reflect and
say oh I'm making two c categories now
conscious unconscious which I do never
thought of it that way I I I think in in
that sense I still do think in some
essentialist sense where for me the the
split is just like an ontological split
um and would you still say it's in some
sense ontological or are you saying the
split IM it's an ontological question
and I mean I would say
contemporary theory is theory of the
split theory of lack um Theory of Gap
this kind of like existentialist
negation right absolute recoil like xak
absolute this NE the negativity is like
in the is the main kind of thing and I
really like I think to do a basic kind
of philosophical project is maybe like
out of time a little bit which is to say
like to have a basic core ontological
idea that is an immediately critical
theory is like not really in fashion
right now um but that is kind of what
this is starting from which is there's
nothing you could say this is not about
critical theory right away this is about
ontology and epistemology right away so
there's no political message in the core
versus you I would say with xak or zupan
um or you know Slovenian school or
modern critical theory within the
ontology is a politic and they would you
know they would say like well Elliott
isn't your doesn't your I would argue
like
um in so far as like all thoughts are
you can Orient yourself towards politics
or philosophy but I would say like you
are going to miss out on the nature of
life like the category of life if you
don't understand that there isn't this
condensation uh immediacy process that
has a rationality you can take Essences
you develop Concepts but Concepts I also
like I I also think of Concepts as
smaller than being like as well which is
to say like we develop Concepts but
ultimately the concept we develop so
where's where's the real split I would
say real splits are Concepts we develop
do not in encapture the absolute hyper
state I'm talking about
right we'll get there sorry I interrupt
yeah no that's all right so like this is
like this is the thing like this
absolute hyper state object of all of
our human Mo like thinking in this big
scale it's like what how can I describe
the totality of human efforts and
motives and the actual it's like I I can
call this absolute hyper State and
ultimately um I'm a subsection of that
there's always going to be outside the
concepts I develop are within it they
have a certain amount of force and I
feel like I'm very I have a very humble
ontology right I have a my ontology is a
bit more humble with which is to say
like I'm not like considering I'm like
Ergo I'm the Revolutionary subject Ergo
these guys are the revolution it's like
well let's look at the force of your
works in your speech what does it do
what does it not do how does it how does
it interact with what already is and
what could be and this kind of thing so
it is I think it is like a properly
philosophical method it's a it has some
concrete benefits I would say also kind
of in Terms a practice of psychotherapy
which is to say Psychotherapy has to
work for All Peoples really um and I
would say this process does in so far as
the self-interest concept um and kind of
allowing people the room to develop
Concepts uh and to uh understand their
world in this kind of way which is to
say the hyper state right which is to
say people have a hyper State we have
our individual ones we have group ones
we make together there's social
structure hyper State uh you know uh
historical like hyper like in terms of
what you decide to essentialize right
which is to say as soon as you reflect
you're creating an Essence um you're not
you don't have unmediated being except
at your very core there's kind of the
unmediated so yeah so this is this is
this is like that's a broad outline of
like the ontology if you're going to
talk about like
how what do I think the world consists
of like at its core right sorry I think
I got interrupted there you said you
don't have an do you say unmediated or
mediated because hegel's whole point is
that you can't have an unmediated
experience right it there there has to
always be a mediation you know like for
example incense certainty right so is
your point that there can be an
unmediated being or did I Mis mishar you
there I would argue there is
there is a kind of unmediated being in
the form of life in the form of
condensation that's what I was thinking
yeah yeah great when we do reflect I
think Hegel has a point in so far as
like our process of reflection you could
possibly call that an essentializing in
any particular moment but I am arguing
that there is a kind of core
uh unmediated process and the character
of the unmediated process
in so far as like it's not unmediated in
so far as like it doesn't go through our
senses but we can use the concept of
unmediated to say it's so
reflexive right so for instance like I
have a dream I create a
dream uh I'm equating this with
unmediated being right so I'm I'm
equating this
with pre-election pre pre- taking the
essence of it and pre uh concept and the
reason I'm using the word
unmediated is to kind of draw this back
to uh this kind of core material of life
so I can see in maybe a technical sense
in so far as like but is it but isn't it
going through your psyche isn't it going
through there is like a category of your
like meat but I think it goes back to
the
meat right okay okay so I've got a
question uh I'm in fact I didn't tell
you this but I'm I'm writing a small
review of your book right now I'm trying
to like break down your Concepts you
know in like very in like a nerdy
definition kind of way so one thing I I
want to ask you is this Elliot is that
is is this life the philosophy of life
you speak of kind of like this nichan
way of exist existence you know pre yeah
I'm so glad you asked that no definitely
not Nisha is a moral philosopher at his
core that is he has yeah please
elaborate yeah yeah definitely not um
Nisha has this idea that certain con
Concepts like Christianity uh like
socialism are intrinsically negations of
life right so this is this is a
different idea of life so like the idea
is like ah this has been developed but
he's so so he's he even calls himself a
psychologist in places he says which and
this is why he's saying well you're
developing these Concepts out of
resentment and in fact even you know
even in the ancient world philosophy is
developed out of resentment and a lack
of power Ergo but then the next
statement is ergo they're bad and the
warrior is good but tell me why is the
warrior simply good uh why why is a guy
who doesn't do philosophy and kills
people with a sword better than a
philosopher I would say in a basic sense
that's  stupid like like I don't
I don't believe that I think if Nisha
was getting like sliced by this guy I
don't think like this is essentially
good because it's strong right it has a
certain so so like force he has a force
of an idea like say that Warrior has I
represent Sparta you know in so far as I
act I act with the Spartans and I do
that but that's like also I kind of put
it into equivalence with I would say
Christianity is a cause I'm a priest I'm
trying to spread like I don't I don't
judge like ontologically and this is
kind of why it's um like a therapy
process which is to say this is an
interest it's a Cause right so like
ultimately following the
Essences from like the dream like you
know you could describe people's
different motives like oh he's doing
this because he was beaten as a child as
a Spartan like for instance you could
say well it's not really simply
unmediated right he h he had these core
conditions but this is why it's like a
bit of an idealist philosophy which is
to say
like I put less emphasis on this sort of
cause which is to say like what is the
root cause this can this is part of the
hyper State you could say but
ultimately um in so far as somebody acts
with the kind of motive of a basic like
I'm expanding Sparta I'm expanding my
person even if he has some traumatic
reasons it's like maybe that's less
important than what he's actually doing
right um and you can you can measure
your own self say if I'm a slave in
Sparta like I'm I'm going to be like ah
well you know he was beaten and
traumatized and this is the tendency of
psychology he was traumatized you know
he was kind of like you know made a
Child Soldier uh you know you can't all
that's true but another way to look at
that is H he is the Spartan upper class
he is uh he can beat me if he wants to
does he does he join with the other oh
he seems to join with those guys and
beats that guy so he's part of this
interpersonal Network he's part of this
cause right um and maybe that's more
important so I think there is this kind
of also in so far as bringing psychology
into the actual force of like action
right so I think like this is like I
think this is necessary which is to say
to push Psychology from a kind of like
categorical understanding from a histo
history is simply the answer to into the
actual right um so I would say this you
know sometimes they try to do this in
cognitive therapy oh you know cognitive
therapy we're going to forget about the
past what are your thoughts I'm thinking
this what are your actions what are your
but this doesn't really say enough right
oh how do you feel I feel kind of
stressed and they they it still kind of
ultimately relies on these categorical
trauma kind of stuff but it doesn't
really it doesn't ever get to the point
where it conceptually understands what's
happening so like I kind of I'm kind of
writing a book now uh which is this is
which is titled hyper psychology yeah
I'm
yeah this is the big project right oh
yeah you watch the cadal thing so hyper
psych and like the idea is I say hypers
psychology only really to say psychology
which is to say like what is psych what
should psychology consist of like it
should consist of these actual forces I
can conceptualize the present I can
understand the forces of the present I
can understand the forces of the past
and I can understand forces in the
future in a more actual way so the idea
is we are getting to like a deep I I am
like positing this is like a deeper
rational way to understand uh the world
so it's not simply speculative like like
the highest form is the highest form of
being art is the highest form of being
class war right I mean is the highest
form of being uh Guist or is it your
family is that the highest form of being
right um and I'm ultimately
arguing if you want to understand why
you think any of those you should start
you can you should start from the dream
really in terms of the multiple motives
which I am calling unmediated right in
so far as it's it's it's it's probably
better to say
pre-mediated I see like you're
pre-reflective pre-mediated I see yeah
it might might even be able to say pre
because I would say the prime mediation
is the essentializing yeah is this
essentializing an actual this because
this is like you know the ego the idea
is the ego takes these different forms
it can't be captured by a personality
type or a category it takes the the It
ultimately takes the form of actual
Force right and ego this is why in the
book it's like ego as exact math right
so this is to say like ego is not my
concept ego is like there's a kind of
exact math of the ego hypothetically
that can be rationally
understood um that's that is kind of
like there's there's this core idea
there so I think like maybe I think
nominally more than Hegel which is to
say like there is like a truth of the
thing that maybe I can't get to fully
the truth of the thing this is like
almost contient style thought of being
but yeah um but there is like this is to
say like there is I mean this is what
schopenhauer made fun of Hegel for which
is like schopenhauer says what about
this scientific thing or and Hegel would
like not know and schopenhauer would
just kind of like n neigh people don't
say n n they would just like n nigh on
them be like you don't know anything
about science you've picked up maybe
something about math but um so this is
to say there is kind of a science of
being right there is a kind of being
that we're not necessarily in touch with
and so like I could say if I could
hypothetically have a super computer
attached to me that followed every
single motive and calculated every
action via my kind of categories of
cause and like all this kind of stuff um
maybe we could get something close to
like a mathematical calculation of
different categories and how much force
this but I I I really think like that
would be an impossible task to like
parse out things in this different way
in terms of like how much is it working
towards how much are you influenced by
this cause in the world like how much
are you speaking about this particular
cause in the world so anyway so for this
for this theory of yours again sorry
naive question how do you account the
frodan death
drive right so this is a
concept the the so first of all yeah
Freudian death Freudian Death Drive is a
historically developed concept by for
sure y okay yeah I would say the concept
of Death
Drive I equate towards the concept of
splitting more so okay different people
different people understand or or not
splitting I would say disarticulation so
if you go to the if you go to the
elements of self-interest
right the opposite Aros so we we should
talk Aeros as well as death drive right
because they their Concepts those are
like these two primary drives of Freud
so Aeros has the oceanic quality right
and he writes a lot a lot of things have
an appeal because of the oceanic quality
uh and a lot of times Concepts can work
like this Con so Concepts take self
other like for instance we are two
different people right I have a life you
have a life but by the concept of
psychology we unmediated that isn't that
interesting so this is like this is the
oceanic effect of uh you know not not
coming on you but like of oceanic effect
of AOS right in a in a broad sense but
it's not necessarily like erotic arrows
but unification so I think there is
something Beyond unfortunately your
married M so it's not going to work
unfortunately no but this is like why I
don't think it's necessarily Sex and
Death because it's like there are
different kind of unifications
possible um so
alternatively say um say you you create
Rahul pun publishing I said punishing ra
punish ra publishing exactly and say
like oh wow like these contracts you're
offering or this kind of things I don't
know I don't like uh I don't like this
sort of like controver I don't like how
I like oh so they want to unify via the
Raul publishing that will be our
unifying I was like and it's called
after you and I you know I don't know um
so then for instance Death Drive is like
I want
out right so like that means so I would
say like exit and I think this like
works with like contemporary theories of
exit like for instance Nick land very
much about exit Theory yeah uh modern
modern kind of libertar brly libertarian
theories I think they're totally
necessary to understand the ontology of
today in terms of like is there a
tendency towards more and more and more
little Realms this is like a little
realm like how do we have this little
realm through technology through very
specific Concepts so I think we need to
understand that in a broad ontological
sense uh Nick Landon this kind of type
of right-wing thinker they have
something to say about um meltdown like
things are melting like like we're not
going to a central psych authority to
like to make this little kind of
Realm yeah says we we're all perverts
horny for the Apocalypse in pervert
horny for the apocalypse apocalypse but
but it's not it's not that that sounds
good but it's not true really like um oh
I think I think he was making more
critique of like a a current Zid Guist
yeah yeah it's like it's like a metaphor
but like like but this is but is it like
does it is that
ontologically true like this is like and
I think this is the task of philosophy
which is like oh well you know he's
saying something he's myth but this is
like a mythology you speak myology in
this y yep in ego and the Hy yeah yeah
so he's like saying something he's
saying this as relates to the broad
socialist cause or Progressive cause but
it's not ontologically true oh certainly
in fact I think about some Progressive
or like some woke people or whoever that
you know he's quite critical of um but
but he didn't I don't think he was
making that statement in an rological
sense I think you're right there um hey
I've got I've got heaps of questions
mate in fact I I don't think we can we
can contain it all into one conversation
if I'm being honest uh however if you
don't mind given we can't we can't
really avoid this because the topic is
itself is about life as you said yeah
I'm curious you know I not particularly
in this podcast but through you know my
personal connections friendships
whatever the case may be I know people
who are psychotherapists I know people
who are counselors people who work in
mental health uh but none of them have
ever been interested in Hegel and
philosophy and you know s or NRA
you notice that yeah or even Freud for
that matter you know like I mean even
Freud they know who he is but they think
he's just like this weird dude who talks
sleep sleeping with your mother so I
mean I I'll I I'll ask I'll ask you in
two ways this question bipar man let's
say um firstly how is it that your your
your vocation or if I could call it that
is you're a psychotherapist but how is
it that you try to incorporate so much
of philosophy in into your work and I
mean you write books on philosophy and
you're trying to create this uh you
trying to create hyp psychology as as
you call it and not to be a narcissist
but to be but um it's like asking a
local chess club it's like right so all
these people are like 1400 chess players
why are you a Master Level chess player
it's like I don't know mate I stud
that's exactly what I me fact you knew
what I knew better you knew my question
more than you and myself they're not
necessarily
for people like like they can help
people but like in terms but in terms of
like my question was more as an why do
you choose why do you choose to bring in
Freud and Hegel into your work as a
psychotherapist I would say like
wouldn't it be
nice uh if psychology represented in an
absolute sense both truth
things in totally the
self-interest of the client showing up I
think this is like a powerful thing if
you can make it right alternatively
psychology can
be broadly a set of
tools right which there's no reflection
on the tools there's no kind of
dialectical understanding of the tools
they're just these are the tools that
you will
use these are the things things you can
have you can have anxiety you can have
depressed mood you can have an
attachment you can have a relationship
conflict and we're going to use these
tools and we're going to reduce a
symptom so this is broadly the method of
public mental health yeah right uh you
can see why that's very favorable for
insurance people who the the kind of
code in California is you have to
describe what you're doing in a way that
people who don't understand psychology
know what you're doing um which is fine
but
ultimately you the the kind of nuts and
bolts of the thing should be deeper than
that like uh so I
think I took it upon myself kind of
finding this lack in in terms of for
myself it was is not enough to say
like um I'm feeling six sad okay now I
can meditate how sad do you feel now I
guess like four sad oh you're cured
great um so this is like psychology is
it can be totalitarian and I just want
it to reach its true totalitarian
potential but also lacking
totalitarianism like a we so it should
cover everything right Psych ology
should cover the totality of your life
in some way right um but also there's
this kind of contradiction which is if
it's covering the totality of your life
it should go beyond the subject of
psychology which is to say it should go
into all Concepts really um and all kind
of important essential phenomenons and
it should not psychologize necessarily
everything which is to say bring it back
into one of these kind of core
categories of
diagnosis of empirical measure of sad
points or anxiety points right um there
should be a rational development of
these Concepts and this is not always
easily expressed by uh a public mental
health authority in fact it I would
argue it probably cannot be expressed by
it so when you when you learn psychology
you learn Psychopathology the categories
of diagnosis you learn different methods
like dialectical behavioral therapy and
I love how Marshall linan when lecturing
about dialectics just casually says and
the funny thing is I called that I
didn't even know what it was and
everyone's like ha I was like do you
realize that's really  bad mate
no no no one cares cuz America no one
gives a  uh they're like oh no it
works and you're like well renowned so
that's what matters you're famous Martha
no uh no but dialectical behavioral
therapy is like a specific set of tools
and so on but it doesn't necessarily
give people the ability to think and I
really want to help people think and I
want to do this
without imposing my ideology on them as
best as I can so that's why my first
book is about how can I negate my
ideology so this very different than
like a xaki and perspective or a
critical like how do I really work from
the interiority of the other life form
right you could say as best as I can
even though I'm you could say split
although in the realm of being we are
not split you're there I'm there like in
a big enough sense we're not split or so
on um uh but like how do I if I'm
essentializing and making this method
this is where the split develops which
is like there is an intrinsic power
structure I have to use my power for the
other person and how do I yeah and how
do how do I do this and what kind of
further is developed in the ego and
Hyper State book is a further expanding
of what self-interest is in general
which kind of helps you do that thing in
the first book which highlights the
necessity of this uh you could say power
Dynamic how does the how and I think
this is why it's intrinsically a
left-wing project because it it is like
how does the person in power not abuse
their power that's not like the project
of the right which is like here are why
the hierarchies are just and I could I
could argue that I could say oh look at
all this stuff I've done I'm a really
you know I have all the knowledge and
you don't and blah blah blah but this is
like the opposite of what power should
do right so I timately think right-wing
ontology um is bad for you like
emotionally right not not not even
talking about like maybe some countries
you know it will help this or that or
whatever I would say broadly speaking to
think in this kind of hierarchical power
way I is like destructive and I and I
think that's because you can go all the
way to Hegel in terms of mutual
recognition like should you use your
power to uplift other people firstly
should you use your should you know the
limits of your power right which is I
know about psychology and then I could
reach this cause and then I don't know
about like I don't for instance putting
a podcast together like that has its own
set of things and I I'm very not good at
organizing that as you saw try like you
call like Elliot let's do the podcast oh
 I'm at the gym so that's like its
own that's its own thing right so that's
a limit of my ability right um so power
should know what it's good at it should
use it to uplift others it and it should
know its limit and this is like not I
don't see this in the right so much I
think Nick land tries to do something
like this sometimes but other times he
doesn't like other times he says power
essentially better people kill you know
the yeah it's very it's very it's very
Aristotelian rightwing ontology
Aristotle is probably like a modern
rtist where everyone's got their place
with within the within the hierarchy
right and then I prefer more the
platonic platonic way I think I I want
to make a few few comments on what you
said about yeah
psychology um in fact in fact I
completely agree because you know it's
it's it's funny you know we we uh kind
of the caricature of psychoanalysis one
could be oh we have an unconscious so we
have all these desires and we do things
unknowingly uh we do self-destructive
things whatever the case may be but what
what I find interesting is The more I've
read psychoanalysis you know Freud or
likeon you know in it's it really is a
project that comes out of the
Enlightenment as then it really does
respect people as being rational agents
as being beings who can think who can
partake uh partake in life as you say
whereas some whereas for example again
some more more cognitive scientific way
of thinking about you know
subjectivity it it completely ignores
this idea of life it's say like okay
humans we're driven by uh I don't know
this motivation this incentive and a
leads to B so the kind of what you
describe the game theoretic way and I do
I do like that you're trying to in some
sense in a very uh audacious way uh
reinvent psychology to its to its
Essence uh in many ways um so uh yeah
where where I was going with that was in
fact to ask you this question about this
book J in the clinic now unfortunately
for some reason I think I was more drawn
towards your second book so I read this
carefully than J in the clinic um yeah I
I don't blame you because like I feel
like xak in the clinic was a bit of a
hysteric book like I was like there's
something wrong with the field of
psychology um I'm going to broadly like
say like all the things that are wrong
with it this is like a kind of
more it was regardless it was regardless
of very enjoyable read I think this is a
stupid reason but one reason I read this
more was cuz I had the physical copy and
I could read
whereas in the clinic I had a PDF it was
like a it was like pely utilitarian you
know that kind of thing but uh okay uh
OT again these are going to be I'm going
to probably be the hysteric here and so
forgive me
um uh if you're talking to let's say um
you you you system green green people uh
you know people who have new new people
people who show up and say I have some
problems I've entered the platform
capitalism because they have the most
ads and now I'm talking to Elliot roseen
stock in a group yeah yeah so assume I'm
one of these green people and and I I
want I want you to use the Jan psycho
analytic or psychother therapeutic
method to to con go fix me I mean that
ironically of course so how how yeah
what what is what are you trying to do
by bringing J into the clinic J which is
again this is an interesting cment at
this point too where uh J took the
clinic so lenan psychoanalysis to Theory
and politics and you know sociology and
whatnot but you're doing the opposite
and bringing his philosophy back into
the clinic and yeah it's not it's not
what lon's trying to do so it's like the
problem is like ultimately the idea is
what is the ideological critique so you
bring xak into the clinic to critique
the intrinsic ideology present in modern
psychology right perfect and all yeah so
like this appears as an objective
ontological system like oh do I have the
ADHD do I have the
anxiety why is this the category of life
I was like go back to like maybe go back
to like let's go back to 600 to 800 ad
let's look at what the Jewish Christian
and Islamic communities were drawing
they drew they drew some people and they
have they Mark the people and they say
this is your This and like why don't we
use that generic system versus and
there's an
anthropological idea I've only recently
started studying with some um better
educated uh people in
anthropology
um why don't we use Ancient generics so
there's a there's a concept of a generic
which is to say I draw a
body right I draw a body and I attach a
bunch of Concepts to the body or and I
say people basically have this kind of
system and that's that's a person and if
you're doing and religions can do this
oh here you're doing this and that's
what a person consists of so in a
hegelian sense what and a ideological
critique we're taking kind of
psychology's diagnostic system as a
generic um it has kind of the appearance
of
medicine but it's not it's not the same
thing I mean if people hallucinate you
might say well what about people who
hallucinate it's like yeah there there
are people who hallucinate and not and
that's kind of rare and so there's
schizo effective disorder
schizophrenia uh delusional disorder
right and this kind of thing um but
another way to say is they hallucinate
they take a pill and it drop drops their
dopamine and they stop hallucinating
like at what point do you need the
generic um there I think it's it's less
it's less kind of solid than people make
it out to be and people know this all
the professionals know this and they say
this they say well this is broadly
helping us figure out some psychological
treatment models so like you know you
you want to like focus on this or that
but ultimately I would argue like
psychology has the capacity to have you
relate to
your unmediated or pre-mediated
Intuition or your psyche or your
subjectivity H and ultimately this is
more Universal which is to say bringing
your rational capacity in conversation
with not just your most impulsive self
but there's a there's an even more
impulsive self than your most impulsive
self um and that is your dream self when
you dream you're creating a a deep world
of con Concepts uh condensed synthesized
right this is what this is that word
really it really is synthesized it's not
dialectically split but it's really you
could say premediation
synthesis of uh being right so this is
more even this is more impulsive than
your Mo most impulsive kind of self and
ultimately how do you bring your
essentializing process and development
of your decision making in conversation
with this um and you know some basic
kind of categories of Life which are
like interpersonal
relationships Telos
cause right um and this kind of thing so
that's that's kind of what I'm trying to
develop as like when people get this
people get this they go to therapy and
they get this you know first of all all
this this stuff can match up quite
easily which is to say like oh yeah I
have this symptom and it red like you
can that's all still there like we don't
have to throw that away like we can
still do symptom reduction and so on but
there's a kind of like qualitative
potential about how to do this which
ultimately is not expressable by
insurance or even kind of medical speak
is it needs
philosophy right we have to talk
philosophically uh in order to you could
say deliver the highest
quality psychology which is to say
thinking and feeling itself and being it
and acting yeah I love that I love that
I mean this is in fact that that last
bit you just mentioned that that deeply
resonates with me um and and it's funny
you say I spoke to a psychoanalyst she's
a well she's a psychotherapist but also
Psych analyst uh based in P in Australia
and she essentially made the same point
um um she said like she um she doesn't
really even engage much in theory like
the way you do she's very much you know
sticks to like home Freud the the the
practice than the theory and the whole
point was uh yeah a lot of the people
that come to her they they come as a
sort of a last resort where yeah they
know they've got some an anxiety or they
know they've got this or that but
they're like yeah I know it but I'm
still doing it I'm still I'm still
abusing alcohol or I'm addicted to
pornography or sex so I'm still uh
having I'm still suffering as an
individual even though I I've I've put
myself into this category I'm like okay
I've got I've got ADHD but that doesn't
really help anything there's no there's
no cure in that sense um and then then
they come into psycho analysis and go
through that process and sometimes it
takes
years yeah well I mean
at least psychoanalysis is making the
space for this like it's it's like
psychoanalysis laid the foundation to
like let people free associate to
interpret dreams and things like this I
I'm not sure if she does interpreting
dreams maybe she does if she's doing
psychoanalysis yeah I'm not sure I mean
I haven't spoken to her in about a year
so but she wrote wrote a beautiful essay
uh on love which I kind of want to talk
to you about too CU you do mention
friendship uh in this book however just
just on this OT and I think this is more
for the listener so I hope you're not
going to like cringe inside I'm just
going to read out this excerpt from your
book from just on P itself from Jer in
the clinic because I think I think this
little ex does does capture the spirit
of the book you say the new vanishing
point is this a psycho educated person
with high insight into their own
functioning with an algorithmic response
process
with which you respond to events on an
individual microscopic as well as a
systemic
level yeah so yeah please elaborate on
that statement yeah so aesthetically I
would say maybe that's not the best way
to put it but but nonetheless it's like
it's once you say
algorithmic like this kind of thing what
it means
like is like how do you how do you
respond and how do you kind of
understand understand yourself when I
was kind of when I was writing that I
was thinking about this intuition level
a lot or xak in the clinic this kind of
first moment right um which is to say
what is psychotherapy doing it's kind of
working directly on this first moment so
before I kind of in ego in the hyper
State described well what is in that
first moment this is like
well you're you're being informed you're
getting psycho education you're you're
changing your relationship to your
intuition reflexes in this first moment
um so the algorithmic when you say
algorithmic resp aesthetically this is
like me and my 20s and so on but like Al
um that what that really means is your
intuitive reflex in terms of this
intuitive reflexive first moment right
it will change like I would even say
like it all the way to like ultimately
if you really it'll change your dreams
right like all the way down like like to
say like this process of
psychotherapy as you're as you're
speaking and as you're kind of doing
things with people and as you're
rationally kind of understanding it will
change your
unconscious so like I feel like that's a
that's Al so that's true that's kind of
fun algorithmic but let's just say let's
just say because this process has the
capacity to introduce your rationality
to your kind of most impulsive self or
your psyche like ultimately your you are
your education is getting in there in
terms of understanding is getting in
this is why psycholog is
totalitarian um because it really goes
to like the core of your thought and
understanding but I'm trying to say like
people have once you're there you do
have the freedom ideally to develop the
concepts that you are already uh
developing but let's say like someone
comes in and they're like a crypto
libertarian and they say like a not like
a secret libertarian but like a crypto
bro like libert crypto libertarian
um and they're like well Elliott you
know like I'm really trying to make it
in a crypto uh currency and uh this is
kind of what's happening and you know
this is the fluctuation and these are
the difficulties and I you know might
start talking about it well you know is
this how is this working for you it's
like yeah you know it's tough for me
it's maybe I'm have maybe it's not
working for me maybe it is working for
me I'm certainly like uh you know in
this process of this and might even
psycho education might say something
like there's a couple ways to look at
this there's like The Addictive property
of Technology itself and gambling then
there's The Cutting Edge kind of future
in terms of like this is cryptocurrency
could be a new digital currency there's
all this kind of stuff so uh and maybe
you can tell me more about why you're in
cryptocurrency and there's a moment
where it be like well I really believe
in it or like I don't  know why
I'm in actually or like this kind of so
there is like this measuring and you
kind of have to bring in um Arguments
for and against and ultimately your
concepts are somewhat ideological but
the idea is like you're trying to you're
trying to do this with the most kind of
Freedom uh existential freedom for the
person to kind of work through it
themselves um and sometimes they'll fall
and make it change other times they
maybe will reinforce or for instance
like um people that
are
very organized at work like extreme
organized and they're having some
trouble because they're they're so
obsessed with organization maybe right
yeah that's that's you maybe they're
maybe they're
OCD maybe they're this kind of thing
right uh so this is like one way to
think of
it um but but it's like would their
treatment consist of like saying you're
you're thinking about these things but
really you shouldn't so this is like IDE
ideological which is to say like ah this
is a symptom maybe you should get rid of
this or actually there's some positives
to being organized yeah I was just gonna
mention I'm glad you brought that up
because for me I know I maybe they'd
call me OCD but I I never really worried
cared about that I was like yeah I'm OCD
because for me it's at a very practical
level I realized that being OCD makes my
life better like as in it it in the
sense that what I find is I I'd suffer
more if I was you know in complete chaos
and just not organized and shabby and
and and and like on about things and and
at least for me
subjectively I I kind of I guess I've
I've I've embraced a symptom you
know so like I don't know but yeah
wouldn't it be weird for me who just was
like oh  I got a interview to be
like then come into a therapy session
with you and then say you know you're
too organ
like this is this is what psychology has
the potential to do right rather than
kind of put it into the process of the
actual which is to say like how is this
working in your life what are the
stressors right how is this not work so
back to self-interest like is can I can
I ask you Ro just not to therapize you
but just one question which is like are
there any downsides to being really
organized uh yes I think I don't deal
well with uncertainty but then the way I
deal with uncertainty or like the stress
from uncertainty is through like
physical Pursuits like I mean if I'm
stressed I'd go like run a marathon or
something on the day just by myself and
I find physical uh relief that I don't
know what you would call it that helps
me deal with that
but I'd say that's one and the other
probably would be yeah I can be like an
bit of an annoying partner or like an
annoying friend because I won't think
I'm I'm like a a fascist everything's in
point order time discipline uh I think
those two so those are two specific so
you have yourself stated the downsides
versus me picking them from a symptom
list so you said the downsides are
uncertainty is difficult and on an
interpersonal level I want to control
other people's actions and it causes
conflict sometimes right
sometimes so I mean these are things
that can be worked concretely through
through a process and you see how that's
very different than saying you have OCD
here's some benzos or
something and that's where it goes back
to the idea of in psycho analysis you
know free
association there's a there's a there's
a there's a fundamental dignity to that
isn't it you say you're you're a human
being you respect the human being for
who they are as a dignity that you can
work through this yeah I I I do resonate
with that in fact I I got to say this
too uh Elliot one thing I like about
your
writing and your even your public work
is there's no there's no like
sentimental suffering as in I find
people who get into like Theory and
philosophy they romanticize suffering a
little bit they they like they look at
they look at a happy personal like oh so
naively stupid you know but for me
something I I used to do that too
sometimes but I've stopped doing that
cuz I think it's unhelpful I think
there's something good about a joyful
person I'm looking for my my witch I
call it the Philosopher's Rune but maybe
i' I've put it away
somewhere is it back there one is it
back there wait one one second one
second I'm going grab it yeah grab
it you know what I'm not I'm not going
to I'm not going to continue looking for
it he says well continuing to look for
it whoa wh what is it a book or uh it's
a book so you this is a direct response
but I actually did some
witchcraft uh where where's way I'm so
upset I I can't find not not really
witchcraft but so I have a i that's so I
it's always right there and I can't
believe I think I I clean I I cleaned it
and I'll have to I'll have to sort it
out but I have my um I have my slavo xac
signed copy of uh iron Rams The Fountain
Head oh that's hilarious I love it
hilarious
so and when I handed it to him he said
ah yes iron ran the greatest so this is
I if you want to not be
sentimental if you want if you like the
way unbalanced on the other side of no
sentimentality is Ein Rand so IR Ran's
really great for this speaking of egoism
the history of
egoism um one thing that it's it's
there's a dignity iron Ran's trying to
make a dignity for people I would say
she ultimately
fails but nonetheless she's trying to
kind of create this dignified project of
like you have this
ability um but I think it's she doesn't
think structures very well like
ultimately
like there is kind of a lack there but
but one of her big points is uh this
kind of impulse to like pity or to like
be
sentimental uh it might it might not be
simply a reflection of your deep moral
highness I think that is a kind of
important kind of idea that this like
that's like ah if I if I pity other
people this will like Lead Me
to uh this will lead me to a deep
knowledge well what about if you like
you said the word dignity what if you
give the dignity to other people through
understanding that there are things that
will benefit them they have the right to
do things that are benefiting them and
then I would say like this is very
different than Ein Rand my version of
self-interest iron Ran's version of
self-interest is that you have to
understand capitalist more moral
philosophy to then have
self-interest really versus I'm saying I
have a psychological egoism perspective
which is everyone is acting in their
best self-interest all the time like you
do this intuitively reflexively this
theory of the psyche says you can't
reflect on how you're doing this um and
ultimately this can improve and and this
sort of thing so but I but I do like in
so far as Ian ran dedicated her life to
saying maybe there's something good
Beyond kind of like
martyrdom and
pitying right which is like I'm
sacrificing myself aren't I good like
like if you want to let's let's see like
how your sacrifice will add up I maybe
it will be impactful or maybe people
maybe like you'll do something and
people like wow you traded you traded
your life uh for this cause and let's
see what your impact was like is that
did it help the cause like did maybe did
it was it popular within the cause maybe
like you'll be a figure head right so
it's like is that enough for you so like
this is not very
sentimental but also I'm not like iron
Rand wiches to say you you shouldn't do
it I'm like well let's see that let's
see what you're doing exactly and that's
cuz you're psychological aspect of it
yeah yeah psychological egoism and also
developing the category of cause or you
could say which is similar to like Telos
or purpose right um yeah okay so I you
did touch on when we started talking uh
earlier on the absolute hyper State I
had to reread that chapter a couple of
times it was it was a good chapter but
yeah if you could just because because
some sense this book reads like the
phenomenology of spirit like it's it's
it's a prog it's a development into
something right so
but uh yeah what's the absolute hyper
State and how does it differ from
absolute knowing by Hegel yeah if
something is if it's unmediated but also
hypermediated
so this is like this is like the maybe
there's a contradiction here because
it's also the
ontological substance the ego substance
of the totality of Life effort
right um so for instance like I can rely
on this or and the force of this is much
larger than the force of meat so for
instance I move to England right I don't
know anything about England but there
interesting there's a train system right
there um there's uh a philosophy library
right there um there's a football team I
don't know what I think about that
football that's kind of interesting may
there's a lot of people into football
that's cool there's I could play
baseball if I want there's a kind so all
this stuff is prior this exist in the
world and has a
force right and then I could say like
let's reorder society and England's
going to be not patriotic or whatever
and they're going to cool their
reactionary Tendencies and it's like
well Freud said oh I like England except
you know despite their conservatism I
like England and so on
um you could do that but for instance
there is a kind of force of other
people's morals in the world like
already like there's already the force
of football there's already the force of
this kind of thing and I can put myself
into kind of relation with the forces of
my surroundings so that to not so it's
like I would say like it kind of has the
effect of like like I'm stepping on I'm
stepping on this rock rather than
sand and uh that's kind of like
unmediated being but really I'm stepping
on the concrete efforts and ideas of the
people uh like a large amount of
people's efforts all at once and kind of
like I step on a rock right it's that
and the idea is to show people that this
exists and this is like how the idea is
concrete why is I say IDE like I say
ideally ISM because it's more material
than
materialism right I don't say
idealism because I because I'm
sentimental I'm very not sentimental
like you like you kind of pointed out um
you're not yeah yeah yeah yeah I think
this is a scientific mindset which is to
say like this exists at a certain Force
Level in the world also you know working
in kind of like South La working in like
Compton
uh there was a guy really into Prager
you like really into this right-wing
like americ the Dennis Pras oh okay yeah
and for instance he says he says you
know have you heard of this guy Dennis
he's like in his 50s have you heard of
him I said ah like in my mind I'm like
he's a wow you wow that's not good so
not only so he ultimately has to not
just deal with like I'm not I have room
for him but also he's like a therapy
person so there's like a limit to like
um but ultimately his like ideas are a
bit weak and not in touch with and they
they have a certain so there's me like
I'm not like negating him or what I'm
like I'll listen to him I'll respect him
and I'm not going to call him like an
idiot or something but however the
setting that he's in being in like South
Central Los Angeles Black and Hispanic
population um if your source of
knowledge is Prager you you might come
up against you could call some absolute
hyper state issues which is to say like
no one wants to maybe hear why there
there are core ways that South Central
kind of runs uh like certain ideas like
for instance the Nation of Islam which
my greatest kind of exist not my wife is
tired of me but like for of saying this
but like I went to a boxing match
invited by like a lieutenant the Nation
of Islam and there was a big fight that
broke out cuz it was just like uh you
know a big fight breaks out and all the
big Nation of Islam people are
protecting me and ushering me out and
I'm like wow how did I get to this point
where Nation of Islam people are
physically protecting me from a fight
and ushering me out of a boxing arena um
and you might say why do people not like
the Nation of Islam oh aren't they
anti-semitic in general oh aren't there
isn't their ontology of world off maybe
but also they're a concrete force in an
area so if you're going to work with a
community it's not really enough to say
like Nation of Islam like farak is
anti-semetic and uh this is like it's
like you're either going to help the
community or you're not right so like so
like you can't just like
ideologically like like pone like oh you
you know you think this or this or like
a for instance Dr sebbi is really
popular uh what and there's a common
idea he was killed for his nutrition
ideas because he was so nutritious the
people didn't want you to be that this
is like a common idea um like Dr sebbi
he was so nutritious and like would it
really help to be like well let's see
what did happen to Dr sebie and you know
and let's see what happened all that
would be really actually triggering to
people people would hate that um but
it's like so so absolute hyper state is
like there is a mythological quality but
nonetheless there's the actual what is
the impact of my action in relation and
it's not simply unveiling the myth to
show the hyper state to show the SP you
could say this essential split between
like factuality and religious belief
right um ultimately is a taking
responsibility of you have a actual
Force um in so this so this is these are
some examples of the absolute hyper
State and they were developed
historically there are historical
developments but it's more important
that they exist currently than that that
even though it is true they were
developed historically in so far as they
were developed historically it can have
some impacts or you can relate to it in
different ways but so that this is this
is interacting so I I wanted to say like
describing the absolute hyper State one
it's solid like a like rock like this is
like the first secondly
um you put yourself in relation to it
it's not it's it's both truth and the
obfuscation of
it and thirdly it's the total efforts of
humankind so it's a very large object
hence absolute hyp yeah I think from
that part two was what I understood the
most because it's like you got to see
you got to put yourself into the
equation in some sense and see in
relation to you how does this all exist
yes yeah and and and also I guess I can
see why why you so say you take like a
scientific approach because it's like a
almost like a not a critical lens like
the critical the where you negate
everything but rather uh let's call it
like you're you're like an investigative
approach you want to you want to know
you want to investigate as to how all
these things
uh all these signify symbolic meanings
you know whatever you call them uh
connect to each other or or did I get
that wrong am I am I again putting you
know unnecessary Concepts into what what
this is no I think that's a fair qu so
like I think there speaking of the split
a split is an Essence right so yeah so
like yeah how how am I going to put
myself in relation is
one question and the second is what is
the nature of the the thing which is a
different question right so I would I
would argue kind
of in the sense you could even say this
goes all the way to stoicism which is to
say like this is a question of stoicism
but it's so abstract that people have
such different answers like Hegel being
Essence concept great idea but like
abstract right which means there's a lot
of different interpretations of being
Essence in concept um so like the stoics
the way the stoics related to like
figuring out what is the nature of the
thing it appears as a whole I understand
the nature of it I put myself in
alignment with what I'm in control of um
I would just say you're not simply in
but the way they do this is and I live
as a philosopher so the way I do this is
I'm informed by stoic virtues so this
part I don't do but I mean these other
parts are correct right which is like
there I would say there is a kind of
nature of things or there which is like
even human Creations not just like
nature but like human Creations have a
nature and I believe this as well like
human Creations do have a they have
properties I would say their nature is
they have when you reflect they have
essential properties that are like
solid right even though you can't
necessarily like grasp the concept like
I could say like for instance the train
has the idea of Transport has the idea
of convenience has the these things it
has this this General idea of dignity
like what gives people dignity you could
say I like this Con so let I I really
appreciate you saying oh this has some
dignity let's like maybe hold on to this
concept as maybe this is the progressive
concept yeah right which is like we're
trying to give dignity to people but
that can even be represented by I have
ease of public transport I have a 4day
work week what should my taxes be so
like dignity is a I think I'm glad you
brought up this concept because like you
can see how in the you know
antithetically speaking in xek in the
clinic which is a very like I said
hysteric book which is good it's almost
like the antithesis is before the thesis
because it's there's a chapter in xak in
the clinic that says the master is the
provider of
convenience right so that it's like you
could follow this it's like who is
providing you dignity what do they want
right this is this is like what me in my
20s is like more skeptical I would say
like but but I mean this is I think this
is all in there it's like you you can
have a kind of critical lens to
convenience and dignity itself um so
yeah but this is this is what it looks
like to go to the nature of the thing
and why the con the concepts they're not
simply idealist in so far as like isn't
that like how human should be it's like
no no no it's in the 
thing like like did like just because
you said dignity doesn't mean it's not
in the train system right the dignity is
in the train and you can kind of put
yourself into relationship with that via
the concept yeah okay all right this is
this is probably a a good jockster
position with iron ran ego
self-interest yeah her she's still she
in fact I'd say iron ran is still a with
kinian in the sense that she's she's an
atomist a pychological atomist whereas
for you you see this idea of
self-interest uh the the the ego with
with it with its hyper state in social
structures in it like it goes beyond the
The Silo of an individual yeah what if
your ego was made of the same substance
as the train track out there and I think
this is like this is like a weird uni
it's like a un unified field thought
and that's that's kind of what I'm kind
of implying and I think like people try
to get to this point or Spinosa gets to
this point the whole like in this basic
the yeah thinking the whole thinking
like it's God working themselves out and
so but like in a very basic it's I'm
it's not it's not so exciting like
always like but I'm trying to kind of
give a good ground for factuality so if
I think of my ego as the same thing as
the train track the what is the the
unified concept of dignity which is to
say I am providing dignity to clients
this you know the state is kind of
providing dignity trying to to workers
and the people in their um there is a
unified concept I can start
thinking through and when you're able to
switch the kind of concept and like for
instance like let's talk about class or
whatever right this is like there's a
class of train workers there's a there's
a class of people taking the train
there's like you know security and like
the people they're in charge of on the
train uh there's like how you know
workingclass people relate to other
workingclass people and the kind of
splits there's what's my role as a kind
of cognit Ariat person who's a you know
a teleworker so it gives you a different
perspective but it's a very large object
and it's condensed
and it's unmi maybe I'll start saying
hypermediated cuz it's like it's so it's
so hypermediated it's kind of
unmediated because it's like it's kind
of
like like a rock like like I said it's
like it's there it's like it's like
really there and you can kind of like do
things with it right no no mate I I get
what you're saying I mean I'm anyway I'm
I'm like I'm sounding like Nisha like
screaming off the mountain now so this
is like similarities which is like it's
there it's in the like is that
a the concept is in the thing it's you
know I I find it interesting the whole
thing about mediation I'm so corrupted
by J and Hegel that I can't not think
unmediated I mean it's funny know has
this thing about like you know when
you're having sex with someone you you
aren't really with the person there's
someone else there there a there's a
fantasy and ever since I heard J say
that now that's in my head and I've had
you know terrible sex life the fantasy
is is in my head any it's it's a
intimacy is a good concept exactly so
it's iny what does that mean for you
yeah yeah that's interesting uh Elliot
this is going to be the uh penultimate
question because I kind of want to do
conclude on your project of hyp
psychology even though I know we did
touch on that but it's it's worth worth
saying this because I again I've been
thinking a lot about this especially you
know reading by and all of that um love
so you in there's a chapter on
friendship which I really enjoyed it's
it's not a chap is it a chapter or like
a section on friendship in in the book
yeah but I'm interested you know and and
I mean love again not in like in like
Eros and erotic sense I mean love that
in a broader concept and like a
metaphysical way let's say what's yeah
through your you know through your ideas
through what you what you're putting
forward how do you yeah what are your
intimations on love so love and then you
said in a broader context which is to
say so this is like one of the things I
like about friendship and also maybe you
could even say this a positive social
media you can have this conversation
there's not a lot is at stake but the
thing so this is kind of like like we're
talking this is kind of nice our kind of
core things that we need in life are not
like really
at stake so like love love broader than
a romantic way I can only think of like
familial love right um maybe maybe
friends but like I like intuitively I
think like um I think love in a
psychoanalytic sense is quite powerful
which is to say your
familial attachments and you know how
Concepts get kind of you know condensed
with your intuition and your kind of
core functions so this is like maybe not
how everyone would think if you're if
you're talking about love Beyond a
romantic concept love kind of in the
initial familial way so determines who
you are like in terms of what your
interest will be uh because you will be
constantly
intuiting kind of these are my interests
and also it can be negative which is to
say like if you have a abusive
upbringing it doesn't matter you'll
still start to attach love to being
abused right and you'll and people have
to work through so love has this
negative potential as well which is to
say like our intuition maybe brings us
into a pattern of acting uh in ways that
ultimately like is feels bad but it's
our self-interest we don't why is it our
self-interest cuz it's it's reflective
of our early childhood it's reflective
of love right so love can be very can
have these kind of tricky qualities as
well
um uh in so far as like romantic love
like then this is like also romantic
love is kind of kind of interesting in
so far as
like in a relationship like depending on
how long you've been in the relationship
ship romantic love is the new thing it's
like it's happening you could say if
you're in a relationship and you're
dealing with the old familial love right
your attachments and they're getting
conflated right and this is where you
get Freud like what's with the
conflation of familial love and romantic
love and then people understand Freud is
like Ergo Ergo your mom and so on but I
mean but this in terms of the real force
of it is like the force of you could say
the attachment concept this is a good
this is like it's hard to avoid the
attachment concept because it's a good
it's a good kind of solid con so much so
entire schools of psychotherapy are all
based off on the very on this word
attachment right
um so I think love is something that we
t with and it also brings in kind of
your LIF structures as well like how how
do you structure your life how do your
how does your life start to reflect the
things that you like or don't like and
so love is love is like a powerful core
like I would say of like if you get
into self-interest and then
like you know and that core can be like
bad in some ways like the core can be
like uh like re repeating uh Dynamics
from Early Childhood right so this is
like where ba where basic kind of
psychology insights of psychoanalysis
are important maybe they're really
important in terms of developing like
what is your understanding of love like
how did you get this
intuition right um and it's really
powerful in so far I think I've told
this like a few different times but like
you know somebody comes in a therapy and
they keep finding out that the people
that they're dating were as arrested for
the same nonviolent somewhat obscure
crime as their father and they kept
finding it out afterwards and they're
like what the  so this is like
there's a c speaking of
algorithm I'm going to go against
Society in a specific criminal way right
uh in order to make money and that means
that act affects how I how I relate to
everything like how I behave
right um and suddenly there's some so
then the person's child sees that in
their
father and suddenly when they see that
algorithm or this Behavior it's totally
they don't know how they know it it's a
black box like AI is a black box like
it's a black box they don't know how
they know it they just know it and they
they associate it with love and so it's
like and they have the same problem of
did other logic is dating a criminal who
does this crime it has a problem like it
comes so then so then it's like why is
this happening and you could say because
love is associated with this pattern and
it can be challenging to meet people
that are outside of your Early
Childhood I you know intuition so but
this is also an important practice as
well right to be able to kind of meet
new types of so there's this these This
Is Love in process so I think of
Concepts you know this is heraclitus's
basic
Insight it's love is not e static
category love is this process so like
the question is what how do you how do
you process things like what's your
what's your
algorithm yeah I mean I guess in that
sense what I have using because I think
I still you know speaking specifically
of romantic love here i i s my ponchon
is more towards the bou and you know
love event disjuncture you wouldn't you
wouldn't necessarily put it that way you
you I just don't doesn't appeal to me
because of my psychology you could say
like love is disjunction so like but so
I would have to like let's I'd have to
go outside my psychology and be like
okay I've heard this from xek as well
love is a Love is Evil right love love
has a quality where you you go against
the thing and then to be like Marcus
celius is like well it's either it is or
it isn't it's not always true like for
instance love can be part of your Social
good quite easily that could happen as
well so like um so I would but this is
like being a
philosopher
philosopher is like I I try to represent
truth this is what dialectic is in the
ancient sense which is like
like ultimately that myth may have a
function to say Love is Evil it's like
Pro it's a provocation um but I like and
xak is super inspiring but he says
things that are uh that are myths you
could say like in this Cas yeah yeah
like Love is Evil that's not it's not
true but it can be and it points you to
a direction right well
interesting is like he's like a spoken
wood poet right he
bad but then you know like in baju for
instance he has this for him the dis
disjuncture and I think in um being an
event here even goes into this quite
deeply but it's like after the event you
recreate a new myth for yourself in some
sense as it's not like our love is evil
and you fall and it's just the abyss and
you but rather there you need to
recreate a new myth in in maybe in uh
roson stalk in terms in your
self-interest uh but but also I would
also add to the new myth it's also
possibly an old myth but the relation is
new because it's actual in present I see
okay well so like fit up so but like and
I don't say this to like I don't say
this to like dab and buo but in so far
as like what is like not what is not
true so and when when I when people talk
to me I'm very open if I say something
that's not people say they are but like
if I say something that's missing
something or lack and I can't say it all
as Lon says on this television when they
put the they're like he scams everyone
to get on camera because there's no
social media he goes you can't say it
all which I like more than Peterson I'd
rather have
a was the French Ty Lopez yeah yeah yeah
yeah who's that the the here in my
garage guy uh
here oh you got M he was like in the
2015s I think he was a big uh hit in my
garage with all the books uh trying to
sell you self help Coes yeah anyway oh
got it got it yes so I was um but no
that that's great thank thanks elot I I
think I think I'm getting at your I'm
trying to put myself in your shoes in
some sense and it's it's sort of working
so uh I'm curious so this you know I'm
reading all these books trying to make
sense of your project but then yeah can
you articulate your project of you call
it hyp psychology or like the next book
you're writing as an if I could ask a
bit of a I don't
know melodramatic question here like
what's your what do you what do you see
as your life project in what you're
doing right now in in this field of
psychology I would say the idea is
to bring psychology out so like the
subtitle that it's currently is a
subject Beyond it self I like right yeah
which is to say like
ultimately hyper psychology is like it
transcends psychology into the life into
life right in and in so far as life is
the subject of
psychology like what it's kind of like
some structure that will introduce
somebody in to a maybe like
philosophical or you could even say
truth truth adjacent I don't want to
sound like a m you know mus uses these
words as well which is like uh truth it
should be as truth aligned as possible
it's like but you don't know what the
foundation of thought is so how are you
going to make a truth align like like
you don't anyway you can like in terms
of factuality but but yeah so the the
the project of hypers
psychology is how do we
integrate other aspects of life like how
do we talk about dignity it's like for
instance I like I want want to think
more about this word that you brought up
which is dignity right um and so in so
far as hyp psychology allows you to
think it's important my
self-interest is in the development of
the concept of dignity because it
relates to my cause it relates to what I
think is good it relates to my my just
core like flow of dayto day so you need
you need to be able this is kind of like
if you want to be a hypy
psychotherapist right or whatever this
would be the the style of thinking which
is to say on the terms of the word
itself which is to say like let's think
let's think dignity in our day-to-day
life for like for now but it might
change in terms of that might develop so
this is the dialectical process in terms
of what this this is a starting point it
can kind of grow from there it can
develop but in so far as hypers
psychology is a word that allow for the
framework of that dialectical process
right and you'd say eventually you'd
just want psychology to become hyp
psychology it's just going to be about
life as such yeah which is which is to
say I would be fine if people just UND
if they understood that and didn't say
hyp psychology every five like you don't
have to say hyp psychology to develop to
do this process of what is hyper
unmediated or hypermediated hyper state
or whatever to like to to kind of put
yourself into relation with all the
concepts it's like why is why is dignity
sticking out because dignity is a it's a
concept I think it
transcends
politics right um it it's kind of it is
related to politics but it kind of also
like it kind of says the Dignity of
peoples without good political views it
says during conflict like for instance
I'm thinking like Marcus aurelus writing
the meditations but he's at War so
there's this like it's kind of hard like
uh to be in conflict with somebody and
ultimately you're like fighting them
concretely is there is does dignity come
into play what what and I mean this is
kind of like so I think I think this is
a important kind of concept and I want
people to be able to understand that
their intuition can turn into conceptual
developments in this way like and it it
goes down ultimately to a to this core
psychoanalytic dream concept like in
terms of you have an intuition beyond
your Intuition or beyond your impulse
impulse yeah your in your intuition is
your totality of your
psyche right um and so you have you
can't ever access this totally just like
you can't ever access absolute hyper
state or all of being or every concept
all at once you you have to kind of put
yourself in relationship to this and
this it's kind of a suggested relation
to con Concepts and intuition right
beautiful beautiful that's the uh
perfect place to end it thank you Alia
thank you for your time I'll leave a
link to all the books in fact you're
jerk in the clinic you just left the
free version online so I'll leave a link
to that too and also no please steal the
books and I and I can't say anymore but
just just steal them or if you want the
books you'll have
to yeah anyway it's it's a I I highly
recommend it I I'd say I'd say you know
have have some self-respect and you know
respect your dignity and struggle
through the writing and you you'll get
at it it's it's it's it's worthwhile uh
but yeah thank you for your time I I
really appreciate it great so take care
thanks mate
