why do brains dream and what's going on
with the bizarreness of Dreams why
doesn't your clock work in your dreams
and even though you spend a lot of your
day working on cell phones and computers
why do those almost never make
appearances in your dream content
there's so many cool questions that
we're going to address today is dream
content the same across cultures and
across time are dreams experienced in
black and white or in color
why do I think about dreams as the
Strange Love Child between brain
plasticity and the rotation of the
planet what is the relationship between
schizophrenia and dreaming and in the
future will we be able to read out the
content of somebody's
dream welcome to Inner Cosmos with me
David Eagleman I'm a neuroscientist and
an author at Stanford and in these
episodes we sail deeply into our three-b
universe to understand why and how our
lives look the way they do and how we
experience our life includes our
nocturnal
life we spend a third of our lives with
our eyes closed lying still and
horizontal like a meat robot that's been
switched off but why in the last episode
we talked all about sleep why brains do
that and why all animals do that and
what is happening in the brain during
sleep today we're going to zoom in on
one of my favorite subjects a very
strange thing the brain does which we
call dreaming we spend a fraction of our
sleep time locked in a different reality
swimming around in plots which aren't
real and they're often not even
realistic but which nonetheless convince
ESS entirely and today we're going to
see what that's all about humans have
been writing about dreams and pondering
about them for a long time and
essentially we have evidence of this
from the beginning of writing we see
detailed dream reports from ancient
Egyptians and Romans and Chinese the
Bible is full of Dreams every culture in
the world has been fascinated by these
strange nocturnal Journeys that we go on
and as we'll see shortly there's an
interesting surprise which is that dream
content in other words the kind of
things that people dream about is
essentially the same across cultures and
across time and that serves as a clue
that will allow us to unlock some
mysteries about what otherwise feels
like a deeply mysterious experience that
we enjoy or suffer every night of our
lives so strap in for an episode full of
surprises so let's start with a poem
that Lord Byron wrote in 1816 called The
Dream he wrote sleep hath its own world
and a wide realm of wild reality and
dreams in their development have breath
and tears and tortures and the touch of
Joy they leave a weit Upon Our waking
thoughts so dreams are indeed a wild
reality the thing we all find so amazing
about dreaming is its bizarreness you're
seeing new things you hold strange
beliefs and you fall for it all hookline
and sinker whatever your brain serves up
to you you believe it entirely so we'll
talk about all this but let's first zoom
in on what's Happening inside the brain
dreaming occurs during rapid eye
movement or REM sleep where your eyes
are darting back back and forth there's
nothing coming in the eyes of course
they're shut so all the activity is
internally generated for Good
Housekeeping I'll just note that REM
sleep isn't necessarily equivalent to
dream sleep but that's when most
dreaming occurs now how do we know that
well it's because if you wait until
someone enters rem's sleep their eyes
are going back and forth and then you
shake them awake and you say hey what
were you just experiencing they'll tell
you whoa
I was just panicking because I was at
work but realized I had forgotten to put
on pants and I was hiding behind the
plant pots and figuring out how to
escape before the meeting started but if
you wake them up during the rest of the
90minut Sleep Cycle during the stages
that we call slow wave sleep and you say
hey what were you just experiencing
they'll generally say nothing I wasn't
there now for completeness I'll mention
that sometimes people report some form
of mental activity during slow wave
sleep but when they do this is usually
just a thought or making a plan but it
lacks the visual vividness and the
hallucinatory components of typical
dreams so dreaming of the sort we're
interested in today happens during REM
sleep now although dreams seem so
untethered and ethereal there are
specific things happening under the hood
dreaming depends on the normal
functioning of a particular network of
brain areas this is primarily in the
lyic and paralic and association areas
now we know that from brain Imaging but
also because damage in this network can
produce temporary or permanent dream
loss or impairment like loss of visual
dream imagery now not all of those areas
might sound familiar to you but you've
probably heard of the lyic system which
sits at the heart of your emotions so
presumably this is why dreams are so
overloaded with high emotion and I also
want to mention a brain area that is
suppressed during REM sleep and that is
the hippocampus this is an area that's
required to convert short-term memory
into long-term memory and this is why
when you wake up from a dream you can
remember it so clearly but after about
15 minutes it just slips away from you
you just can't hold on to what happened
this is because you have the short-term
memory just fine but you're not
converting it into long-term memory and
so it simply Fades before your eyes and
by the way I think this experience that
we have every morning can enhance our
empathy about what it would be like to
have something like Alzheimer's disease
because a person with Alzheimer's says
on the phone okay I'll be right down
there in a moment and they hang up and
then the memory of that just slips away
so even though you might tell a relative
with Alzheimer's come on just try harder
to remember just think about somebody
telling that to you about your dreams in
the morning so back to the Byron poem
the line that I thought was interesting
was they leave a wait upon our waking
thoughts because they don't directly
interact with our waking thoughts but
instead they can just put a spin on our
mood even if we don't remember why okay
so what do we see in the brain when
dreaming begins well just before the
onset of your eyes darting back and
forth you have a group of neurons in the
brain stem specifically in an area
called the ponds and these crank up and
these trigger several consequences the
first is that your major muscle groups
get paralyzed this is called atonia so
you've got this elaborate neural
circuitry that keeps the body paralyzed
during dreaming and by the way the very
elaborateness of this circuitry
emphasizes the biological importance of
dream sleep you don't get this kind of
complexity by accident presumably
dreaming would be unlikely to evolve and
remain without an important function
behind it so why do we get this
paralysis of the muscles it allows the
possibility for the brain to experience
things and simulate reality without
actually moving the body the second
consequence of these neurons in the
ponds is that they trigger these waves
of activity known as pjo waves and these
are key to the experience of dreaming
these pgo waves travel to a tiny area
called the geniculate nucleus and from
there these waves of activity slam into
the occipital cortex at the back of your
head in other words they drive activity
into the visual system so that's why
these are called pgo waves because they
start in the pawns P move to the
geniculate G and go to the occipital
cortex o PG I mentioned all this detail
because pgo waves are the neural
correlate of dreaming the visual areas
become alive with activity allowing us
to see our dreams you blast activity
into the visual cortex and you enjoy
visual experience even though your eyes
are closed now interestingly when you
measure electrical activity across the
brain with
EEG when you do this during REM sleep it
looks really similar to that during the
waking State you see similar patterns in
both States for example lots of gamma
wave frequency which is generally
thought to reflect something about
cognitive processing with the exception
of the the paralyzed muscles and the
lack of external visual input because
your eyes are closed the states of REM
sleep and of wakefulness they kind of
resemble one another and this is what we
might expect from a state of
consciousness that's altered but it's
some sort of Consciousness nonetheless
okay so that's what's happening in the
brain when we dream but why do we dream
well there are various hypotheses about
this and I mentioned one last week which
is that maybe dreams allow us to
simulate rare situations in other words
these nocturnal neural simulations might
allow us and all animals to test out
activities without the danger and risk
of doing so in the real world so you can
practice through different scenarios
with your muscles all shut down so
people who Advocate this theory suggest
that the periodic stimulation of the
cortex in this sem random and
non-specific manner this can maintain
circuits that are really important for
survival but they rarely get activated
because you don't run into emergencies
that often so the idea is that you're
just sending in random activity keeping
the engine oiled in case you need one of
these programs sometime and some
researchers suggest that it's even more
specific than that a version of this
framework called threat simulation
Theory suggests that dreams exist to
simulate threatening events and to
rehearse what to do in the face of
threat and that seems on its surface at
least consistent with the high
prevalence of violence and aggression in
dreams but I want to note that there's
no data that directly supports this idea
and I mentioned last week that this
Theory suggests that people exposed to
more survival threats in Waking Life
might have a more common experience of
threat dreams at night but the data do
not support that also the threat
perception Theory doesn't explain the
fact that most dreams are totally
meaningless and bizarre instead of
involving any meaningful threat
perception or threat avoidance so back
to the question of why we dream a few
years ago my colleague Don vau and I
proposed a new Theory which is the only
one that makes quantitative predictions
across species and if you heard episode
11 you may remember about this that the
has to do with brain plasticity and
here's the idea in a nutshell we know
that if a person goes blind other senses
start to take over what was the visual
cortex in other words the territory of
the visual system is not fixed
permanently but instead the wiring of
the brain is quite fluid and there's a
takeover that happens okay now it turns
out that if you take a normally cited
person and you blindfold him you can
start seeing the beginnings of this
Takeover in neuroimaging starting in
about 1 hour and that really surprised
us because of how fast the Takeover
starts to happen so what does this
rapidity of the Takeover of the cortex
have to do with dreaming well in the
incessant competition for territory in
the brain the visual system has a
special challenge because of the
planet's rotation we experience Darkness
for about 12 out of every 24 hours hours
and obviously I'm talking about our
evolutionary history not the recently
electrically blessed times in other
words our ancestors all spent their
lives as inadvertent participants in a
blindfold experiment every single night
so how did their visual cortex defend
its territory when you've got no data
coming in through the eyes so our
proposal is that the visual cortex
preserves its territory by finding a way
to remain active at night and we call
this the defensive activation Theory and
the purpose of dreaming here is to keep
cells in the visual cortex active and
that's how it resists conquest by the
territories of the other senses vision
is the only one of the senses that's
disadvantaged by Darkness you can still
touch and smell and taste and hear in
the dark and so it's the only sense that
needs internally generated activity to m
maintain its borders during the long
night so as a result about every 90
minutes you get this internally
generated activity that blasts
exclusively into the visual cortex and
so dreams are experienced as primarily
visual so several predictions
immediately fall out of the defensive
activation Theory first because brain
plasticity diminishes with age this
would suggest that the amount of time
spent in REM sleep should should also
decrease as one moves through the
lifespan and that turns out to be
exactly what happens REM sleep in humans
accounts for half of an infant's sleep
time but as a person grows older the
percentage of REM sleep decreases
steadily in other words diminishing
plasticity of the brain correlates with
less REM sleep but more importantly we
made a more Quantified prediction we
said hey maybe the more flexible in
animals brain is the more REM sleep it
requires to defend its visual cortex so
Dawn and I studied the plasticity in 25
species of primates and we found that
the species with more plastic brains
spend more time in REM sleep every night
so you'd think that these two measures
REM sleep and brain plasticity they
would be totally unconnected so it was
very surprising to find that they are
tightly linked so dreaming defends the
visual cortex now the circuitry that
underpins dreaming this is so ancient
and deeply wired that even people who
are blind have it but note that blind
people don't have visual dreams instead
their nighttime hallucinations involve
the other senses like feeling their way
around an oddly arranged kitchen or
hearing strangers speaking why because
other sensory areas have annexed the
underused visual C Vortex so think about
it this way people who can see and those
with visual impairments they both have
activity shooting into their occipital
lobe during dreaming but the senses
processed by that territory are
different the defensive activation
Theory also makes more General
predictions if dream sleep is triggered
by the absence of visual input during
the night we might presume that a person
deprived of vision while awake could
similarly experience dream seem like
visual hallucinations and that is
exactly what happens when people have
degenerating Vision or they end up in
solitary confinement or even just in a
dark float tank any situation in which
vision gets deprived the brain starts
fighting back and having hallucinations
so that's the idea dreams are a screen
saver the brain puts activity into the
visual cortex to prevent it from getting
ruined during the night okay so you
might say fine your hypothesis seems
plausible but why do dreams seem to be
stories after all we don't just see
random Snow like on an old television we
experience stories and in fact there are
various stories of someone discovering
something in dreams like koule thinking
of the structure of the Benzene ring
based on a dream he had of two snakes
biting each other's Tails or Paul
McCartney dreaming the melody for the
song Yesterday yesterday so what's up
with dream content the key is that the
brain is a storytelling machine your
brain is deeply carved with roadways
that represent your experience in the
world and these are stored in what are
called associative neural networks which
means that everything connects to other
things based on how they relate so if I
ask you to think of a mouse that's
physically connected in your brain's
networks to your con concept of cheese
or exterminators or Mickey Mouse or
mazes or running wheels or mouse traps
or pet stores everything else you've
ever associated with a mouse so all
concepts are related and linked
physically so what happens during sleep
and dreaming well the synapses that are
used during the day tend to be slightly
more chemically active I'll just say
they're more hot from the activity of
the day and so your dreams usually
involve something from the day or
something that's on your mind they often
involve the memories and desires and
fears and hopes that are brewing in your
inner life but the associations are much
looser so maybe you have something about
your boss or something that happened in
a class or whatever but the dream
quickly goes off in some weird Direction
the associations are looser and so we
end up dreaming stories with looser
associations following paths along the
associative neural network that we might
not otherwise take but things make sense
at least in the light of dream logic so
even if the visual cortex is just
getting voles of random activity you get
meaning out of it you get some sort of
story now people often wake up and say
no way that wasn't random that was a
metaphor I'm trying to decide if I
should quit this job and I had a dream
that I went into the office and the
floor was tilted at 45° and no matter
what I did I kept slipping back down and
that was a metaphor about the
impossibility of my advancement there
that was a sign for my
unconscious okay so maybe the
interesting thing about interpreting the
content of Dreams is that they might be
100 100% random but they act like a roar
Shack blot which is to say you can
assign any sort of meaning to them you
remember a roar Shack plot which is
where you squish some ink between two
pages and then you pull the pages apart
and you get some random shape and you
ask people to interpret what they're
seeing to assign meaning to it and it's
easy enough to say yeah that looks like
this thing in my life maybe this issue
that's been chewing at me and that's how
Dr rack used this to determine what had
meaning in a person's mind but you would
never say The Blob of of ink carried
meaning it's all about the imposition of
meaning by the viewer and this I suggest
could be what happens with dreams as
well you interpret the ink blob and that
interpretation might have significance
to your life but you imposed that
meaning instead of it being inherent in
the dream here's an interesting parallel
Pablo pcasso once said we all know that
art is not truth Art Is A Lie
that makes us realize the truth and that
could be the same thing with dreams they
are a lie that makes us realize the
truth so in this sense it's the same
thing if you're thinking about some
problem and you go to the Bookshelf and
you pull off any random book and turn to
a random page and you read the sentence
often it will very tangentially give you
some push to the thing that you're
trying to solve but that doesn't mean
the author of the book cared about you
and wrote that sentence with that future
moment in mind it simply tells us that
lots of things in the world are like
lots of other things and can therefore
be interpreted and I do just want to add
one more word of caution to the game of
dream interpretation by the time you
turn to the person next to you and say
oh my gosh I just had the strangest
dream and you tell them you are forced
to add another layer of narrative
scaffolding so that it makes sense as a
story that you're telling so a narrative
that's very thin can seem to have more
flesh after you've pushed it through
your storytelling Machinery in other
words we layer on narrative structure to
give our dreams a shape that they didn't
actually have and so especially if
you've had a dream that you've told over
and over it usually has more of a
scaffolding than it actually started
with nonetheless the content of Dreams
has always fascinated humans spurring
societies to invent cultural use for
dreams in religious ceremonies and
medicinal practices or doomed attempts
to predict the future Sigman Freud who
lived decades before modern brain
science he thought that dreams provided
an inroad into the underlying functions
of the brain and especially the
subconscious he suggested as had many
before him that dreams concealed hidden
meanings that were just at the threshold
of breaking through the barrier to
Consciousness more specifically he
proposed that dreams constitute a
disguised attempt at wish fulfillment
similarly Carl Young posited that dreams
may offset features of a character or
personality that you might ignore while
you're awake in general both those
theories have been criticized because
they can't be proven wrong and critics
have pointed out that the wish
fulfillment interpretation seems
improbable in view of the recurring
nightmares that attend post-traumatic
stress disorder so I am of course not
the first to propose that dreams might
have no inherent meaning the
psychiatrists Jay Allen Hobson and
Robert McCarley suggest that dreams may
have no meaning at all and they have a
model they call the activation synthesis
model which proposes that random
activity from the brain stem goes to the
cortex which tries to turn it into motor
output but given the paralysis of the
major muscle groups the brain has to
explain the Paradox between outgoing
motor signals and a lack of expected
sensory feedback so in this situation
the cortex synthesizes an explanation
essentially weaving a story from the
random inputs now Hobson and McCarley
faced criticism for this aspect of their
Theory because dreams often do have a
relationship to life experience so in
that light they made modifications to
allow that dream content relates to
memories and fears and desires and hopes
and so on but that these provide the
background context and not the exact
content of the cortex's interpretation
of the random activity so which is it
does dream content tell us anything at
all or nothing well here's how we can
approach the problem when you look at
one person's dreams like you think about
your own dreams you may not be able to
use the content as a key to unlock much
about the brain but as you move from
considering one dreamer to doing the
science and looking at thousands of
dream reports and hundreds of thousands
from all over the world you can start to
see the fence lines you see that dreams
aren't a wild unleashing where anything
can happen instead dreams have
particular rules to the stories and that
gives us hints so what are those rules
well I recently read a very cool new
book by my colleague Rahul johal called
This is why you dream and he outlines a
series of studies that demonstrate a
remarkable consistency of themes across
cultures and across decades the same
kinds of dreams are reported for example
being unable to find one's way or being
late for an important event in dreams
both men and women usually experience
more aggression than friendliness
although men in almost all societies
have greater physical aggression in
their dreams than women do everyone
experiences more Misfortune than Good
Fortune people experience more negative
emotions than positive emotions so the
cross-cultural research suggests that
dreams are similar across a wide range
of cultures in terms of the subject
matter the level of aggression
familiarity with the people in the
dreams for example let me zoom in on
this jandelle points out that in the
1950s there were questionnaires given to
college students in America and College
students in Japan and the questionnaire
asked them what they had dreamt about
like showing up somewhere with no
clothes or flying or trying to do
something again and again or being
buried alive or something involving
school and their teachers or whatever
and as it turns out although American
and Japanese students were living pretty
different lives their answers were
essentially the same so for the
Americans the top five dreams were
falling being attacked or pursued trying
again and again to do something a dream
involving school or teachers or studying
and sexual experiences and when you
compare this to the Japanese students it
was essentially the same their dreams
were ranked as being attacked or pursued
falling trying again and again to do
something dreams about school or
teachers or studying and being Frozen
with fright and sexual experiences were
number six so halfway across the world
very different cultures same dream
content Now 50 years after after that
study similar questions were given to
students in China and Germany and they
came up with essentially the same
answers again you find people dreaming
of being chased or pursued or arriving
too late like missing an airplane or a
final exam now you might say fine but
these are all industrialized countries
and maybe their lives are sort of
similar but in fact people have also
studied indigenous Societies in Brazil
in Mexico and Australia and they find
extremely similar results the cultures
are quite quite different but the plots
of the dreams are not so there have been
lots of studies on this sort of thing
now and they all conclude that dream
content is essentially the same across
cultures and across time as one example
wherever you are in the world men dream
more about other men while women dream
equally of men and women and all people
across cultures are more likely to be
victims of violence rather than
perpetrators so dreams cover similar
across the world irrespective of
language and culture and time it doesn't
seem to matter how rich you are how poor
you are so what does that mean well
what's the one thing we all have in
common our organs on the inside and
specifically the brain as easy as it is
to look at different cultures around the
world with different governments and
different religions and different
costumes this variability has cropped up
in the last millisecond of human history
and if you look just under the skin and
the bone you find the same brain in us
all it's the same engine under the hood
so whenever we find something clear like
oh everyone dreams about the same thing
that tells us we are looking at
something fundamental and ancient and
Universal and we find all sorts of other
interesting Answers by looking across
thousands of dreams for example what if
dreams are a way to live out fantasies
like sexual fantasy that seems
consistent with how we talk about dreams
a way of acting out our desires but in
studies across all cultures it turns out
that fewer than 10% of dreams are sexual
which I find fascinating given the way
we talk about dreams if a young single
person says to another single person oh
I had a dream about you last night that
everyone titters and makes assumptions
about that and we have terms like dream
girl or dream guy but in fact 90% of our
dreams have nothing to do with that so
the content is remarkably similar across
the world but where things get really
interesting is when we zoom in one more
level and really examine what
Dreamscapes look like in detail and I'm
not asking about what's in the dream
script here but if you look very closely
across thousands of dream reports you
can ask what is not in the script so I
want to return to a question I posed at
the beginning which is that we live in a
society where we are constantly hunched
over our cell phones and our laptops how
come these essentially never show up in
our dreams isn't that weird and even in
the era before computers back when
people read a lot more books how come no
one sits around reading books in their
dreams why can't you even see any text
in your dreams why do you spend so much
time writing stuff down in real life but
you never can write stuff down in a
dream how come you never do math in a
dream like calculating a tip for a
restaurant Bill even if that comes up in
a dream plot it feels totally impossible
to get the right answer well all of this
serves as a big Clue Into the networks
that are active during a dream and this
is pretty well worked out with brain
Imaging now although anyone who is being
very observant probably could have
guessed this all even a century ago what
reading and writing and cell phones and
computers all have in common is that
they require the use of a network in the
brain that we summar
as the executive Network which involves
a lot of activity largely distributed in
the frontal lobes and the parietal lobes
and you need this for rule-based problem
solving and for making decisions when
you've got a particular goal in front of
you that you're trying to solve and the
key is that activity in the executive
network is reduced I'll just say it's
shut down while you are dreaming so
you're not able to read and write and
launch an app on your cell phone screen
and so on because that work requires the
executive Network and that network is
off duty for the night but what is on is
a network we summarize as the default
mode Network which is what Kindles to
life when you shut your eyes and you're
not involved in gathering information
and acting on some other task so this is
called the default mode network but many
scientists are renaming this the imag
ination Network because this is what
lets your Storehouse of experiences fly
you can piece ideas together and come up
with new hypotheses and thoughts and
this is what's firing on all cylinders
when you dream so the executive network
is reduced the imagination network is
enhanced and this is what gives dreams
their very untethered character there
are other Clues you can also gather from
looking at deta
dream reports which is that sometimes
objects will turn into other objects but
they're always related in some way what
I mean is you might have your bicycle
turn into a motorcycle or your small
house becomes a mansion or the cafeteria
becomes a restaurant or the hammer
becomes a screwdriver but you don't find
the bicycle turning into a restaurant or
your house turning into a hammer what
does that tell us well under the hood we
have what are known as semantic maps and
more than associations which I mentioned
before semantic Maps refer to the way
that all the stuff in your brain is laid
out in terms of relationships between
concepts for example in your semantic
map you have the concept of an animal
which might include categories like
mammals and birds and reptiles and so on
and within one of those categories you
might have more specific Concepts like
dog and cat and eagle and salmon and
snake and frog and so on things are laid
out in your brain based on their
conceptual meaning and what we find is
that dreams follow the semantic maps in
other words they stay local in the
little clusters of the maps so this is
why you see the bicycle turning into the
motorcycle because they're both forms of
transportation but not into the
screwdriver which is a tool and in a
totally different category the these
things live in different little
neighborhoods of the semantic map so
again a careful look at dream reports
tells us important clues about what is
going on under the hood and that tells
us that while the themes are Universal
strife and falling and attempting to do
something over and over the details are
filled in with the specifics of your
semantic maps and this all brings me
back around to a question I had since I
was a kid about whether dreams are
experienced in black and white or in
color now when I was a child I remember
at some point that my parents told me
that we dream in black and white and I
was confused by this because I didn't
seem to dream in black and white as far
as I could tell my dreams were in color
so I thought I must be somehow assessing
that incorrectly because they were both
very smart and educated my mother was a
biology teacher my father was a medical
doctor and As I Grew Older I asked my
friends about this but I couldn't find
anyone who thought that their dreams
were not in color now because I
genuinely knew that my parents were
brilliant I thought maybe there was
something they knew that I didn't like
maybe we were dreaming in black and
white but didn't realize it and then I
found several large-scale surveys that
reported what my parents had said that
most people dream in black and white one
study was from 1958 and they said only
9% of people dream in color in a paper
in 1942 reported that only 10% claimed
to frequently or very frequently dream
in color and a report in 1951 had the
highest percentage they said that 29% of
dreams are in color but even this didn't
make things clear what was going on
because dream reports from earlier like
Freud's reports of Dreams in
1900 often had explicit color
descriptions in them so somehow it
seemed to be only my parents'
generation that dreamed in black and
white and it turns out if you run the
study now almost everyone says they
dream in color as you may have guessed
by now the hypothesis on this is that
people were influenced by watching black
and white television and black and white
movies and black and white photographs
and once the technology changed to color
then so did dreams I I'm putting a very
nice paper by Eric schwitz gble on my
site that compiles all these studies
through the years and the change in the
reports Through The Years again this
demonstrates that the content of our
dreams has to do with the experiences
that we have now I'll tell you an
interesting side note on this I happen
to live in California and during covid
everyone in my neighborhood wore masks
and it was a very weird time and so we
rarely saw other human beings for a
couple of years without everyone being
in Mas s and one of the things I
remember from that time was that we
would sometimes watch a movie on TV and
it was so shocking that people in the
movie would push their way through a
dense crowd and sit so close to their
friends and the people they were talking
with and they were indoors with such
density and it became in 2020 so
noticeable and so shocking when we were
in the middle of Co interestingly it's a
little hard to remember that now but I
remember it well because I was taking
careful notes on what was going on with
my dreams during this time and
specifically since my real life involved
the very thinned out crowds and everyone
in masks did that show up in my dreams
and the answer was no the thing that
struck me the entire time during
lockdown is that my dreams were totally
normal in my dreams I was at a big party
and there were lots of people around and
no one ever had masks in my dreams which
struck me as weird when I would wake up
why didn't my dreams reflect to my daily
experience now this is just a single
person's report and I didn't think to
study this carefully at the time by
doing a big online survey of everyone
but if it's generally true that other
people were having these very Salient
daily experiences of lockdown and masks
and yet it wasn't appearing in their
dreams the only interpretation I can
make is that our dreams reflect Pathways
that get laid down over our youth When
We're Young And if that's the case then
maybe we could still find some black and
white dreaming among older people now in
other words maybe you'd still see some
of that now even though those people
have been watching color television for
60 years now with all the things on my
plate I'm not going to have time to pull
off that study but I would love it if
listeners could ask their oldest living
relative say a parent or grandparent or
great-grandparent how they dream and
determine if anyone still dream dreams
in black and white and what their age is
okay so that story of black and white
dreaming correlating with black and
white television that seems like a clean
story but there's one thing that still
bugs me about it although television and
movies were in black and white obviously
the world wasn't when my parents walked
outside they saw green trees and blue
skies and red Cardinals and yellow
sunflowers and so on so why didn't their
dreams reflect that well there are two
things to say here first not every one
dreamed in black and white instead it
was between let's say 70 to 90% so had I
been alive in the 1950s I would have
studied the issue of how many hours of
Television people watched each day and
perhaps some measure of how many black
and white movies they saw and how many
newspapers with black and white photos
and so on and correlated that to whether
or not they had black and white dreams
second I have a totally speculative
hypothesis I don't have any evidence for
this but I'm going to say it anyway what
if some part of the brain
knows at least in part that dreams are
like a fake movie and in that way it
takes on the property of fiction which
in those days was black and white
because note that even when you're in
the middle of a movie some part of your
brain still knows you're watching a
movie and this is why when the train
comes at the camera you don't actually
duck and scream so even that we're
compelled by fiction we don't fall for
it completely could it be that to the
brain
dreams are more like movies I don't know
because I missed that era so the
opportunity seems gone to study that but
I'm wondering if we're going to have
another shot at studying this question
once virtual reality becomes ubiquitous
and pervasive and whether a big chunk of
the population will report dreams that
are more like synthesized virtual
reality worlds then like our daily life
to me this would shed light on the
mystery of the the black and white
dreams and the details by which your
dreams are determined by your
experiences in the world now there's
still lots of stuff that I think we
don't understand one is why we can have
false implanted memories inside a dream
this is something I've wondered about
for years for example I had a dream many
years ago about my brother's wedding and
he was yelling at me and saying I can't
believe you said that to Jenny and
ruined my wedding and I felt horrible I
felt as guilty as I've ever felt why did
I do that why was I so insensitive and
then I woke up as it turns out my
brother had a lovely wedding that went
just perfectly and I of course never
said anything bad to his bride my lovely
sister-in-law Jenny ever there was never
trouble of any sort there so why did I
fall for the false memory why couldn't I
access my real memories of the wedding
while I was inside the dream in other
words the issue is that not only did I
have a false memory but also I had no
access to my real memory of the wedding
one set of memories was replaced by
another and this is what freaks me out
not just about dreams but about our
sense of reality we buy whatever our
brains serve up to us at every moment we
buy the plot of a dream completely and
by the way this is one interpretation of
what happens in schizophrenia the way
psychiatrists used to describe this
about a century ago is that psychosis is
essentially an intrusion of the dream
state into the waking state so the next
time you see a man talking to himself on
the street and having an argument with
someone who is not there in front of him
interpret it through this lens that he
is having an awake dream and you might
understand what's happening in a fresh
way so what we see here and what we've
seen in many of these episodes is that
we accept whatever reality is served up
to us and by the way I think this is why
literature works with our species
because we can so easily adopt a
different reality we can read a book and
we laugh and we weep we are effortlessly
deluded and to understand this I think
we shouldn't use the term suspension of
disbelief it's the wrong term because it
implies that disbelief is the stand
standard disbelief is the normal
operating mode in fact it might be just
the opposite our brains are perfectly
willing to accept whatever they are fed
now I want to hit one more question in
today's episode which is where is
dreaming headed would it be possible to
read out the content of somebody's
dreams well if you happen to have heard
my episode number 27 you'll know that
the answer is already yes at least to to
some degree different research groups
have been working since at least 2011 to
see if they can measure brain activity
in the visual cortex to assess what
somebody is seeing in front of their
eyes in other words if you're looking at
a building there's a different activity
in your visual cortex than if you're
looking at a puppy or a cup of coffee
and so on and so the research question
is can you tell what a person is seeing
just by measuring the patterns in their
visual cortex and the answer is that you
can pretty well tell what somebody is
seeing this way after that research came
out people realized we might be able to
measure dreams because dreams are
activity in the primary visual cortex
dreams are experienced as visual because
it's activity in the visual cortex and
your brain understands that as visual
experience so Yuki alsoo comani and his
colleagues published a paper a few years
ago in which he took this same approach
he had had people look at a bunch of
pictures and watch a bunch of videos
while they were in the brain scanner and
then he used machine learning to decode
how the picture out there corresponds to
the activity patterns in the brain and
now you let people go to sleep in the
scanner and you measure their visual
cortex and you use the machine learning
model to decode what that activity would
correspond to in other words what they
were presumably seeing in their dream
Dre and once the machine learning model
gives an answer then you can make a
little video reconstruction of their
dream and you can watch what presumably
was the experience for the dreamer
albeit with very low resolution now when
you're decoding pictures or videos it's
easier to know if you're getting it
right when you're decoding dreaming it's
harder to know for sure that you got the
right answer you have to wake up your
participants and say hey what do
remember and then you compare that to
what you think you might have decoded
but even with those caveats this gives
the rough start to a dream decoder that
could tell you what you were dreaming
about and presumably this will only
become higher resolution with time so it
may be that in the future we are able to
know what you dreamed even if you can't
remember it you could keep a digitized
dream diary that way or you could share
your dreams with a girlfriend or
boyfriend or less likely a dream could
be used in a court of law someday who
knows where this will all go but we can
imagine that in 200 years from now
dreams may be a very different sort of
thing than the entirely private
experience that we enjoy now so let's
wrap up to my mind the biggest issue
that freaks me out about dreams is this
issue that we believe patently
impossible possible situations and we
accept false memories even when they
contradict events that we know to be
true in Waking Life this represents a
deeper question about why we can be so
easily fooled but many other questions
about dreams can be answered in the
meantime we're in a moment of using the
tools of Neuroscience to tie specific
details of the biology to the experience
of dreaming we still have a long way to
go but some promising leads can come
from the way that dream content changes
with drugs for example dreams can be
made more Vivid and frightening by drugs
that affect the dopamine system or by
alkaloids anti-depressants tend to
reduce the amount of dream sleep
medications to reduce epileptic seizures
also seem to reduce nightmares so we can
imagine in the near future having
systematic studies to work out the
effects of different drugs on dream
content and to do this in conjunction
with brain Imaging and we might be able
to further nail down the relationships
between dream content and specific bits
of the dream generation Network and
Beyond drugs we can also look to disease
because specific problems lead to the
loss or impairment of dreaming people
can lose dreaming with injuries to the
inferior parietal lobe on either side
patients with certain certain forms of
dementia report Bland dreams involving
less aggression and less narrative
complexity and less emotional content so
by looking at changes to the brain and
corresponding changes in dreaming we can
better map out the landscape of what is
involved and fundamentally studying
dreaming may help us to comprehend
Consciousness why because there are so
many similarities between REM sleep and
the awake conscious State now there are
major differences as well but it's
important to note that we find both
Waking Life and dreaming equally
compelling and believable which tells us
that all you need to do is strike the
right notes on the neural piano and you
have your totally believable experience
but what would be cool is if there were
something like Consciousness during a
dream state that was even closer to our
daily normal ious experience and that's
what we're going to talk about next week
we're going to talk about the very rare
circumstance when you are dreaming and
you realize that you are dreaming and
you take control of your dream and
become an active director of the plot
you are essentially conscious but living
inside the walls of your skull so join
me next week as we sail into the very
strange and amazing territory of lucid
dreaming go to eagan.mn
with questions or discussion and check
out and subscribe to Inner Cosmos on
YouTube for videos of each episode and
to leave comments until next time I'm
David Eagleman and this is inner
Cosmos
