why do you think of your 30 trillion
cells as a self does an ant colony have
a sense of self and could you think of
all those ants as a liquid brain what
does any of this have to do with how the
brain of a caterpillar transitions to
the brain of a butterfly or how we might
think of a memory as a pattern that
stays alive and has its own life
welcome to interner Cosmos with me David
Eagleman I'm a neuroscientist and an
author at Stanford and in these episodes
we dive deeply into our three-pound
Universe to uncover some of the most
surprising aspects of our
lives in the last episode I talked about
who we are and how we change Through
Time
the pieces and parts of every single
cell in your body degrade and get
replaced
continuously such that you are
physically speaking a totally new person
every few years and yet we experience
the illusion that we are the same person
we've always been we have this illusion
of
constancy so last week we explored this
by considering the thought experiment of
the ship of Theus the story here is that
each plank of a famous ship is replaced
one by one over time which raises the
question is it still the same ship even
after every plank has been replaced and
nothing of the original remains we
considered this question of course
because like the ship we too exist with
physical changes that never stop and yet
we perceive ourselves as constant
through time the planks of thesis's ship
map onto the cells and molecules in our
bodies so what maintains your sense of
self over
time okay so maybe the thing that links
our different selves through time is our
memory but there's a problem here as
well which is that memory is notoriously
unreliable it's constantly being
reshaped and revised so this is all very
strange and there's an added difficulty
which is that we're constantly changing
and even when we recognize that we have
changed we always assume that we're not
going to change very much into the
future and that's always incorrect this
is a cognitive bias called the end of
History illusion we tend to believe that
our current preferences and
personalities are fixed even though we
will in fact continue to evolve so
that's our situation we constantly
change but we're reaching back into our
not so good memory to try to understand
who we are or at least who we were all
this encourages us to start looking for
new Frameworks when we think about the
self for example what if we thought of
the memories themselves like their own
little creatures and they are competing
to stay alive so in this episode I want
to dive into new ways of thinking about
all of this and there's no one better to
ring up for that than my colleague
Michael Levens he's one of the most
energetic and original thinkers in the
field Michael is a developmental
biologist and a synthetic biologist
meaning he makes new kinds of organisms
he's a TFT University and what I love
about Michael is his extremely broad
interests like bioelectrical signals by
which cells communicate and what
cognition looks like across totally
different body plans and
how you get similar forms and functions
across all kinds of different scales in
biology so I'm going to have Michael
back to talk about some of these other
topics on a future episode but today I
want to zoom in with him on his recent
thinking about the self and
memory so Mike tell us how you think
about the self I I work in diverse
intelligence I'm interested in all
different kinds of implementations of of
of minds and I think a self is a useful
way to think about selves is as a system
that uh has goals of some particular
size it's What doug Hoff would call a
strange Loop it it it's an observer of
the outside world and but it's also an
observer of itself it's something that
can loop back in and uh interpret what
it what its own memories mean and what
what it is doing and make decisions
going forward those are the components
of being a self and so do selves change
yeah part of the Paradox of of being a
self is that you have to change in order
to stay alive you have to change in
order to persist every time you learn
something every time you make a decision
that then feeds back and Alters the
inputs that you receive and thus changes
your own cognitive system and your own
behavior going forward you've now
changed I I you know we selves face this
this Paradox that in order to to to uh
to persist they must change and
transform over time why do you suppose
we have the illusion of ourselves when
we think about you know yourself and
your life you have the illusion that
it's unchanging what do you suppose
that's about yeah I think that uh well
let's let's just think about very
primitive basic uh fun basic agents at
the very beginning of of of of that of
that Spectrum if if you're any kind of a
system uh that's going to survive in the
real world what you can't afford to do
is to be a kind of plasan demon where
where you're tracking the micro states
of you know every single stimulus every
molecular impact on your on your
membrane or whatever you you can't
afford to track all that if you try to
do that you will run out of time you'll
run out of energy you'll be eaten and
dead in no time and so I think that what
we have in uh at least at least in
biological evolution is a an incredible
pressure to coar grain that is to look
out into the world and to group uh
inputs and Sensations and stimuli and
observations that you make to group them
into categories and to try to understand
your world by reducing its complexity
and by trying to uh make models of the
world that that have these large things
in it that are themselves agents you
know that do things and that you can you
can then make decisions about what they
do and you don't have to pay attention
to all the micro States if you're going
to do that you fundamentally need a way
to make models of persistent things you
have to uh have some some way of saying
that this is an object I need to stay
away from or conversely this is
something I need to approach or this is
something I need to recognize meanwhile
of course the let's so let's just look
at Vision you know for example so you
have these these uh pixels impacting
onto your retina these these visual
stimuli and depending on how you're
looking at something the details will be
completely different the lighting will
be different the the motion the way that
it's angled but your job as a as a
successful cognitive system is to
recognize as well as possible that this
is always the same thing right that you
can despite the fact that it's now just
shifted tinted green or what whatever it
is that that hey wait a minute I
recognize it I I know what is and so I
think from the very beginning to to be a
successful being that um can survive in
a world where time and energy are are
extremely precious these are precious
resources you have to get good at
noticing and in fact magnifying
invariance you know things that stay the
same and then I think you turn that on
yourself and you say wait a minute I am
also an agent that does things and I
don't mean consciously and we don't do
this consciously but but but every
system every living system I think has
an internal self model and part of that
model is to recognize you as a
persistent thing even though things
change and then and then you know those
those of us that have self-consciousness
then have a have a story that we tell
ourselves about being a a persistent
thing as opposed to I think what we much
more um close to what we really are
which is a flowing
process so so we all walk through life
and we have our notion of self and we
observe the selves in others that that
we love and we try to figure out what
this is all about you have a very cool
approach which is that you think about
diverse intelligences tell us what that
term means yeah diverse intelligence is
the name of a of an of a field that on
the one hand is is emerging uh now and
it's a very exciting kind of field on
the other hand this is a collection of
ideas that have really been around for a
very long time and it goes back to the
uh efforts of trying to understand what
what do we actually mean by uh
intelligence by Minds by um cognition by
all all these kinds of all these kinds
of terms and we have familiar examples
of them in brainy animals and and in you
know in ourselves but actually the the
the key thing that that we need to
understand is that all of us at one
point both on an evolutionary scale and
on a developmental scale we were all a
single cell ones you know at one point
we were a little blob of of of quas and
cytoplasm and an unfertilized oite and
we would look at that and we would say
well there's um there's a little a
little blob chemicals that obeys physics
and chemistry and then at some point we
have something that we would say has an
inner perspective it has a mind it has
preferences it has goals it has memories
and and you know and it and it has a
full-blown self-conscious kind of metac
cognition and so on now how did we get
there right because we started out you
know this this amazing journey from
physics to mind you know you start off
with with a little blob of chemistry and
then eventually here we are so diverse
intelligence uh is is I I I think is um
predicated on the on the idea that uh we
need to understand how it is that minds
are embodied in the physical world and
that by understanding that we emerge
slowly and gradually this is we we are
not you know there's no there's no
magical category called human that
suddenly snaps into existence at some
particular moment of embryonic
development but this is a slow gradual
process uh it's it's an effort to
understand what those processes are that
give rise to collective intelligence and
by the way all intelligence I think is
collective intelligence because all of
us are made of parts and we have to
understand how the comp competencies of
those parts give rise to whatever the
larger scale system is capable of doing
and and as soon as as soon as you frame
the problem that way to understand what
what is it that the components are doing
to scale that cognition from the
competencies of a single cell to that of
of an animal or a human then then
immediately you start to ask yourself
okay so not only is there a a history
going backwards where we see
increasingly simpler forms and ask what
what is their intelligence like but then
we can uh really uh try to um shed some
of the uh limitations that were given to
us by our evolutionary firmware that
make it easy for us to recognize you
know large intell large large um
medium-sized objects moving at medium um
speeds through three-dimensional space
and we say okay that's an intelligent
animal doing whatever it's doing but to
learn to recognize intelligence and
unfamiliar guises you know what other
spaces can intelligence be operating in
what what else can it be made of what
other what other uh processes give rise
to this scale up of intelligence that's
diverse intelligence it's the the broad
attempt to understand intelligence as it
can be what what's an example of that
for example ants in a colony
understanding that as a as an
intelligent system where they're laying
down memories in particular ways it's
very different than the way we think
about the human brain is that an example
um yes so I'll give you a few examples
and get sort of progressively
progressively weirder with them um
traditional Collective intelligences
like ants and beehives and and you know
termite colonies and flocks of birds and
things like that those are uh typical
collective intelligence they are what
Ricard solle calls liquid brains because
they're moving around relative to each
other our neurons tend to stand still
relative to each other and yet we too
are a collective intelligence right we
we are a pile of neurons and other cells
that work together to give rise to an
emergent being with memories and
preferences and goals that don't belong
to any of the individual cells so so no
matter what you are whether you're a
collection of neurons or you're a
collection of birds or or of termites or
anything like that um what you need is a
kind of cognitive glue you need these
policies that are implemented by the
pieces that allow the collective to be
more than the sum of its parts in in in
relevant ways and so if we Define
intelligence as uh problemsolving
competencies in some space so the
ability to um and so this is kind of
William james' definition of
intelligence same goal by different
means right the ability to navigate some
space to reach your objective and uh and
and do so despite novelty despite
perturbations and and so on then we can
get we can get uh progressively um more
inclusive with this we can say okay so
we have we have animals that solve
problems we have uh unfamiliar things
like slime molds right so so so there
are people including us who um study
slime mold um behavior in slime mold
learning and things like that so slime
molds are a very unusual organism it's a
single cell it can be quite large and
yet it can it can solve all kinds of
problems people have studied memory and
learning in uh in bacteria in uh in
unicellular organisms and plants and and
then you can get then you can get um you
know even even more um sort of broad
with this and you can ask well what
happens Beyond three-dimensional space
for example the cells that make up our
bodies and our and our tissues and our
organs they operate in physiological
State space so the space of all possible
physiological conditions they operate in
gene expression space uh embryonic and
um regenerative cells operate in an
anatomical space they have to navigate
from whatever shape they have now to
some kind of complex organ structure um
and in all of these spaces you can you
can see if you look for them using the
techniques of Behavioral Science you can
find them solving problems you can find
them getting to their goal in very
creative ways despite various problems
so that's kind of the range of the
diverse intelligences and then beyond
that you have embodied Robotics and you
have maybe software intelligent agents
and maybe um someday exobiological
beings and so
on okay so the challenge is that
everything's changing all the time uh in
in our brains and all these other
biological systems and an colonies
whatever things are changing all the
time cells are dying or or aging or
getting mutations and yet somehow when
it comes to memory of oneself we tend to
have some sort of memory it's not
perfect it only has a few details things
like that but we we we retain this
memory through time now what is your
framework for thinking about that yeah
um I'm not sure we retain memory through
time as much as we reconstruct memory
through time and uh of course there's a
lot of you know human Neuroscience being
done about this but I want to take a
step back and give you another example
that kind of drives my my thinking on
this consider what happens from a from a
butterfly to a caterpillar so in the
caterpillar you have this soft bodied
creature that lives in basically a
two-dimensional world where it crawls
around and and eats leaves now one thing
that's uh that it has to do is it has to
turn into a butterfly during that
process of metamorphosis its brain is
massively rebuilt many of the cells die
all the connections are broken it's
completely refactored and you get a new
brain suitable for driving a now
hardbodied kind of vehicle completely
different controller you need for that
uh and now it flies and it lives in a
three-dimensional world and um and so on
now it turns out that uh if you train
the
caterpillar the the the let's say you
train it to associate a specific color
to a specific leaf that it wants to eat
what you will find is that um the
butterfly despite having a totally
refactored brain will remember that
information and for years I thought the
amazing thing here was how do you hold
on to information when your information
medium is being totally ripped apart and
refactored right we don't you know our
computer technology doesn't doesn't like
that we we don't have anything that has
that that that robustness to it but but
if you think about it more uh what turns
out is that the amazing thing is not
holding on to the memory because
actually the memories the exact memories
of the caterpillar are of no use to the
butterfly whatsoever because it doesn't
move the same way it doesn't want the
leaves it drinks nectar right and so so
just holding on to that memory is is of
no use what you need is to actually uh
transform and remap that memory into a
completely novel context where it's like
not leaves but food for example right so
you have to generalize a little bit and
you have to now remap it on a different
um on a different controller and um you
know numerous people who have done
experiments in memory transfer most
recently David GL and others show that
that um it's it's really wild how you
can move either tissues or EXT extracts
let's say RNA extracts or whatever and
introduce them into a new uh into a new
creature and and have that creature like
take on that that initial learning so
let me interrupt for a second so tell us
about David glandon's experiments in
these SE slugs yeah well specifically in
in David's work uh what he was doing is
um training these se- slugs to a
particular uh to a particular task I
mean it was a simple you know simple um
reflex and um extracting RNA from from
the brain because the hypothesis was
that memory is stored in some way in in
this in this medium of of RNA and then
uh he was injecting it into a naive
animal and showing that they now have re
you know they show a recall of that
information I mean to me I mean it's
it's a fabulous body work uh to me one
of the most interesting things about it
is that when you've got this RNA you
don't have to go put it exactly in the
right neuron where it was supposed to be
you know when the you just kind of
inject it somewhere in the brain of a
second of a second sea slug yeah exactly
of the recipient right of the whole SE
SL and it somehow gets taken up and
that's that's a that's a theme that um
that is like Central to all this because
what I think this is this is telling us
is so now so now let's let's walk into
this from from the other end whatever
you are human or anything else you don't
have access to the Past what you have
access to is the engrams the memory
traces that the past has left in your
brain or body or wherever that were
formed by past experience and so what
you now have to do is to at any given
moment and it's you know these moments I
don't know how many milliseconds they
are but but some some number of
milliseconds you have to reconstruct
that memory to be meaningful to you now
because you don't know what it used to
mean this is you have to do this on the
on the Fly and I think there's a lot of
um a good Neuroscience showing how
plastic these memories are and how
they're how you know even even recall of
the memories means they're getting
changed there's no non-destructive read
accessing these memories changes them
and and and so so the way I think about
this is uh as an architecture in the
shape of a of a kind of bow tie and this
is for the computer science listeners
you might imagine like a like a an
autoencoder um architecture where uh
there's a funnel on the left side which
receives the primary experiences the raw
data that that come in the the sense
Impressions and that the process of
learning has to and and and this is
fundamental to intelligence is
abstracting from Individual instances of
things you experience to a rule to some
kind of um some kind of pattern and it's
the pattern that you remember it so you
compress all those uh experiences you
throw away all the irrelevant details
and you form a memory you store that in
some sort of engram uh you know
sometimes people think of this as
synaptic modifications sometimes other
people think it's in the RNA or in the
cytoskeleton wherever so so you store
this but now but now here comes here
comes the really interesting part uh
when you need to recall this
you have to now here comes the right
side of that um the right side of that
bow tie you have to sort of reinl that
compressed memory and because you've
lost all kinds of information this
process this this recall process is
creative because you don't have all the
details that were there and no nor can
you really be sure at a later time what
the meaning was to your past self in
other words I I also think of memories
as as literally messages from your past
self so I tend to think of memory and
recall as communication events and it's
just uh you know it's a communication
with a past version of you but it's the
same they sent you a message it was
encrypted and and and um compressed in
these uh in these engrams and then you
try to reinflated it and your goal at
any given time is not to have any kind
of uh allegiance to what the memory
meant before your goal now is to
reinterpret it the way the butterfly
does in whatever is the most optimal
adaptive way that makes sense
now so this really you know the first
part is kind of algorithmic which is the
compression but now here comes a
creative process it's not really
deductive it's a creative process where
you take that prompt it's it's it's more
of a prompt than anything else and you
say okay what does this mean to me now
how can I incorporate this into my
current constantly evolving model of the
self of the outside world and so so it's
very much and and this goes on goes on
all the time and this this is consistent
with um the plasticity of of memories
it's consistent with um confabulation
which has been seen in all kinds of
experiments with with human subjects you
know split brain and so on wait let's
take a second to talk about
confabulation so this is where brains
seem to make something up you know there
are these experiments for example the
cutaneous Rabbid illusion if I tap you
twice uh somewhere on your forearm and
then I tap you a third time let's say in
a different location you will feel like
you felt three Taps that were all that
were moving in the direction even though
the second tap was in the same spot you
feel like you uh felt it on the way to
the third one this is one example of
lots of confabulation where the brain is
retrospectively making things up now the
interesting part is we look at
confabulation generally as something bad
for example with large language models
we talk about hallucinations but there
is another way to look at this which is
as hypothesis as generating new creative
ideas so tell us how that fits into the
way you think about confabulation yeah I
mean so so here's another another
example of confabulation that um is is
similar to what what I'm talking about
two examples one is uh there was a there
was a patient that had a um an electrode
that was placed in their brain for I
think epilepsy was the idea and uh and
it happened to land in a region of the
brain that when you stimulate that
electrode it makes them laugh makes the
mouth laugh so so the person will be
sitting there thinking about something
serious you can see and there was a
video of this I saw somewhere the the
scientist pushes the button they start
laughing and then you ask them why are
you laughing and the answer is never gee
I don't know I was sitting here thinking
about something serious and then my
mouth started laughing that's never the
answer you get the answer you get is
well I I thought of something funny I
thought of a joke and and you get the
same thing out of split brain patients
when the one hemisphere causes the other
side of the body to do something that
the language hemisphere doesn't
understand what they usually do is make
up a story about it on the spot and they
don't know you know consciously they
won't report that they're making up a
story so I think I think what we mean by
confabulation is really a
fundamental skill and necessity of sense
making of your world you have a model of
the outside world you have a model of
yourself and what you are and how you
behave and uh sometimes that model gets
updated but but sometimes you just
incorporate other world events that that
that go on you incorporate them into
that model and you interpret them in a
way that makes sense to you now you know
and um something similar to what you
said about the tapping you've seen the
the rubber hand illusion yeah in the
rubber hand illusion your hand let's say
your left hand is covered up you're not
seeing it but you're seeing a rubber
hand and you see somebody um stroking
that rubber hand and every time that
rubber hand gets stroked you feel a
stroke on on your hand too the person is
stroking them both at the same time even
though you can't see your own hand uh
and then they hit that hand with a
hammer and you withdraw in Terror
because it feels like it's become your
hand yeah so so to so to me the amazing
thing about that that is the plasticity
look we we've been tetr pods for I think
almost 400 million years something like
that and so so for for millions of years
we had a brain that knows exactly how
many limbs you have and within what 7
Minutes of of new experience you now
have decided that you have this extra
hand it's uh the plasticity is is is
Crazy by the way one thing that has been
extraordinary on this is experiments in
VR where for example you give somebody a
third arm that comes out of their chest
and you control your natural two arms
with two controllers and you can see
your arms and you also see this third
third arm which you control by uh
changing your wrist orientations and
that can control the third arm and
within a few minutes people can get very
good at controlling this third arm and
you know they're doing a game where you
pick up boxes of certain colors and uh
yes so you can add Limbs and subtract
limbs readily the homunculus the little
model of your body is totally flexible
in that way that right there the ability
to uh to adapt uh to to novel situations
in this way that that confabulation to
tell a story that makes sense not that
it's necessarily true relative to what
your past was giving you but but to what
makes sense for you now is fundamental
to biology and I think biology doesn't
preserve the Fidelity of memories it
preserves the salience of memories it it
tries to remap them in the way that is
makes sense to you now not necessarily
to what it meant and and I think that
this is fundamentally an intelligence
ratchet for life and here's what I mean
by that um let's look instead of a
memories of a single of a single human
or an animal let's look on an
evolutionary time scale you come into
the world as an embryo you've been given
all of this uh genetic and cytoplasmic
and other kinds of information that are
the uh the accumulated really the
memories of your of your lineage agent
right the lineage that's been through
that's been through the evolution and uh
has U has accumulated all this useful
information there are some animals uh
and and at least as far as we know maybe
nematodes like celegans that are
extremely uh hardwired we know exactly
how many cells they're going to have all
the cells have the same position it's
determined by lineage they're very
hardwired but the majority of of of uh
of living forms aren't like that they
they take that information and they
reinterpret it in uh novel ways I think
that now now in normal development we
always see the same thing happening so
we kind of assume that it's some kind of
hardwired mechanical process but it's
not that at all for this reason we can
take we can make a tadpole which has no
eyes in the head but it has an eye on
its tail and that those those animals
can see see right out of the box they
don't need new rounds of selection or
Evolution or adaptation or any of that
they can see immediately we can take
cells from an early frog embryo and they
become xenobots and they do interesting
things there have never been any
xenobots there's never been any
selection to be a good zenbot right so
that plasticity wait can you can you
explain to the audience what a zenbot is
sure yeah uh so so we make we make uh in
our group we make xenobots and anthr
robots these are these are um living uh
systems that we call them biobots
because we use them uh for among other
things biorobotics kinds of applications
they are living uh organisms made of
cells in the in the case of xenobots
they come from frog cells in the case of
anthr robots they come from adult human
tracheal epithelial cells they are self
motile they will move around a dish they
they sort of swim around a dish on their
own and they have lots of interesting
capabilities for example the anthr
robots if they find a neural wound they
will heal they will heal the peripheral
inovation by by taking the two sides of
the neural wound and kind of connecting
them together who you know who would
have known that that your tracheal cells
that sit there for you know quietly in
your body for for decades have the
ability to form a self multile little
creature that runs around and do these
things and does these things so the
plasticity and and people have been
noticing this this kind of thing for um
for a very long time developmental
biologist is that living systems will
play the hand their dealt they don't
just automatically at least most of them
don't just automatically do the same
thing they will try to uh as much as we
try to tell a coherence story in um
confabulation in linguistic space they
will confabulate in transcriptional
space meaning gene expression space in
uh physiological space and in um
anatomical space to put together some
kind of a coherent uh lifestyle given
novel um novel circumstances the
environment can be novel um you can
interface living tissue with all kinds
of weird materials uh they will always
try to make something and I think that's
because they never assume that uh you
can take the past literally they have to
on the Fly put something together one of
my favorite examples is uh what happens
in the the new kidney tubules you have a
n um if if you take a section through
the kidney tubule you see eight or 10
cells are making like a like a circle
and they make this they make this too
well one of the things that that people
have found is that you can treat them in
a way that makes multiple copy number of
their chromosome so they the genetic
material instead of 2 N they will have
4N 5n 6n and so on if you do that the
cells get bigger but the nude stays the
same size so that's kind of amazing so
you take his cross-section through the
tubule and you see oh the cells are
bigger but there's fewer of them and
they still form the exact same structure
well you can make a a highly polyploid
nude like that that has gigantic cells
and in that case one single cell will
bend around itself leaving a hole in the
middle which is a completely different
molecular mechanism right it's not
cellto cell communication it's some kind
of cytoskeletal bending so now think
about what this means if you're a nude
coming into to this world you can't
count on how much genetic material
you're going to have you can't count on
and never mind not being able to count
on the environment right who knows what
the pH of your water is and all that
forget that you can't even count on your
own Parts you don't know what your
chromosome number is going to be you
don't know how many cells you're going
to have you don't know the size of your
C you have to do something coherent and
in that case build an actual nude when
everything changes and that's why I
think that um that's the fundamental
thing about confabulation is that if you
commit to the idea which I think biology
has to unlike our computer technology
which relies on a um highly Reliable
Hardware right when you when you code
you don't worry about your you know CPU
doing something weird you just assume
it's going to do what it needs to do you
don't think your your you know your
copper is going to go off or something
in biology that's not the case the the
medium is completely unreliable you have
no idea what you know how many proteins
of a given type you have or if they're
going to get a little bit denatured or
you know what's going to happen if you
assume that your medium is uh is is
unreliable then instead of this kind of
hardwired here's how we do it every
single time idea uh what evolution is
going to produce are sense making
problemsolving agents in different
spaces it can be very simple things
bacteria and you know but but already
you're off to the racist because you
can't count on your environment being
the same and you can't count on yourself
being the same you're going to mutate
right your parts will mutate Everything
Will
Change so this is one of the first
things that I was absolutely intrigued
with in biology when I was very young
which is how in the world does a mouse's
heart heart and an elephant's heart do
the same thing when in you know these
two cases you've got totally different
number of cells making this and yet it
makes the same structure that does the
same thing so what is the way to
understand how biology can code for
these higher order structures yeah I
think I think that um there there are
key uh elements of of of understanding
what's going on that come from
Behavioral Science this is we are not
going to get to this purely by the
concepts of chemistry and physics
although those are crucial to understand
what we have here are problemsolving
collective intelligences so when you
have a bunch of molecular networks that
make a cell that's a coherent organism
like a like an amiibo or a lacr area or
something that that do all these
interesting things they are making a a
next they are contributing to a Next
Level collective intelligence that does
that that operates in some kind of space
and has a small cognitive lone where it
can do certain things that have a little
bit of predictive power forward a little
bit of memory backward
when those cells come together and form
an organism once again you have a
collective intelligence that now
projects into a new space whereas the
cells were solving problems in
physiology and um metabolics and gene
expression you now have a system that
solves problems in anatomy so so when
you take an early embryo let's say an
early mamalian embryo and you cut it in
half you don't get two half embryos you
get two perfectly normal monozygotic
twins because each side has to figure
out oh wait this is missing why I have
to rebuild and so on and so my point is
not that we attribute uh uh you know
high order human level
self-consciousness to these things I'm
not saying they have the metacognition
to know what what they're doing what I'm
saying is we have a a a simplified
version of intelligence which we know
there had to be because we came that
that is our origin we know there has to
be a version of intelligence that is you
know sort of on the on the left end of
that Spectrum going all the way back to
primitive cells and and and before that
actually and and that's that's how we
need to think about this as as as
problem solving continuous dynamical
problem solving great so let's s where
we are now and return to the issue of of
memory so how does memory work in uh in
a brain I'll just address to you know a
couple of things that I can speak to
what one is that I think the uh
conventional story that memories are
some sort of fine-tuning of synaptic uh
connections I I think that story is very
incomplete and there there are many
people um you know like lansman and Sam
gersman and and and many others that are
um that are working on that I I I tend
to think if I had guess I would say that
there probably isn't one substrate of
memory I would look at memory as uh an
interpretation process which I think
neurons are very good at this of
interpreting a reservoir that Reservoir
is everything else the cell is doing the
cytoskeletal states the molecular
networks I mean some people pick up have
picked up transcriptional um uh
signatures of certain memories that mice
have had and so on every everything in
the cell all the complexity that is
going on can be used as a Reservoir in a
sense of reservoir Computing to uh be
used as prompts to reinterpret these
those prompts as memories that are uh
useful and with with so so again
maximizing salience not necessarily
Fidelity but salience uh useful in their
novel um context so I think I think
memory is a lot about um creativity I
think it's a lot about uh having prompts
that that that push you into new new
kinds of problem solving you know and
and if if your if your body and your
environment stay extremely constant then
it just looks like the old version of
memory where you store a piece of data
you read it out and and that's it right
that's how it looks like that's what it
looks like from the outside but I don't
think that's what's going on you know in
my in my book live wired I make the
argument that even though in Silicon
Valley we think about everything as
being a trim and efficient layer of
hardware and then you build uh trim and
efficient software on top of that that's
not at all how the brain's working
instead you've got this constant
reconfiguration and I know that you also
reject that dichotomy between a
computation layer and a passive code
layer um so how do you think about that
yeah well um I I think I think there's a
couple of U major differences between uh
how how we build Hardware now you know
comp computational devices and and what
biolog is doing the first thing we've
just talked about which is the um the
reliability the idea that um in in in
the computational world you have levels
of abstraction and you try to screen
every layer from all the vagaries of the
level below so if you're C coding in you
know C or something you're not worried
about what the copper is doing and what
the Silicon is doing you you you assume
that um the the function calls you have
are going to do what they need to do and
and you go from there biology isn't like
that um all all the all the layers are
um somewhat unreliable and you need to
be interpreting it um at all at all
times Josh bongard and I are working on
a framework called poly Computing and
the idea and this is this is um
partially based on some amazing work
that um his student Tusa parsa has done
showing that the same set of physical
events can be interpreted as different
computations by different observers the
exact same set of physical events so
give us an example uh an example is um I
mean in in her work they were looking at
the vibrations of particles and and you
look at them in one way and you see an
and gate and you look at them a
different way and you see an or gate
that's that's one example um in biology
it what it means in biology is that and
and and by the way he he and I wrote
this paper called this plenty of room
right here kind of riffing off of find
Ms comment that there's plenty of room
at the bottom because because biology
has this thing where every level is
already occupied there is no room at the
bottom because every level is occupied
how do you as as if you're Evolution how
do you how do you put in novel
functionality when every level already
has something and by the way when you
make changes you're going to screw up if
you make changes in a given subsystem
you're going to screw up all the other
systems that depend on what it's doing
so one thing that I think happens in
biology this this poly Computing where
you don't necessarily change the system
you add other systems that see what's
already going on in a different way and
make use of it as a computation but from
a different perspective so if you're
this some kind of chemical pathway that
mitochondria are using as part of the
metabolic pathway some other system can
look at that and say well I'm gonna use
it as a as a clock I'm gonna I'm G to
take I'm going to use it to regulate my
timing or I'm going to use it you know
in some other some other signaling
capacity and uh so so I think what we
have in biology is not this this linear
stack first of all not not a linear
stack but a um kind of a super a society
of multiple nested cooperating and
competing agents which all have their
own perspectives and they all interpret
everything that goes on around them in
whatever way they can uh so and and you
know we're used to the fact that in in
in computation we supposedly know what a
given algorithm is doing right you can
and and if you don't know you can ask
the person who wrote it and they'll tell
you this is what this thing is Computing
but in biology I I don't think there is
any one fixed answer to this it's
whatever you as an observer can usefully
think it's doing that that doesn't mean
anything goes if you have a story that
doesn't help you uh get around in the
world and and Thrive then you don't know
what it's doing but but but multiple
observers can have different stories
about the about the same thing so give
us if you can give us another specific
example of that so the cus Skeleton on
the one hand is used by the cell to get
around and so you might say well this is
this is my uh my movement Machinery
that's that's that that I'm counting on
to maintain certain cell shapes and so
on but at the same time there's other
data showing that the cytoskeleton can
actually be can be storing memory it's
also serving as a scaffold for other
molecules to find where they need to go
they're moving around with motor
proteins and things like that and um
there just there's just lots of lots of
different uh uses that any given uh
mechanism is uh is performing at any one
time and there are multiple different
readout systems and and this is this is
why you know the the same molecule um
induces eyes in one context it induces
uh
it might induce a kidney rudiment in a
different uh contest there are
transcription factors that have that
have many different roles depending on
the context in our work on bioelectrics
the exact same stimulus induces a tail
to regenerate on a Tull but a leg to
regenerate on a froglet and they never
get confused so the that specificity is
not in the uh in the treatment it's in
the surrounding cells being able to
interpret that exact same signal in
whatever way makes sense for them the
ability of of these subsystems to Cooper
operate in uh in in in groups and solve
problems together is is is really like a
fundamental thing in which biology is is
is different than the the kind of uh you
know control systems that we have now in
computer science that's right and you
know Stephen J Gould wrote about
exaptation where you have something that
develops and then it turns out to have a
use in another way but what you're
talking about is even more sophisticated
than that in the sense that it can
retain its first use and be used for a
second thing and a third thing all at
the same time just by reading that data
out in different ways is that right ex
that's that's exactly right and uh you
know some of some of the latest um stuff
that I've been thinking about really
tries to turn this whole thing on its
head and you know so so in the standard
tan Computing Paradigm you have a
machine and you have the data right so
you have a you have a the process you
have this machine that reads the tape
and it and it records you know the the
the byproducts of the computation on to
the tape and so on so typically we look
at this from the perspective of the
machine that is we are the uh whether
the the we the cell or the human or
whatever we're forming memories and
we're writing it down into some memory
medium the memory medium is passive the
memories themselves are passive they're
just marks on the tape and then we can
read them out when we want some of the
latest work that we've been doing is
starts out by thinking about it
backwards and saying but what does this
look like from the perspective of the
data right data that are not passive
they're not passive patterns Within some
medium they're actually active patterns
and from the perspective of the tape the
tape runs the show that machine is going
to do things depending on what is
written on the tape so if I'm a pattern
on this tape I can make the machine do
things from my perspective I'm I'm I'm
I'm in control and so now it s it sounds
a little crazy to say that that these
patterns are doing things and that
they're agential and whatever but let's
keep in mind we are patterns too we are
temporary metabolic patterns within an
excitable medium um the way that people
study you know temp other temporary um
patterns like solons and whirlpools and
you know all different kinds of all
different kinds of systems and from from
that perspective uh you can you can see
that different kinds of patterns persist
in different media be they cognitive
Media or just computational media and
asking what does the world look like
from their perspective and how much how
much problem solving capacity how much
uh uh agency in fact might those
patterns have has massive implications
not only for new computational
architectures but also so for example
for regenerative medicine where you want
to understand what are the persistent
information structures that cause cells
to um do or not do various things in in
disease States and re you know pro-
regenerative States and so on so let's
double click on that so what would that
mean for a memory to be like an agent to
be doing something I'll I'll tell a uh
I'll tell a story that that I read I'm
I'm sure at least part of this was
motivated Years Ago by by a science
fiction story that I'm not exactly sure
what it was I think it was a it was an
Arthur Clark story but I'm not 100% sure
so let's just I'm sure I've also Twisted
it in a different way but let's just
let's just just visual it's because your
memory is creative uh to totally there
may have been no story I have no idea so
I you know I just want to give credit in
case there was uh so so let's just let's
just visualize this so so from the
center of the Earth come these creatures
these core creatures right they live at
the center of the earth they come out
onto the surface they are incredibly
dense okay because they live at the core
they they have Vision that operates
let's say in um in um gamma ray and so
they come up to the surface what do they
see well pretty much nothing because
everything that we see here is like a
fine uh ethereal um uh plasma to them
they are so dense all of the stuff that
we think of as real objects are
basically uh not even within their
within their ability to to to perceive
directly so they're walking around
stomping through everything and and you
know the same way that when we walk past
you know some kind of flower bed there's
all kinds of like fine you know patterns
of scents and so on we just sort of walk
right through it mix it all up so
they're stepping all over everything and
well well one of them one of them is a
scientist and he's taking some careful
readings of what's going on around him
and he says to the others um hey you
know there's this there's this like fine
invisible gas around our planet there's
this like plasma around and there's
patterns in this there's regular
patterns in this plasma that kind of
hold together and so what well I've been
watching some of these patterns and you
know they seem to be almost like they do
things they almost seem agential they
almost seem like they have goals and
like they you know they're not they're
they're they're sort of like you would
see um waves or solons moving through
water you know and they look like they
hold together for a period of time and
they say to him well how long do these
hold together well about a hundred years
well that's crazy nothing nothing
interesting can happen that that quickly
you know they're just temporary they're
temporary fleeting you know sorts of
sorts of patterns and and by the way
we've been watching the ecosystem here
and some of these patterns are really
like not conducive to the health of the
ecosystem you know these patterns are
really are really like screwing things
up so they're they're kind of like um
these these um recurrent but but
unhelpful patterns so I so I have I have
a blog post which has this this this
fictional dialogue between that cre that
that that core scientist and he tries to
talk to one of the patterns we of course
are the patterns and so this the human
says to him um it's really imperative
that you guys understand that we are
alive and and we have we are we matter
we you know in a moral sense we have
goals we have memories we persist and he
says well I feel like I'm crazy I'm
talking to a pattern in gas you you
can't be real he says I'm real I'm solid
I live for you know millions of years
well you're you're a temporary pattern
in this gas like how can I take you
seriously as a as a coherent
intelligence and so ju just thinking
about it that way reminds us that all of
this is relative and that we we two are
patterns and what what other patterns
around us uh have a degree of coherence
and live and and strive and have
different kinds of degrees of um of
problem solving competency and other
kinds of things that we don't know and
so so once we think about that once we
realize that this distinction between
you know real solid beings like us and a
temporary pattern like we are all on
that Spectrum we are all patterns so
once you think about it that way it
unlocks the ability to take the uh tools
that we use to understand real embodied
beings and ask ourselves how do some of
those tools and Concepts from uh
Behavioral Science and and so on how
would they apply to certain other kinds
of patterns in other
media so what are patterns in in media
well thoughts within a cognitive system
are patterns you can have fleeting
thoughts that sort of come and and go
you can have persistent thoughts you
know thoughts that are hard to get rid
of right then there all many examples of
that and some of those thoughts actually
do a little bit of Niche construction
Niche Construction in biology is when an
animal modifies its environment that
makes it easier for them to persist so
you're doing something to the
environment that makes it easy for
yourself to stick around well there are
data that that depressive thoughts
persistent thoughts those kinds of
things actually modifying brain tissue
in ways that makes it easier to keep
having those kinds of thoughts right so
so you got your fleeting thoughts you
got your um kind of persistent thoughts
then maybe you have some um dissociative
personality alars which are way more
coherent than a simple persistent
thought and in fact somewhat agential so
they have they have agendas and they
have memories whatever but not a fullon
human personality so then you have you
have that and then who knows what's
beyond that right transpersonal
psychology will say that maybe maybe
there are there are bigger things past
that so so I think that uh you know this
this idea of of having patterns within a
medium and maybe within a cognitive
medium but also a computational medium
if you're data in a database being being
shuffled depending on that architecture
maybe you can take the perspective of
that data and ask yourself what does the
world look like from from my perspective
right uh from the perspective of the
pattern and what is the pattern doing or
not to facilitate its own persistence
and to facilitate its own transformation
that usually is required if you're going
to persist over long periods of time you
may need to change so that's that's you
know that's some cutting sort of Cutting
Edge stuff as far as what we're thinking
about to understand some of what goes on
in in these kind of complex biological
cases that we want to be able to control
in medicine and so on and presumably you
think about that in darwinian context in
terms of if I'm a thought and you know
some some pattern that is a thought and
I'm trying to keep myself alive um there
are certain mutations perhaps that I can
have or certain things that I can do
that give me an advantage in that domain
that's part of it but I think that the
Bare Bones darwinian Paradigm which is
uh short-term self-interest competition
and uh random change those three things
I think are woefully incomplete as as a
story both of of actual evolutionary
change in biology and the kinds of
things that we're talking about here the
alternative to this of course is that a
system that changes with some sort of
foresight now that doesn't mean
long-term purpose I am not saying that
there's some sort of human or above
level a plan that that is executing uh
you know the changes that that are
happening what I'm saying is that we
cannot necessarily assume that uh the
change that is happening is completely
blind and we cannot assume that there
isn't some computational process down
done at the level of the lineage that is
actually uh guiding the changes that are
that are happening what one one way to
think about this is to think about the
whole lineage you know I don't know 50
million years of alligators or something
uh think about that that whole lineage
as a giant uh single agent distributed
over time bigger than we're used to
thinking about where every each
individual uh animal is a hypothesis of
that agent about the outside world some
of those hypothesis are good some are
not uh the thinking evolves as time on
right so again this is Cutting Edge
stuff you know this is this is um I'm
not at all saying that we have all this
worked out this is just these are things
that we're working on and and some some
uh some ideas going forward but but
there are lots of people thinking about
um how much and including um um Richard
Watson uh how much and what kind of
computation is done by populations like
this that is not captured in this very
simple uh competition for resources
random Change Model the way that you
think about memories in the brain as
being like their own agents patterns
that stay alive and and the recollection
of memory as sort of the creation from
some physical evidence that's there a
recreation into your current world does
this tell you anything about ryo's law
which is the oldest uh rule in neurology
which is that older memories are more
stable than more recent memories have
you thought about that at all uh I've
not thought about that specifically it
sort of makes sense that uh if if if if
you're if you're a pattern that has
managed to stick around for a really
long time by interaction with the
surrounding cognitive system in a way
that causes it to keep you around and
for you to persist it makes sense that
uh you have now uh picked up on on
whatever um properties residence
whatever that uh is allows you to be
pretty stable in the system there's this
term that people use sometime about a
breakthrough where you reinterpret a
number of things that happen in your
life you find out that this person maybe
that you were mad at had some other
problem going on they knew that they had
cancer but they didn't tell you that and
and suddenly they're lashing out at you
you have a totally different
interpretation of it you're going back
through your memory and recasting
everything in a different light do you
have any interpretation of that in your
framework I I mean I mean that sounds to
me like a a very
sophisticated human level cognitive
version of a process that happens uh all
the time going all the way back to our
simplest ancestors which is that uh
circumstances change and it forces you
to reuse whatever information you had
from the past whatever tools you had
from the past to make sense of what's
going on now and that I think is the
fundamental basis of intelligence that's
why I think this requirement to
confabulate because everything changes
is an intelligence ratchet it it it
requires cells to get good at solving
problems in their spaces which
eventually bubbles up and as as
collective intelligence scales and the
cognitive light cones expand it it then
eventually starts to look like the kind
of intelligence that we're we're used to
seeing but that that that fundamental
process I think is is is very ancient
and fund and basic Mike does this change
anything about how you think about
yourself uh for me I think it's it's
very uh very important to um face uh
this this this Paradox right the Paradox
which which we face as as cognitive
systems but also species face this as
well if you don't change you will likely
die out when when circumstances change
but if you do change to meet those
circumstances you're no longer the same
you're not you anymore so so what does
that mean right that's the Paradox how
how can you possibly persist in this
idea of persisting as a uh as a as a
pattern and uh realizing that because
things change all the time and this this
I think is is fundamental what is in our
control are not the thoughts that we
have right now what's what's in our
control is the long-term application of
effort to modify our own cognitive
system to have different thoughts in the
future the thoughts you would like to
have more of and and behaviors you would
like to have more of versus something
else so this this idea of committing to
a consistent longterm process of
self-change you know the the the
Buddhists also call it the body satva
vow this idea of enlarging your
cognitive light cones so that you're
able to have the goal of of of
compassion you know beyond our current
uh limits mited human kind of scale that
we can actually you know work work
towards the goals of a certain size yeah
that's that's that's what motivates me
and and the plasticity is really I find
it incredibly um hopeful and positive
this idea this this incredible
plasticity that has Intelligence at its
core that every single cell is
intelligent within and it's exerting
intelligence in its cooperation and
competition with others to form larger
scale structures that can be molded top
down molded over time to be better and
to improve over time
that was Mike Levan a professor and
biologist at Tufts University so
wrapping up this two-part episode about
the self we saw that everything in your
biology is changing all the time your
cells are constantly turning over their
pieces and parts but we have memory to
bind the use together now I've talked in
several episodes about memories change
in their character they're not like a
file of zeros and ones that are written
down in a computer and then read back
out perfectly and the way Michael Lan
thinks about this is that memories get
compressed they get encoded down into
the neurons or the connections between
neurons or the inner Cosmos of proteins
inside neuron and then when these
memories get reinflated later they find
themselves in a different world they get
interpreted by the new brain that is
looking at them so I want to make this
model clear so here's my analogy to
capture that imagine that the world out
there has lots of things that need to be
bolted down and so you create a wrench
and your metal wrench is in some sense a
compressed representation of the world
out there a world full of bolts so when
you see the wrench that reminds you of
all the bolts that are out there okay
now imagine that you bury that wrench
and some other creature some future
human creature digs it up in a thousand
years and she doesn't see it as a wrench
but to her it's maybe a weapon or it's
an instrument for conducting electricity
on her spaceship or she takes it to be a
ceremonial artifact or she uses it for
physical exercise or she looks at its
clean balanced design and uses it for a
piece of art the point is that what you
buried is not what gets exume in a new
world of the future and that's what
happens to Memories too you bury
something that has some meaning in the
now but what you dig up is interpreted
Through The Eyes of the future you and
if there's one thing we can count on
it's that despite all your intuitions to
the contrary that future you will not be
the same as the you now it'll be someone
you don't know who doesn't share all
your values and opinions and is someone
you can't accurately predict the ship of
Theus with all those changes does not in
fact remain the same
ship I was recently talking with my
friend Lisa Joy and she said she thinks
it's strange that the longevity
Community cares so much about EX ending
their lifespan by decades because that
future person will be somebody
potentially very different from who they
are now so who are you saving if you go
through a lot of trouble now to extend
your life whoever you're saving it's a
stranger to you you're doing all this
work for someone you don't know so
coming back to the question of why we
have this notion of an unchanging self
Michael's answer is that that the job of
the brain is to make models of
consistency like this is what a chair is
this is what a backpack is this is what
a bicycle is and even though there maybe
a lot of variety in the specifics that
you come across and things might change
you nonetheless are good at summarizing
things as objects you lump them into
unchanging categories and so Michael
argues the same cognitive Machinery is
turned on to our selves even though
there's a lot of fluctuation of what
that refers to we lump the self into one
object that we call me and that
highlevel cognitive model just doesn't
change much and so as we close we are
left with this remarkable Paradox that
we move through life carrying memories
and stories and beliefs about who we are
and we carefully preserve them like
relics in the soil of our minds and we
expect them to stay the same but with
each retrieval every time we unearth
them they are interpreted aresh they're
reshaped by the hands of a self that is
itself ever shifting but the illusion
our brains create for us is a model of
the self as unchanging a fixed point in
a fluctuating world and it's a
comforting thought that we're a single
thread woven through time but maybe
there's also a beauty in realizing that
each of your future selves is a stranger
unto you an explorer who picks up that
wrench of memory holding it to the light
and interpreting something new each time
who we are what we hold dear maybe these
aren't artifacts that are meant to be
saved or preserved perfectly they are
living stories they're reimagined and
repurposed by every future version of us
so when you think of your future self
who you will be tomorrow or a month from
now or a decade from now think of that
stranger that future you and maybe smile
at the mystery of what that person will
even remember what they'll care about
what they'll let go of after all part of
the adventure of life is not just
holding on to who we were it's also
about meeting time and again who we are
becoming go to eagan.mn
with questions or discussion and check
out and subscribe to Inner Cosmos on
YouTube for videos of each episode and
to leave comments until next time I'm
David Eagleman and this is inner Cosmos
