start off um just by thanking all of you
for being here this afternoon on behalf
of
Princeton well that was auspicious I I
am delighted to welcome Eric Schmidt a
proud alumnist from the great Princeton
Class of 1976
back okay move that down a bit there
Eric's historic leadership in the
technology industry has given him
exceptional insight into what some are
calling the age of artificial
intelligence and the opportunities and
challenges that AI presents for Humanity
we are especially fortunate that he has
chosen to share these insights in
several important books over the past
decade today Eric will offer Reflections
from his most recent work a
collaborative effort with the late Henry
Kissinger and Craig Mundy former Chief
research and strategy officer at
Microsoft titled Genesis artificial
intelligence hope and the human Spirit
the book was published just yesterday
but already reviewers are hailing it as
a profound exploration of the ways that
AI will test our understanding of what
it means to be human and raise new
questions about knowledge power and the
possibilities for human progress thank
you Eric for being with us today to
engage in this important discussion
thank you as well for all that you and
Wendy are doing to Foster Innovation and
creativity at Princeton and to help this
University meet the most critical
challenges of our time it's now my great
pleasure to turn things over to the
university Provost Jen Rexford a member
of the great Princeton Class of 1991 and
an extraordinary scholar and teacher in
Princeton's computer science department
offer some words of introduction and
engage in conversation with Eric Jen
great thank
you I'm delighted to join uh Kristen
welcoming back Eric Schmidt a former
member of our Board of Trustees and a
member of the class of 76 he's an
accomplished technologist entrepreneur
philanthropist as CEO and chairman of
Google from 2001 to 2011 he worked
alongside co-founder Sergey Brin and
Larry pagee to transform the company
from a small Silicon Valley startup to
the Global Tech Giant that it is today
but to go back to the beginning I think
it's fair to say that Eric's technology
career began at Princeton where he came
here planning to major in architecture
and ended up majoring in electrical
engineering I have some questions for
him about that in a moment he went on to
do his graduate work at Berkeley and
then began his uh professional career at
this uh legendary uh Palo Alo Research
Center that was part of Xerox and also
also have positions at at Sun micros
systems and Noel today Eric remains
deeply involved in technology and
particularly AI as an investor a
philanthropist an author and a public
servant along with his spouse Wendy Eric
has established a number of
organizations including the Schmidt
Family Foundation and Schmidt Futures
that invest in talented people and bold
ideas to address many systemic Global
challenges he's also as Chris mentioned
a loyal friend to Princeton who's
generously supported the computer
science department as well as
interdisciplinary research initiatives
across campus I've personally benefited
a lot from Eric's wisdom and guidance
over the years and I deeply inv value
his partnership as Princeton navigates
new challenges around the age of AI
we're thrilled to have you back on
campus Eric and look forward to
discussing your book with you uh without
further Ado I'd love to have you join me
in giving a warm welcome to Eric Schmidt
thank
you can can I can I take a moment to
thank uh president Chris and Jen um when
I was here there was no computer science
computer science is now the largest
major good
job and Princeton is now rated better
than Harvard and Yale in almost
everything
good fantastic
job so so when you came to Princeton in
the in the 70s what did you see that
inspired you to study electrical
engineering know who or what uh drove
you in that direction was interesting
that that I was young obviously and I
didn't really know what I was doing and
I met you know they have this on this
alumni recruiter people that you go
visit in order to apply and I talked to
this guy it just sounded sort of cool so
I said sure and then they let me in
which would never occur today given my
lack of achievement at the time um so
when I showed up I I wanted to do
architecture and I visited the
architecture school and they told me
that all they did was work and they
clearly all they did was work um and I
thought there's something wrong with
this and then I realized that I was
really a computer person but there was
no computer science and so Brian
kernahan who's a faculty member here was
giving a talk in what was the time
called engineering
27 and it was like unbelievable about
the origins of computing and I said
that's who I am so the most interesting
thing and why I'm so grateful to to
Princeton I then met this guy Jeff Olman
who's now retired from Stanford but he
was a brilliant faculty member and Jeff
was very connected to
belaz um and by the way Jeff had a rule
that he wouldn't call you by your first
name until after you had passed your
quals but he called me by my first name
because I wasn't a gradate student you
know this is the rigor that we were
under and um we had a computer here
called a 36091 there were only three in
the world um I now own the control panel
for these the Princeton 36091 which I'll
loan you if you want to see something
from ancient past um and the important
thing was that it was clear what I
wanted to work on and the university
strangely decided me to do what I wanted
to work on so for example I have an
electrical engineering degree but I
didn't take any of the electrical
engineering
classes and and the reason I mention
that is that the university saw that
making me happy was good for me and they
buil bu me as a computer Scientist by
the time I graduated from undergraduate
at Princeton I had a graduate level of
understanding of computer science
because there were no other classes I
was interested in which has also
resulted in me knowing nothing besides
computer science for the rest of my life
which is a a mistake which I've tried to
address but the key point I want to make
is that that that it was the Judgment of
the faculty as a you know a very young
man in my case that allowed me that
opportunity and I'm very very grateful
to that because Jeff was a um consultant
at Bel Labs I came and I worked for Stu
Feldman right who is here in in who was
a brilliant astrophysics student and
graduate here who is in B labs and they
were building
Unix and that's when the luck starts
when you get at the origin of something
that's going to
explode don't
quit write it right and we didn't know
what we were doing but they certainly
did I was just a young person St and I
went back to see the building
right and the old rooms that we worked
in that look like addicts today um but
this is how Origins start right for each
of you that origin story is really
important don't give up that opportunity
they don't come along very often and
they occur when you're very
young so thinking about the book how did
you and your co-authors decide uh to
write this book together and what did
you each bring to it um well I think
everybody here knows who I guess I
should assume that maybe not I guess
everybody in Princeton knows who Henry
ker is a lot of people in your
generation don't uh but certainly one of
the most historic figures in the 20 20th
century and opened up China you know
negotiating Richard Nixon all that kind
of stuff and U he and I became friends
15 years ago when I met him at a
conference and he said why can't I get
all this bad stuff off of Google about
me typical Henry kind of comment and I
said you can't he said why not and I
said okay I invited him to Google where
he then announced to the entire un uh
employee body that Google was a threat
to Modern
civilization which everyone at Google
loved okay to be accused of being a
threat from Henry Kissinger was great
and so that's how their friendship and
at one point we started talking about
technology and he had been studying the
impact of technology for decades he had
he had studied when he was at Harvard
postwar before he had studied Kant he
was very interested in the relationship
of humans and the space around them how
we perceive things and how technology
changes it um there's a story that when
he was in the government he actually
tried to get the government to give him
a computer a computer terminal would
have been a time sharing termal at the
time and they refused because they
thought it might be too dangerous in his
hands um so he'd always been interested
in it now he had trouble understanding
math and algorithms he couldn't type he
could hardly see but his brain was so
strong that we collectively and Craig
and I did it got him to understand what
was going to happen the ideas around
Genesis which are fundamentally not
about technology and and i' I've told
you guys privately I really think this
University should embrace these ideas
and questions because I don't know the
answers and so it's your turn and and my
standard answer is The Graduate students
will figure this out right because they
have to write phds write a PhD on the 20
or 30 questions that are in this book at
least you get a PhD out of out of
Princeton and at least you'll do
something new right because all the
normal phds have been written this is a
the arrival of a new
intelligence um that Rivals human
intelligence is a very big deal for
ethics for Society for child rearing for
economics um simple example Allan is
here uh you can speak for U the economic
profession if I told you that these
Technologies are going to double
productivity every year for three years
and therefore GDP will go up by 20% in 5
years per person or whatever I believe
you would say we don't have models for
that kind of growth right for whatever
reason and it sure looks like this is a
discontinous change this is not a
continuous
change so one of the things I really
loved in the book was the discussion of
polymaths you know the the importance
they play in in making major leaps
forward and the the idea of AI being a a
polymath your pocket uh if you will I
just want if you could say a few words
about that and why it's so important
well first place because I I don't want
people to think that I'm crazy uh which
I may be uh let's establish a belief
system so there's what I call the
Stanford Cisco school which says this
will occur in two cranks which is about
18 months which is three years I think
they're wrong I think they're off by a
factor of two in other words I think
it's six years and if that doesn't scare
you then let me tell you what it happens
in six years
the the current Foundation models are
now testing at 80 or 90% of the graduate
level knowledge in every
field now there's nobody not even at the
brilliant people here who can do all of
that in every field at the same time
those Foundation models will be
connected in various clever ways uh
Shirley is working on a physics one
which is incred incredibly interesting I
mean I can give you examples in
chemistry that we funded and so forth
and so on um when those things get
integrated together you have a polymath
that's driven by a human okay then the
next thing that happens is the agentic
revolution which is essentially the
development of agents that use these
things to solve problems which I can
describe and you can certainly describe
think of them as an llm that tries
Alternatives and then evaluates them and
then learns from what works and what
doesn't it's like a travel agent that's
really stupid but eventually they learn
to be a good travel agent but it's
applicable then the next thing is you
take that system and you train it for
curiosity and
power learn something new and aggregate
power and power doesn't mean physical
power it means influence uh dominance of
an area and so forth and then run that
thing what is that what is that is a
polymath that we've that we as humans
could never build and in my telling of
the story that polymath will be
available to each and every one of you
and every citizen in the United States
and in fact every citizen of the world
that is a very big
deal I mean my my standard joke on this
is that uh I spent my whole career
managing software people these things
can write software almost as good as
humans and they soon will be able to do
it maybe better but certainly as well so
each and every one of you who's not a
computer scientist and programmer well
you can have your own programmer and
they'll do exactly what you want unlike
my
programmers right makes sense indeed so
when you think think about Princeton's
motto about the you know being in the
nation service and the service of
humanity where do you see the
opportunities for AI to help
Humanity well the there it's it's always
more fun to talk about the negatives but
let's talk about the positives first uh
these these digital systems are capable
of doing very complicated tree pruning
where they can help you with drug
Discovery you have a Precision medicine
initiative AI will be at the basis of
those decisionmaking looking at all the
information trying to come up with stuff
that works um so you should expect an an
enormous sort of a cambering explosion
of Medical Solutions to problems that
have beveled us climate change there's a
huge energy program here at Princeton
which I've been a little bit involved
with um you're not going to get to in
fact some of the modeling that was done
at Princeton is the best in the country
and I know that because I endorsed it to
the government um you're not going to
solve climate without new Energy Systems
new Energy Systems require AI what do
they need what do they specifically
means new materials fision Fusion new
transmission so forth and so on that's
going to be AI
developed education uh the be single
best thing and I don't need to tell the
academics here single best thing you can
do for the world is get it more educated
why do we not have an AI system that
just educates everyone in their own
language and the way that they learn
strikes me as a learnable proposition
think about global Healthcare we have
pretty good Healthcare in the United
States although we complain about all
the time most countries have a nurse
practitioner who is doing the doing his
or her best to service a large
population in a little village um why
don't they have an app that tells them
how to do it better just just think
about the compounding of these things um
let's go into chemistry chemistry
physics and so forth most problems in
science look to me to be multiscale
prediction problems so the systems that
we're building are very good at
multiscale prediction problems and the
reason is because large language models
roughly speaking predict the next word
there's not much difference between
predicting the next word and predicting
the next part of a protein sequence
algorithmically they're very
similar so Demus who just want the Nobel
Prize proved this by their protein
modeling in Alpha fold which is one of
the great gifts you know to biology and
well deserved so there are probably many
other benefits but what if most people
care about healthare education safety
quality of their lives we can really
materially improve it globally so you
said a moment ago it's it's you know
easier to talk about the bad than the
good so maybe we could talk a little bit
about the bad I mean in terms of you've
hinted at this a little already but if
you could say a little bit about what
worries
you well a lot worries me
um there are many different layers of
concerns about this the simplest way to
say it is that when I'm in silon Valley
it feels like it's everything everywhere
all at once there's so much money
there's so many people in your
generation who are trying new ideas to
solve the problem I can assure you the
humans in the rest of the world all the
normal people because you all are not
normal sorry to say you're special in
some way uh the normal people are not
ready their governments are not ready
the government processes are not ready
the doctrines are not ready they're not
ready for the arrival of this and um I
can give lots of examples of not being
ready um but a simple example I I'll
make some up right now um you have a a
son or a daughter and their best friend
is not
human their best friend is a digital
thing whatever you want to call it what
are the
rules is it okay that that child is is
you know is the equivalent of Mark
Zuckerberg this the um the surate parent
who gets to deide what your kid learns
and doesn't learn right in fact in the
book um and Henry is very very clear
about this he's very very concerned that
people like me make these decisions he
wants a collection of people which I
think is actually represented by the
disciplines of of Princeton to come to
some consensus on how to roll these
things out they're playing with the way
people think is really powerful so if
you think about state sponsored
misinformation
that's trivial compared to having your
best friend be state sponsored and the
sort of daily interaction and shape
someone's identity their cultural values
we talk in the book about something
called duxa which is a a Greek term
around the embedded structures of U of
life and U these are not laws but
they're they're cultural norms they're
assumptions that we have of good
behavior and they differ by by by
culture uh what happens to them so in
the case where AI is built by one
country hopefully the US what happens to
all the other cultures do we just roll
through them they're already accusing us
of aemy by destroying their cultures by
virtue of companies like Google which is
relatively innocuous because you have to
ask Google something imagine if Google
instead is telling you something think
about the power that that would give to
a company like Google so if you think
about human traits like you know
creativity empathy how do you see AI
complimenting or or even adopting some
of these trads I I think a lot of it
depends on how these things are trained
um the models when they come out raw
don't necessarily have any belief
systems and so technically what happens
is you do pre-training then you do a
series of fine-tuning which ultimately
results in a technique called rhf which
is human feedback to try to help it make
better so a lot of decisions are made in
that
Pipeline and so uh you could have a
polite llm you could have a nasty llm
and so forth
and U it's important to say that we
don't understand the structure of how
this is going to look out and I'll give
you a simple
example um someone like Sam Alman will
talk about a trillion dollar Data Center
and almost all of that money by the way
goes into the the literally the
electrical bills so if if it's a
trillion dollar data center how many
will there be will there be a couple
maybe in the US a couple in
China very few places can do a trillion
dollars around that now why would you
spend a trillion
dollars to have something which is the
world's polymath that can invent things
that no one else can that can solve
every economic physical and science
problem might be worth a trillion
dollars I mean our the US weapon
programs cost a trillion dollars this is
probably a more powerful weapon than the
biggest weapons programs the US sponsors
it makes sense so if you think of it as
that model then it's going to be easy to
regulate because we're going to know
exactly where they are because they're
going to be huge there's an alternative
view right where they there will be
diffusion of these techniques into much
smaller models that are disperate and
then you have a huge huge problem of um
essentially
proliferation there's a long literature
around nuclear
proliferation um so forth a story here
that uh only a few of you will remember
in my undergraduate thesis I I wrote my
thesis on language design and there was
an undergraduate who wrote his thesis on
how to design the trigger trigger thing
for a nuclear bomb and when the
physicist who was his supervisor
realized what he had invented he
immediately caused it to be classified
so the university had a problem because
you're required to submit your
undergraduate thesis to the public so
this is a great conundrum to the
leadership at the time this is under
President Bowen and it was ultimately
decided that if you wrote A P an
undergraduate thesis that was so
important it was classified we would
just give you the the undergraduate
degree which I thought was a good
accommodation and he went on to be a
great
physicist so so you the these are tricky
right and I worry a lot about the
proliferation issue because we know evil
exists in the world and we know that
these systems are asymmetrically
powerful so if you take the position
that everyone will have access to a
polymath and further and this is an
important assumption that that access to
that will be relatively
distributed then we're in a very
different structure of the world so you
talked about uh trillion dollar data
centers sort of begs the question of the
role of academic institutions and you
you also talked about smaller models and
you could say well gee academic
institutions should build small uh
models or do theoretical work what do
you think is the answer here I mean
obviously academic institution shouldn't
compete with industry but we need some
ability to contribute what do what do
you wellend so the industry answer is
that the super smart represented here
people will all become uh essentially
Consultants or under contract in some
way with these
institutions um under their intellectual
property laws and without doing open
source uh and that's sort of the way the
in the industry views it U indeed I was
privileged to be the person who launched
the Princeton uh Google such
collaboration which by all accounts has
been incredibly successful and I
remember with the governor I think it's
still the governor um yes uh maybe not
for much longer but in any case he he so
he and I did the announcement a few
years ago and what I said at the time is
that had this existed I would spend all
my time in this building because I would
do whatever it took to get a computer
that didn't make make me stay up all
night because way back when when I was
an undergraduate I could I would sleep
during the day and work at night because
the computer was
faster people of my generation
understand that makes no sense to
anybody else but literally I would sleep
during the day and I I don't think I
went to class but somehow they gave me a
degree
anyway um but it was it it it worked out
okay for everybody so one way to think
about it is is there a better model so
first the government needs to provide a
lot more research access to these things
this is a new tool that will improve
America and American Research American
universities a whole bunch of us have
worked to try to get that there is a
program called nare which um I endorsed
as part of my role in National Security
Commission for the
Congress and there's a good chance that
will come through even if it doesn't
come through we need to find a way to
get a 100 million $200 million $300
million into Princeton for that uh for
that um resource um and I'm going to
help we'll find other people who can do
it and so forth we're very committed to
solving this problem the part of it is I
say to myself if I were a computer
science faculty that you know worked for
you for example what would I be
frustrated with that I'm not going to be
frustrated with my students I'm not
going to be frustrated with working here
salary is fine I'm busy doing my thing I
don't have what I need right it's
roughly analogous to when you look at
physicists if they work in um
accelerators for example they literally
will move for 20 years to be next to the
accelerator or they'll go to CERN for
two or three years because they have to
be physically next to but right we don't
have that in computer science and I
should say as an aside that we're also
have new economics in our
industry um you all are familiar with
the cost of these things I'll give you
some numbers a typical GPU fully loaded
is about
$50,000 100,000 gpus is roughly then 5
billion something like that 200,000 gpus
is roughly 10 billion so Elon just built
a 10 impressively a 200,000 G GPU data
center in Tennessee and that you
depreciate it over 2 to 3 years so that
tells you that in over three years he
has to come up with three and A5 billion
dollar of depreciation against his
Revenue so how much revenue does he need
10 billion a year how much revenue does
Twitter have not 10 billion a year
right the there are plenty of examples
that are worse places like Microsoft and
Google have so much Capital that they
can actually afford this
so part of the reason I'm mentioning
this is that the entire competitive
landscape is being changed both for
universities but also for companies
because of this extraordinary Capital
cost and um in the last month there's
some evidence that the scaling laws are
beginning to come off the hor
horrendously fast Peak they are the
scaling laws are if with more power more
data and so forth you get emergent
Behavior
and the rate of improvement seems to be
slowing no one knows quite why it's not
clear that's true we'll find out in the
next month or two one theory is that
we've essentially sucked in all of the
world's available public information and
most of the models are converging on
that what will happen with agents when
agents arrive in the next year or two is
agents are much more complicated and
much more expensive so don't worry the
capital needs and in particular the
electricity needs will continue how how
do you fund it right at some point the
investors in these AI startups are going
to want a return um they're going to
want to see some kind of Revenue and it
it's always true and every generation
has to learn that lesson the hardware
now maybe it'll happen maybe it won't so
when you me you talked a little bit
about the role of government I would
curious your thoughts about the role of
government in regulation and also you
know technolog is moving so quickly how
can government which moves slowly I mean
so really hope to regulate effectively I
can give you a couple in the spirit of
being brief because it these
conversations take days in regulation um
Europe is doing it the wrong way Europe
wrote something called the AI EU act you
can read it it's really quite depressing
and it basically requires safety ahead
of everything else and the most
interesting requirement it has is that
the system be able to explain what it
does and today the technology it's
called the explainability problem they
can't explain it maybe we will people
think they can work on that pretty soon
maybe that'll happen here um in China
they have a lé fair rule about
regulation As Long as You Follow all
their other rules which are not
Lair um and so the Chinese conception is
that as long as the big companies are
building these models and as long as
they're not talking about tanaman square
and those sorts of things it's fine I'm
I'm it's obviously very serious I'm just
trying to be Punchy about it in the US
um the the US and the UK and France and
Korea I worked with a set of people to
do trust and safety models including a a
Biden executive order act which I helped
shape um it sure looks like President
Trump the one of his first things is
going to be to cancel that so I don't
think we know but I think a fair
statement is that in the US whatever
regulations around trust and safety are
going to occur are going to be very
different and much later than I had
thought now if you're an entrepreneur
trying to do crazy stuff
this is good news if you're a person who
worries about the dangers of these tools
it's not good news so what do you think
about sort of underexplored problems in
AI or if you were a grad student or an
undergrad senior thesis student now like
what would you work
on um well there's so many um you have a
a graduate student here named Dean who
we we met with who was explaining to me
that the relationship between um brain
patterns in neuroscience and these
neural networks is is actually much
closer and there might be a limit of
what the computers can do compared to
human brains in other words I present
this as though the um the humans will
have be limited and the computers will
be exceptional but what if and he's
sitting right here you can you can
speculate on your PhD research what if
that limit uh is is also in place for AI
I want to know that answer I'm very very
interested in agents I think that um
one of the things about research is you
want to pick stuff that's not already
going to get solved so for example I'll
pick a simple one solar solar and
Battery improvements in climate change
there are so many people working on that
those are important problems and so
forth but you're not going to make a
denovo new discovery in there unless
you're like super brilliant much smarter
than I am uh and maybe not even then but
in the concept of Agents how does the
agent work how do they talk to each
other what is the language how do how do
you orchestrate them if you have a bunch
of agents that are in parallel and
they're all waiting for signals which
one do you call first there are many
many scheduling and organizational
questions which have a lot of
implications um in that I think that's
probably the next the agents the general
answer to your question is agents and
the specific problem is how do you
orchestrate them and so forth there is
research here at Princeton going on in
Transformer architectures and the
fundamental algorithmic limits um if
some somebody could come along with the
next big thing after Transformers that
would be like a big deal uh I don't
exactly know how that would work and
then finally I gave you a pressy of
today we're language to language then
we're anything to anything in terms of
foundation models and then we're an
agent Loops where they where there's RL
reinforcement learning which is looking
at scenarios there's an enormous jump in
complexity because you as computer
scientists we think in terms of
scalability and complexity the
complexity in the Agents of how do they
go to the equivalent of tree search to
look at all their different choices to
figure out what they're going to do
that's a really important and really
hard problem I would work there cool so
we're going to open it up to questions
in a moment just one final question for
me you know what's your greatest hope
for AI and and what's the Legacy you
hope to Le lead in this
space um well first place at my age and
it's disturbing that I'll be returning
to my 50th anniversary in two years uh I
haven't quite mentally adopted that fact
but I guess we have to deal with it all
of us at some point
um I am a believer that exceptional
Talent changes the world so now we have
a situation where we have tools that
will allow exceptional talent to scale
at a level that is nonlinear and it goes
something like this that the talent goes
like this the scientists go like this
and so forth and at some point my
industry believes that there will
actually be a AI generated
scientists so you have the human
scientists with AI and then you have the
AI scientists and they We Believe
collectively that the slope gets even
higher that's why Society is not
ready and a whole new generation of
people will come along and make an
enormous amount of money right a new
generation of entrepreneurs people that
I don't know yet but they'll be even
richer even more successful even more
famous than Elon and Steve Jobs and so
forth because that acceleration creates
a scale possibility that is
inconceivably large so if you look at my
career I started off here uh working in
the in the computer center which at the
time was an 87 Prospect this is before
your time um and today it's used for
other things and I I since I lived there
I knew it really well um as an aside I
decided to the cokes cost 5 cents and I
uh decided that I was going they raised
the price of the Coke machine to 10
cents and I decided to boycott
it and then they raised it to 20 cents
and I realized that my boycott it had no
impact on them um but but but I think
the key thing the key thing to do here
is figure out a way to get yourself into
the middle of these curves that go like
this I've been most successful thanks to
Princeton that I was at the beginning of
each of these
revolutions that's where you want to be
because when they grow it's like
unbelievable so chemistry science math
all of them are going to be transformed
in this so you're in that sense you're
the best generation to take on right
it's your turn
now and it's their turn to ask questions
as well so I'm GNA open it up to
questions now and we really want
students in particular to to ask
questions so I'm going to ask that that
you wait for a microphone uh so that we
can hear you and introduce yourself
before you ask your
question thank you um hi thank you for
the talk my name is Chris Catalano I'm a
fourth year graduate student in
molecular biology um I really
appreciated everything you had to say
the AI and I I share many of the same
dreams and optimism and hope for the
future of technology and AI however
seeing the state of the country and the
world the way they are right now um and
you know having observed what social
media has done to a lot of people you
talk about for example people having
access
to experts or you know and a polymath in
every field at their fingertips every
person having this but it seems to me
more likely that people will use it for
videos that make them laugh or angry
information that's only going to confirm
their biases so maybe one day we'll get
to that point where Society is ready for
to to use the technology that you speak
of however it seems to me the transition
is going to be very destabilizing how
does society navigate that transition
that power that suddenly people will
have and what happens if we can't so
this is what the book is
about um and um one of the things that's
worth saying is that none of us thought
when when when we invented social media
that we would become a threat to
democracy wasn't on the list of
attributes and these are the unintended
effects of technologies that touch
humans my simple answer is this thing is
largely made by technical people who
didn't take any of those classes because
they were too busy so they were
literally surprised with Henry I would
say I would make these you know
statements about optimism and so forth
he said the only problem with you Eric
is that everything you're saying is
inconsistent with any historical record
and I said well I don't I didn't take
history classes I didn't have time so so
I think that this time around the reason
we wrote the book was to get everybody
to start thinking about these
questions so the misinformation one is
easy um the social media companies have
chosen not to police it because they
haven't been required to and they make
more money because of it right that's a
regulatory problem um I do think that
there's a real danger here that these
systems can optimize around a single
individual's
peculiarities find like-minded people
and then drive them insane we have these
horrific stories both men and women but
I'll use a stereotypical man he's got a
tough life nobody likes him doesn't have
a job lives at home whatever and he's
online and he finds a group of people
who he agrees with and he gets
radicalized Andor commits suicide it's
just not good for society it's not
obvious to me how this will get
regulated at all so I think this is
something for us to think about I I just
to be completely depressed in this is
going to happen very fast regardless of
what you and I agree to because there's
too much money too much scale too many
competitors for here thank you so much
for being with us Mr Schmidt I'm a
senior studying economics uh you
mentioned uh scaling laws and whether
they're slowing down I know there's been
a lot of discussion recently about if
pre-training scaling is slowing and if
you know the Chain of Thought reasoning
if that's a new dimension to scale uh so
my question is do you think we'll be
able to scale on both of those axes um
and what's going to happen in one to two
months that should give us a better idea
thank you yeah I these are early an
excellent question these are early
they're early fears in the industry
because the whole model was around the
emergence at each layer and these models
take about 18 months to make and so when
you start the way it works is you spend
six months screwing around trying
different algorithms this is where the
university connections make a difference
and then you start the model and they're
typically trained in what are called
mixture of EXT expert models so they div
they divisionalized the training and
sometimes the mixture of experts doesn't
work in the sense it doesn't come
together there's somebody called a loss
function and so forth which they
optimize for um there are people who
believe that this is simply nervousness
because of the amounts of money at stake
and so forth and there are people who
think there's a fundamental
slowdown the reason I said what I said
is that it doesn't to some degree it
doesn't matter because the the game will
then be played one level higher so in
computer science there's always a game
one level higher from where you are so
you get the operating system then you
have a language fight then you get the
language fight then you get the platform
fight then you get the apps fight then
you get the the higher level apps um and
that's okay and there's plenty of money
to be made at each of these levels um I
would bet
that the this alleged slowdown may not
matter very much because the the game
will be played at the agent level which
uses whatever Foundation models are
available and most of the agents are not
particularly complicated they have
language input language output and they
do something so that's that's my bet
up at the top
yes yes ma'am um thank you so much for
the talk so actually I'm a PhD in
history so my question will be very
simple do you have any advice for
students like me who are coming from
Humanities backgrounds in this um world
which is kind of to be dominated by
techn thank you so this is sorry you
said history yes so um the first thing I
would do is I would take Google's uh
notebook
LM and I would take everything that
you're doing in your history research
and I would throw it in new essentially
Aggregates all sources of information
and then you can start doing queries it
has a really fun thing called podcasts
where it makes up a synthetic podcast
that's very entertaining but for you as
a as a researcher I would throw
everything into my notebook and then I
would use that to get deeper
Insight that's the first thing I would
do the second thing I would do is find
somebody who's trying to build a a a his
history language model in other words
something which can understand the
history and also predict things and I
would align myself as a in your case as
a as an expert as a as a historian with
that work I think those two paths are
likely to produce really interesting
results for for for a a discipline that
hasn't changed very
much at the
top
soror hi hi Eric I'm Rodrigo I'm a math
major in sophomore I do I do know
Rodrigo very
well it's a pleasure to have you here
prin and thank you you you were an
incredible partner we we worked together
last summer and uh you are the example
that I use of why Princeton
undergraduates are going to take over
the entire world oh I I'm truly honored
right now thank you so much uh I guess
my question is uh assuming that we have
these very um powerful systems that are
even better than the most well-renowned
mathematicians physicists how do you
think having these systems is going to
change Academia and the way that
normally institutions like Princeton
condu academic research so for example
would you see more people entering PHD
programs or a completely transformation
completely new transformation on how PHD
programs are uh how they work and how
they develop would you see this academic
change in institutions in the next few
years so again the book talks about this
at Great length and the I I talk a lot
about sort of what the computer can do
but a better way to understand the
question is how will humans interact
with these powerful systems right just
sort of roughly what you're asking and
it makes sense to me that in all the
fields at Princeton everyone will be
using these systems all day right so a
mathematician will learn about math and
then they'll come up with conjectures
and then you'll have something which
will just prove them and then they'll
give you some proofs and say come up
with the conjectures and vice versa in
other words the way the education will
work is you'll have to learn with the
computer and that's my guess so the
teaching will ultimately the presumption
for you as an undergraduate and my guess
is when you enter Princeton because
Princeton's people are so good is
they'll presume you already know even in
high school how to use these systems uh
to get some basic learning and knowledge
and drive them um in math and you're
much you're a real mathematician I'm
just making it up I I'm assuming that um
the eventual path for math is that
you'll have computers that generate
conjectures and computers that generate
proofs and occasionally the two will
come up with something which is
extraordinary um but that will
ultimately have mathematicians guiding
it at least for 10
years that's and frankly when you get
your PhD from here in math you're
probably what you'll end up doing unless
you come to work for me which is a
separate
discussion up
here uh hi Eric my name is Connor uh
just want to thank you for coming and
speaking with us um I'm a junior in the
ECE department and you know I'm trying
to kind of reconcile having these like
all powerful AI models um for like my
future career in a technical industry so
I just really wanted to ask you like
what would be your advice you know to
students studying technical subjects um
getting ready to work with AI but still
be able to kind of work on these
interesting problems themselves as well
so let me give you a non-computer
science answer than a computer science
answer the non-computer science answer
is Learn Python and learn how to use the
python interfaces that are in these
Foundation models to do interesting
things um I started with another company
um which is very small and they're doing
demos and what they did is they just
used the apis in Python from the big
guys and they just pay credits for it
and they're able to do image
classification um you know various
bisection segmentation of information
generation of new images that kind of
stuff it's so easy now to build a
prototype especially if you're using
Python and especially if it's not going
to be some huge scalable system so one
way to think about it is it from a
university perspective and a research
perspective a demo is good enough so I
would imagine that every single let's go
back to our historian uh in in her
problem the most obvious thing for her
to do is to take the historical test
that she studying and then have the the
images get generated on behalf of that
and pay a small fee and then take
historical images and have the systems
essentially dissect classify and
otherwise analyze the work which she
would have to do by hand right so these
these tools are incredibly powerful
there from a computer perspective that's
not going to be good enough and then
you're going to have to design for scale
which means you're going to have to have
real programming languages and you're
going to have real real architecture
you're have to real security and things
like like that and that's why we have a
computer science department
here sir really appreciate you coming um
I'm a second year PhD student studying
military innovations and Acquisitions
for the army military innovation in
which group um I'm here on a Downing to
do my PhD through security studies um
excellent yes sir uh so one of the many
things wrong with the system that you
and um General Millie brought up in your
article was the lack of VC doing things
and stuff within the procurement cycle
uh so I guess in in a two-part question
one how do we get these Exquisite
Technologies to scale that Venture is
producing and then are we creating the
correct demand signals for venture to do
the type of risky innovations that are
required for National Security so the
problem you're describing is
solvable and I know this because I tried
to solve it for a decade working for the
defense department and I was the head of
the defense Innovation board and worked
for National Security and all of that
kind of stuff and I indeed spent quite a
bit of time with President Obama and
president Trump on this and I basically
said to them not even you as
commander-in-chief can fix this problem
um and the the core issue has to do with
the system was designed post-war in the
70s especially after the failures of
Vietnam and it has it's a zero trust
environment where there's no particular
incentive for moving quickly and there's
a great incentive for doing very very
expensive problems that are very
interesting but nobody uses so they
violate every tenant of Technology
business planning so I proposed for
example of why don't you just work with
a vendor to design the product how we
work in our industry and I was told it's
a great idea but it's illegal so I said
well why don't we change the law can't
change the law okay
so having spent a decade working and I
really actually like the people a lot
they're trapped in a horrific
system uh I have started to work on this
uh on my own there's a whole bunch of
startups in the in the tech sector that
are doing the right thing and the simple
rule would be a triable systems that are
inexpensive they're based on consumer
products they're done at scale and they
are networked together simple example
the F35 of the underlying military
networks that they use are not powerful
enough to take the incredible
information that an F35 takes right they
just they're just not powerful enough
that's true of every BAS
so it's just it's just a Mis
architecture of how our national
security should work
so uh General Millie and I have written
a series of papers on this and he and I
sort of sort of agree sort of strange to
to agree with you know the perfect
General he looks like it he sounds like
it and so forth and the great thing
about it is he's a great prestonian so
we have a perfect alignment of interest
and so Mark and I uh believe that the
way this will be solved is by a complete
rethinking of how war is done and you
can see this in Ukraine so having spent
lots of time there the soldiers are
sitting there at the desk and they're
they're doing autonomous attacks using
autonomy and remote remote Direction so
my advice to you um is to try to figure
out you're not going to be able to solve
the political problem which is sort of
where the money is but you can come up
with an architecture for National
Security and the way to think about it
is let's assume you had a great country
and zero military what would you build
the first thing you would build is not a
battleship or an aircraft carrier or an
airplane with people in it the first
thing you would do is build autonomous
defensive systems and offensive
systems so if you think of it that way
you start from autonomy and a new
network architecture and by the way this
is really hard right because the network
has to be secure the autonomy has to
work and you have to deal with the fact
that your competitor in this in the
particular case in Ukraine and Russia
they're doing the same thing to me
that's the most interesting
question okay last couple of
questions hi my name is Joey I'm a
junior studying computer science thanks
so much for coming here and giving this
talk um I actually had a follow up about
like considering research directions um
as an undergrad who's very interested in
doing research and and um doing research
currently in large language models and
interested in doing grad school um I
think I resonated a lot with your point
about like um finding yourself at the
beginning of a new wave um do you feel
like large language models are an area
that is um getting saturated or and do
you feel like perhaps um you mentioned
the camb explosion right and the camb
explosion is an example of where uh
increasing the number of ways that
organisms could sense the world um
resulted in an explosion in biodiversity
um so I wonder if like you feel like the
next area of research would be somewhere
in the space of spatial intelligence or
um Vision language models like combining
other forms of perception with natural
language or do you feel like the um are
there's still so much more that we can
develop in the field of language that
remember that large language models have
only been around for two or three years
so it's crazy that we would all already
be discussed you know that this is
saturated I still think we're at the
beginning I think that large language
models change over time so your research
area is is preserved my strong advice to
you is stay in the field and get your
PhD right and the reason is that at your
age with all everything that's going to
happen there's so much ahead of you that
you don't see right because but I have
the benefit of having watched it when I
was here the computer that that I used
which I shared with the entire campus
was a 100 million times slower than the
phone in your pocket or
purse pretty extraordinary right thanks
thank God to the physicists and the sem
people for making that possible it
resulted in my being able to donate
money to Princeton my family going to
college you know etc etc and having nice
house and all of that
um on the technical aspects there are so
many unex unexplained problems in large
language models broadly speaking
brittleness predictability
explainability there's so many deep
research issues that you can get plenty
of phds just in solving those problems
and and I think your idea about
integrating sensor models and vision
models is a new one you should do that
right and at Princeton as an
undergraduate you can do it
yes sir thank you uh Happy is my name
it's an honor to be uh to listen to your
talk uh my research is about creating
technology for low resource African
languages yes and uh you already know
the current technology is kind of
centered to high resource languages
especially English so how do we scale or
how do we increase the you know
inclusivity of LW resource
languages so there's a a belief in the
industry that you can take a high
resource language English and then you
can essentially fine-tune it into the
language structure of the languages that
you're talking about if that's true then
that's a good solution if it's not true
can you as a researcher figure it or to
make it true because otherwise we're
going to have a problem where American
hegemony takes over the world I'll give
you a simp a more General point to make
the the argument if you believe as I do
that the US and China are going to be
the the incredible competition in the
next 20 years in this area it's going to
then leave most of the other countries
behind and these are proud countries
with their own cultures their own
languages how do we propose to
accommodate them now the typical
American will say well what's wrong just
speak English okay which strikes me as
sort of dumb right wouldn't it be better
if we actually accommodated their
cultural mores their languages and so
forth and language is key to an aspect
of culture that's why what you're doing
is so important but I think technical
answer is it should be possible to
essentially do fine-tuning around these
low resource languages to because
language has a common structure we
learned this a long time at Google we
were able to do translation of 100
Languages by 100 languages pretty easy
uh and indeed computer language to
computer language as well great last
last
question
sorry hi yeah thanks um I'm Jabari I'm a
first year grad um thank you for the
really nice talk I heard last year that
you were invited to netanyahu's a AI
advisory forum and I wanted to ask given
Google's role in Project Nimbus and
minimum estimates of up to 200,000 dead
if you had met with Netanyahu or the
board of AI advisers in the past year to
discuss maybe uh killing less
children um I I yes I agree with the the
presumption in your question so we we
actually agree and I did not have any
such meetings of any
kind so zero
meetings great thank you so much all of
you for being here can I just say one
more time please it is for those of you
who are well I guess everyone here is
either a faculty or staff or going to be
graduating it is a privilege to be here
I knew it when the day I came in and I
still feel it today
thank you very much thank
you thank you J that was really good
thank you
for yeah good thank you Chris
