I couldn't believe what I was
seeing I walked into the room and I said
this cannot be happening right
now this is not the kind of thing that
normally happens in this
town is it this camera I look at this
one okay why don't they just edit that
part out can you tell us your name my
name is John and what is your connection
to Crazy Legs who the serial killer I
don't know who that is you don't no uh
is this for TV sort of sorry we must
have got the wrong guy yeah I think you
did I work at Hobby Lobby whoops well
could you tell us about that oh uh sure
so Hobby Lobby is sort of a knick-knack
store it's so they're just going to
interview him anyway it's a good place
to work because we have Sundays off and
I'm not like religious or anything but I
just don't like working on
Sundays no it didn't hurt necessarily I
just wanted to go to a dermatologist to
make sure it wasn't anything
serious uh but then I found out that if
you bundle it with your home insurance
it's actually a little bit cheaper how
long is this you know what's funny I
never understood the roadwork Bond
people would quote it to me is this the
whole episode do you guys want to hear
about the time I got my tonsils out oh
my God I'm done this is so stupid year
2005 my throat ravaged with strap hey
guy does anyone else feel like
everything is designed to waste your
time now or am I being too cynical
Netflix documentaries are multiple
episodes when they could have just been
one 45-minute Movie video games are too
big YouTube videos are too long and
please for the love of God stop asking
me for my phone number every time I buy
something from a store I don't want to
join your Rewards program I just want to
give you money in exchange for a hat is
that too much to ask sorry I'll start
with the Netflix thing it seems like
half of what I watch on Netflix is twice
as long as it should be they always make
it just interesting enough to hold your
attention but it's still pretty clear
they're trying to stretch it out as much
as they can and I know it's not just me
who feels this way cuz I'll look up
reviews after I watch something and they
almost all say the same thing watchable
but it drags on could have been tied up
in one episode please Netflix stop
trying to make a series when there
simply isn't the content for a series
they made a documentary a couple years
ago about the Cecil Hotel a place that
has I'll say it an alarming number of
deaths associated with it it's the site
of that extremely famous elevator video
of Alisa lamb right before she was found
dead so there is plenty of mystery to
uncover here but by episode 2 they were
just interviewing YouTubers not people
connected with the story just a bunch of
random dudes who had Googled stuff about
it before they keep calling them web
sleuths which I guess is the most
official way of saying that you just
woke up one day and decided that you are
a detective well since no one else has
been able to crack this case I guess
it's up to me generally one of the big
things that separates a professionally
made documentary from just any average
YouTube video is the access they have to
the subject matter anyone can throw
together a video where they summarize a
Wikipedia page but the most memorable
and revealing documentaries are ones
where we hear the perspective of the
people involved I watched one on Hulu
recently called the contestant and not
only is this an absolutely insane story
but you get to hear it from the point of
view of the it happened to you also get
to hear from the villain of this story
who is such a monster I can't believe he
agreed to be a part of this it's
fascinating to see how proud he is of
himself like yeah I tormented this guy
and ruined his life but you got to admit
it made for a pretty cool show but this
is kind of the expectation when you turn
on a documentary that you're going to
hear the story from the people involved
in the story so when you put on an
official Netflix docu series on a
streaming service that costs money to
use and most of it is just regular
people offering their two on the same
blurry video everyone else has watched
it kind of feels like a huge waste of
time it's so aggressively time wasting
that I can't help but feel like that was
the goal like all right we have
everything we need to tell this story we
have other guests who were staying at
the hotel we have the manager of the
hotel at the time we have the
maintenance worker who discovered her
body and in between interviewing them
we're also going to hear from someone
who only credential is having internet
access I am a co-founder of the Elisa
lamb discussion group on Facebook know
he wasn't there when it happened but he
has listened to a lot of podcasts about
this so we should probably hear him out
more recently they made a docu series
about Ashley Madison a website whose
mere existence is fascinating let alone
all the Fallout from their massive data
leak that exposed a bunch of celebrities
and politicians there is absolutely a
story worth telling here and some of it
was very interesting but again pointless
interviews backstory that's
unnecessarily detailed there's such a
clear amount of filler put into these
documentaries it felt like half the fun
time of the last two episodes was just
trying to make us feel bad for this
YouTube vlogging couple which I'm sorry
was never going to happen in fact I
would say the best thing to come out of
this was that it forced them to take a
short break from exploiting their
children's medical issues for AdSense
Revenue because they were too busy
making 17 videos about how they were
going to be on Netflix now I would guess
like with a lot of their scripted
content the shadowy Netflix overlords
are more responsible for a lot of these
decisions than the talented people who
work on these I don't think almost every
single document is 3 60-minute episodes
because that's always how much story
there is to tell I think that's the
mandated runtime that their bosses give
to them so even when they end up with
footage that doesn't add anything to the
show they kind of just have to leave it
in anyway to pad the length there's a
series they did a couple years ago with
Chris and Bell called the woman in the
house across the street from the girl in
the window as you could probably guess
from the title this was a parody of like
lifetime Murder Mysteries and it was a
pretty funny show I enjoyed it but the
whole time I was watching this I I just
kept thinking this should have been a
movie why is this Eight Episodes is it
because they knew it would take me 4
days to finish instead of getting
through it all in one night therefore
extending my subscription just long
enough for them to make a little bit
more money for me you know now that I
hear that out loud I'm pretty sure it's
that at this point I just assume most of
Netflix's decisions are made by an
algorithm that prioritizes keeping
people subscribed as long as possible
and has figured out the best way to
mathematically do that even if it
lessens the overall user experience I
think overall Netflix is trying to do
too many things at once they want to
make good shows but they also want to
make a lot of shows and they want the
shows to be longer than they need to be
but not in a way that would cost more
money and they need to move the plot
along so no one gets bored but not too
quickly otherwise the people are looking
down to their phones the entire time
might get confused she'd heard from so
many showrunners who are given notes by
the streaming channels that they say
this isn't second screen enough the
viewer is expected to be on their phone
kind of half doing something else while
your crime drama or whatever is playing
and you just can't make it as
complicated as you have cuz they're not
going to understand it cuz they're only
going to be half concentrating on your
show you know when you hear stuff like
that it's actually not that surprising
how often shows like Avatar would repeat
the same information they just told you
a few minutes ago you're not supposed to
pay attention when you watch Netflix
you're just supposed to put it on in the
background so you have something to
listen to while you make dinner but like
if you're designing your content so that
it's best consumed while half paying
attention to it why would I waste my
time devoting all of my attention to it
on the topic of things that are getting
too long what's going on with YouTube
videos does anyone no I'm old enough to
remember when the 10minute Mark was
something videos got stretched out to
now it feels like half the videos that
get recommended to me are 7-hour
retrospectives on like the Penguins of
Madagascar and I'm kind of conflicted on
how I feel about this cuz on one hand
some of the best videos I've seen on
this website are well past the hour mark
there are multiple defunk land episodes
that have better storytelling and
production value than any Netflix
documentary I've seen when H bomber guy
or Jenny Nichols release a 4-Hour video
I know it's not just because they're
trying to inflate the watch time so it
gets boosted by the algorithm it's
because they spent months working on it
and that's just how long the video ended
up being I'm a sucker for a comically
in-depth review of a piece of media I've
never thought about for more than 2
seconds as long as a person making it is
passionate about the subject and they
put in the effort to make it
entertaining I'll watch just about
anything but I'm worried that some
people are taking the wrong lessons from
the success of some of these channels
they see that a very long video about a
niche subject has the potential to get a
lot of views so it's almost as if they
go into their video with the goal of
making it as long as possible even if
there's not really that much to talk
about the current YouTube meta is to
turn your video into a podcast it's to
pad the absolute  out of the runtime
because that's what the algorithm likes
and to be clear I don't really blame
these people for doing this especially
smaller channels who are just trying to
make their videos stand out before they
drown in the bottomless ocean of content
but it's just frustrating from from the
audience perspective that the system is
rewarding unedited yapping if I just
vomit out every word that remotely
pertains to the topic at hand with no
thought into brevity no consideration of
the viewer's time it's actually more
likely that YouTube will push my video
out to those people whose time I'm not
valuing the algorithm is teaching me
that I shouldn't cut things out of my
video if they feel Superfluous or
unnecessary or repetitive or like I'm
just saying the same thing over and over
again but in slightly different ways
they'd prefer if I stretched out every
video as long as I could but if that's
all I'm doing what message am I sending
to the audience I'm trying to cultivate
that their time is just something for me
to leverage so I can get more views
that's a little shitty but the worst
thing is when they start doing an ad
read at the beginning of a video that
quite frankly I'm not even sure I'm
interested in yet you haven't even
hooked me and you're already trying to
sell me a water bottle that smells bad
brother if I wanted to be advertised too
I would fly to New York City and spin
around in Time Square I didn't click on
this video to learn about the deodorant
that changed your life I clicked on this
video to hear a grown man rant about the
Fairly Odd Parents for 3 hours so in
that way this is kind of my fault I
don't know what I was expecting
also no I'm sorry you don't have to do
this I literally do I signed a contract
this portion of the video is sponsored
by Sofi the ultimate finance app helping
you Bank borrow and invest I have one
goal in life to be the first person in
human history to have $100 all at once
an amount long considered to be
unreachable and yet I will reach it and
even though I'm only about 3% of the way
there I'm not giving up because with
sofi's high yield checking and savings
account I can earn up to 4.5% apy on my
savings with direct deposit which is 10
times the national average savings rate
high yield savings accounts are a great
way to make your money work harder for
you so you don't have to work harder for
your money your typical savings account
with direct deposit at your local bank
earns you just 46% interest and that's
not enough for me I have a world record
to break but with a Sofi high yield
savings account with direct deposit it
in just 5 weeks the money in my savings
account is earning more than it would in
an entire year in a big Bank savings
account with Sofi checking and savings
you also get paid up to 2 days early pay
no account fees and you can cash in on
up to $300 when you sign up with direct
deposit but here's the best part Sofi
and I are teaming up to give away
$10,000 so I guess I'll be the second
person to have a 100 bucks all you have
to do to enter is sign up for a Sofi
checking and savings account right now
using my link and that's it click the
link in the description or scan the QR
code on the screen to enter for a chance
to win but just make sure you're using
my link because it's the only way to
enter thank you to Sofi for sponsoring
today's video now based on everything I
just described you might be thinking
okay so you want every video to be as
concise as possible you mean like Mr
Beast no no no no no no no no no that's
not what I'm saying that is on the
entire other end of the spectrum there
are videos that go on so long that large
portions of them become nothing more
than background noise and then there's
the most hyperactive fever dream editing
non-stop cacophony of colors and sound
meant to over stimulate the 8-year-old
boys watching on their iPad and then
there's a lot of space in between but I
guess because of all that space it's
weird to me how many videos end up on
either extreme it'll either be like I
just Dr my friend in an elevator for 72
hours without any food or water but none
of that even mattered because they ran
out of air and suffocated before they
even got hungry or it'll be like but
before I can talk about season 2 of How
I Met Your Mother we need to go back to
the beginning the first camera was
invented in 8 I'm just asking that we
meet somewhere in the middle that's all
also to be clear Mr Beast and all of the
channels copying him have never made
their videos that way because they value
people's time they're just trying to
keep their retention rate as high as
possible it's just a different metric
they're prioritizing if Jimmy cared
about his audience at all he wouldn't
sign off on doing this unbelievably
deceptive  where during mid roll
ads they put this progress bar on the
bottom that starts off really 
fast it makes it seem like oh this will
be done in a few seconds I don't need to
skip this and then once people have done
the math in their head and decided
they're just going to see it through to
the end the progress bar mysteriously
slows down like a lot and suddenly that
last 20% is starting to feel like an
eternity I thought we were almost done
and now I'm not even sure we're halfway
through this  really pisses me off
cuz this is a very deliberate choice
this is not an accident you have to go
out of your way to key frame it like
this with the intention of deceiving
your viewers it's such an openly
manipulative thing to do to your
audience and is very telling of the way
you view them that you're willing to lie
to their face if it means a number on an
analytic screen might get a little bit
bigger to you they're not real people
they're just data points that can be
orchestrated in whatever Direction you
want them to and that sucks and if you
agree with me please sign up for my
patreon right now I'm trying to buy a
bunch of Teslas so I can see how many
you can stack on top of each other
before they explode I have a lot of
respect for creators that make algorithm
Ally counterintuitive decisions because
they don't want to waste their viewers
time I think internet Shaquille is hands
down the best cooking channel on YouTube
he's knowledgeable he's funny and he
always just gets right to the point
there's a promise of information in the
title and he doesn't try to withhold it
from you just because he could
theoretically put more midrolls in by
Meandering for a bit for a long time Tom
Scott was kind of the science version of
this nerd writer is like the film
version of this in a world where most
video essays end up being somehow longer
than the piece of media they're about
riter still barely hitting that 7 Minute
Mark it's just here's this thing I
noticed in a movie here's some insight
about it and that's all I got for you
brother but I think it's also worth
noting That these channels are
successful they're not doing the thing
you're supposed to be doing but it works
for them and I just want to use that as
a testament to making things the way you
want to make them or making the type of
video you wish there was more of
sometimes going against the grain
actually is the best way to make
yourself stand out like don't just throw
together a bunch of crappy videos about
whatever drama is trending make a
retrospective about some Niche hobby you
had as a kid this  is way more
interesting remember this website is
called YouTube not do the thing that you
think will become popular tube that
would be a really stupid URL now I'll
admit it's not totally fair to get mad
at other people for wasting my time when
really no one wastes more of it than I
do there was a day last week where the
screen time on my phone was
106 hours and I slept in that day
there's so many things I want to do in
my life before I'm gone so many people I
want to spend time with so many places I
want to go but I can't stop scrolling I
don't want to but it's as if it's been
scientifically engineered to be the
easiest thing to do Adam and Eve were
caught on camera can you guess who's
holding the camera keep scrolling if you
choose the
devil there's this weird feeling I get
whenever I go on Tik Tok or Instagram
reels or Reds just kidding where I'm
simultaneously aware of what it's doing
to my brain but I do nothing to try and
intervene I just sit there and let it
destroy me because I have to see that
next video what if it's so funny but I
exit out of the app before I ever get a
chance to watch it I'd cry no I'd kill
myself and it's almost as if that
feeling is intentional they've made it
so the distance between you and a chance
at dopamine is just one small swipe away
I'd almost say it's malicious but I know
that's not true true because a billion
dooll company would never do that
billionaires care about your well-being
that's how they made so much money in
the first place Twitter Instagram
Facebook they would never intentionally
show us things to make us upset because
studies show that people spend more time
on a platform if they're seeing
something that makes them angry they
wouldn't do that because that's not nice
this is what most of my timeline is
whenever I scroll through a Twitter it's
the most blatantly obvious engagement
bait that has weasel its way into being
prioritized cuz it successfully baited
engagement its arguments about body
counts and whether Nickelodeon shows
were good or not and it works on me it
has the intended effect when I see it I
was scrolling one day and I saw someone
say I Carly Victorious Zoe 101 and at
first I had to squint for a few seconds
cuz I wasn't sure what they meant by
this and then I realized they were
saying the first two are good LeBron
James and the third is sort of an
impostor that doesn't belong and I in my
head got defensive I was like what are
you talking about Zoe 101 was good it
was certainly better than Victorious how
does this have so many likes what's
wrong with Zoe 101 and I exited out of
Twitter and sat in silence for a few
seconds as I pondered what just happened
how I got upset that someone I don't
know said a show from 20 years ago that
I kind of liked isn't as good as a
different show that I barely watch why
is this how I'm spending my time in this
moment I could have been doing anything
else and yet I chose to introduce this
argument into my head that can't be good
long term right like we can all agree
that's probably not great for my brain
if you're like me and you've been
struggling with the endless scroll I do
have a recommendation I found this by
accident while I was doing a video a
couple years ago about dopamine fast
it's called screens in and it's free I
have it set up so it only gives me a few
minutes at a time on each of the most
poisonous apps that I hate but am
addicted to so you can still pop in for
a sec and get the feeling of being up to
dat but then it'll grab you by the
shoulders and yank you out before you
get too sucked into the void you still
get a little bit sucked but not all the
way but of course I saved the most
important issue for last video games are
too big now and I'm tired of pretending
like they're not when I was a kid the
idea of an open world game blew my mind
up until a certain point everything was
very linear very insulated you load into
an area you do what you have to do there
and then you move on to the next place
but this idea that you could go anywhere
in any order what could be more imer
than a world that you could essentially
live in and boy did I want to live in
any other world than the one in which I
played clarinette and got bullied by
someone who also played clarinet you're
not better than me we're the same to me
open World Games felt like the
culmination of every technological
Milestone it felt like the future of
gaming and then over time it became the
standard it became what every game had
to be and then all of a sudden it seemed
like the goal shifted from making the
best game to making the biggest game I
guess because it's easier to Market
something based on scale than to just
come out and say hey the story is really
good in this one trust me I started to
get overwhelmed by games because of the
seemingly endless list of tasks I needed
to complete the chores that I needed to
do and to be clear I'm not talking about
games like crime scene cleaner that's a
great game okay I don't mind chores when
the game is chores I'll play powerwatch
simulator all day I played unpacking
shortly after moving into this house and
I hadn't finished unpacking in real life
yet my wife was not happy about that
what I'm specifically referring to is
when games feel artificially padded with
repetitive side quests when there's like
seven different activities to do but you
just end up doing each of them a hundred
times and as someone who goes into games
with a completionist mindset this is the
quickest way to make me give up cuz I'll
try to collect every item and go into
every corner for like 20% of the story
until one day I just stop opening the
game altogether relieved by the massive
weight now off my shoulders I think
there's a big reason why Elden ring had
such a big impact on me and so many
other people yes you're in this
staggeringly large open world littered
with places to go and things to kill but
it's not in the form of just a bunch of
exclamation points on your mini map
almost everything you do in this game is
motivated by oh that looks cool I want
to go over there it's a feeling you
should have while playing an open world
game it's that sense of wonder that has
mostly been lost by all these cookie
cutter Tas aons also the more bloated a
game is with content the more narrative
dissidence there ends up being which of
course only matters as much as you let
it but it's still really funny sometimes
when the main quest line of a game is
trying to instill this sense of urgency
but at any given moment you can just go
 around for 15 straight hours we've
only got until midnight tonight to
rescue my uncle or they're going to
execute him hey do you think there's
anything cool in this cave over here a
compromise that works great for my brain
is a semiopen world like the two most
recent God of War games I like when
there's enough optional side exploration
that it still scratches that itch for me
without it ever feeling like I'm missing
out on this overwhelming amount of
content by just wanting to streamline
the story for a bit I think it's okay
for a game to be modest in scope just
because the technology exists to
procedurally generate a thousand
different planets doesn't mean we have
to do that sometimes I wonder if the
technical limitations from previous
generations actually made games better I
mean it certainly made them more
contained it made them more approachable
I love going back and playing older
games that only take a few hours to
finish I want to be able to complete
things I want to have a full experience
in a reasonable amount of time I'm tired
of not getting any closure from games
because they make it so tedious and
long- winded to get to that point and
that's assuming the game even works when
when you first buy it which chances are
it won't it's become so normalized for
games to be unfinished and littered with
bugs on release that it's actually
surprising when a game comes out and
works the way it's supposed to a lot of
even really good games aren't worth
buying for like two full years cyberpunk
fantastic game in 2024 but I bought this
on release and had to slog through so
many bugs retread so many areas because
of crashes all before encountering an
immovable obstacle I could not progress
the story because every time I tried to
initiate this cutscene the other
character would not say the next line he
was supposed to so they would both just
sit there in silence indefinitely I
couldn't continue the game past this
point and I was like 10 hours into it I
had a similar gamebreaking experience
with Dying Light 2 Metro Exodus and I'm
not even touching Starfield anytime soon
the bigger a game is supposed to be the
more I don't trust it to be a complete
experience when it first comes out it
usually takes years to fill out all the
missing pieces so I'm not going to waste
my time or money on what I assume will
be a significantly worse experience than
if I were to just wait until it's on
sale in 2027 but in a world of titles
forced out prematurely by a deadline
that was never realistic nothing feels
quite as egregious as the yearly
full-priced sports game you spend 11
months building up a player or a team or
a general manager if you're a weirdo
like me and then as soon as the calendar
flips over you got to start from scratch
all right everyone time for the new game
yes it's $100 again but we've made so
many improvements the number on the box
is
different and where's your credit card
NBA 2K has one of the most aggressive
microtransaction systems I've ever seen
in a video game but they're not just
dedicated to milking every single dollar
out of your bank account they've also
made it their personal
to waste as much of your time as humanly
possible a few years ago they added
something revolutionary they turned the
park into the city now functionally at
its core the city is just a menu every
physical location that you have to Trek
to could have just been text on a screen
and it would have been way more
efficient to navigate but that wouldn't
be Innovative Innovation is when you
have to jog a mile just to have Gatorade
before your next game Innovation is when
you create something tedious so you can
sell the solution to it man aren't you
guys tired of having to navigate this
big stupid City we made then buy a bike
it's $10  you imagine if every time
you turn on your computer you had to
make a little guy run across town just
to go to the Gmail store Oh  forgot
my password going to have to Sprint over
to City Hall I feel like every single
element of this game is designed with
the goal of wasting your time whether
it's getting interrupted in the main
menu to show you two separate ads or a
halftime show you cannot skip even if
you press X the whole time don't get me
wrong this halftime show is great
they've got Ernie Kenny Shaq my three
favorite guys they show highlights and
relevant stats they make jokes by sports
game standards this halftime show is
fantastic but there are 1 million games
in every basketball season and I don't
want to watch 1 million halftime shows
I'm just trying to speed run to the
playoffs so I can take a virtual trophy
home to my real life Orlando Magic is
that too much to
ask 58 seconds by the way whatever those
are just minor inconveniences the really
egregious waste of time are in the my
career mode now the thing is when you
start his career this guy  sucks
at basketball which is a problem because
that's the thing he's trying to do he's
slow as hell he can't shoot to save his
life he has one shirt and it's Brown and
in order to fix these things you need to
obtain virtual currency now there's two
ways you can do this option one grind
spend dozens of hours playing dozens of
games scraping together pennies so you
can get 1% faster 1% stronger 1% better
at handling Ball but it's never enough
this process is miserable you're useless
out there you don't belong in the NBA
you would be better off in any other
line of work and this this is exactly by
Design This is how the game wants you to
feel they want you to hate this part
because they know the more frustrating
of an experience you have the more
likely you are to just skip to option
two spend $40 more come on just do it
you don't have time for this don't you
want to get to the fun part you'll start
doing the math in your head and
rationalize it as a no-brainer yeah $40
is a lot of money but it's not nearly as
much money as I could earn in the 40
hours it's saving me you feel like a
genius you feel like you outsmarted the
system and then you realize uh this is
the system I did the exact thing they
wanted me to do and it wouldn't even be
that bad if the game itself didn't
already cost $70 but now you're out over
a hundred bucks maybe 150 if you
pre-ordered it also the professional
athlete you created doesn't play like
he's never touched a basketball in his
life before I've got all the natural
ability in the world thanks to my gen
and then you get to do it all again next
year this whole system of paying to skip
a grind that has been intentionally
designed to be insufferable has become
way too calm developers are purposely
holding our time hostage knowing we'll
probably spend a few bucks to get some
of it back I feel like that's almost the
entire business model of MMOs it's one
of the reasons I stopped playing
RuneScape after our lifelong onoff
relationship I kept having to fight the
urge to spend a few bucks on gold
because the alternative was earning it
in the game but then I'd have to play
the game and I don't want to do that I
just want to play the end of the game
how long does it take to get
there
oh well I guess this is where I live now
in conclusion life is short and your
time is precious it's your most valuable
resource and you should treat it that
way because unfortunately no amount of
it is guaranteed and I just hate seeing
how much it's become commodified how
companies have figured out ways to steal
as much of it as they can from us you
can't even pause a  movie anymore
without having your attention demanded I
know you're just getting up to pee but
if you could please scan this QR code we
got a lot of interesting information
about Lysol wipes the way our attention
gets pulled in every direction at all
times also makes me feel like I should
be multitasking always or I'll fall
behind I always feel like I'm missing
out on something there's so many movies
I want to watch and games I want to play
and there's not enough hours in the day
to do it all so when I do get myself
free time I try to be overly efficient
with it I can't just play a video game I
should be catching up on podcasts
loading screen perfect that gives me
exactly 9 seconds to scroll through Tik
Tok I'd hate to be bored I'd hate to
have to listen to the thoughts that are
already in my brain I need to be
absorbing new information constantly or
I'll die I've been trying more and more
lately to not let the feeling that
there's something better I could be
doing prevent me from enjoying the time
that I have sometimes it's nice to go
for a walk without bringing my airpods
there's still plenty of stuff to listen
to Birds Cars 1 billion cicas making the
world's loudest sound I don't need to
min max content consumption in fact I
probably shouldn't be doing that I don't
think prioritizing constant small hits
of dopamine hoping it all adds up to
something meaningful is the secret to
being happy the secret to being happy is
gambling nobody's ever had a bad time in
the casino this is free so how do you
make money the advertisers cover the
cost of the TV this is an ad this is
always on whatever you're watching we
we're able to monetize uh using the
bottom device P check this out so
there's a Pizza Hut ad right there we
literally are now on P p hut.com and we
can order a pizza
