well hello and welcome everybody once
again to icmda webinars I'm Dr Peter
Saunders the chief executive of the
International Christian medical and
dental association and today uh we're
privileged again to have professor John
Lennox uh who's going to be discussing
with me the subject of evolution a
theory and crisis based on his recent
book
57da brings together about 60 000
Christian doctors and dentists from over
80 countries around the world and the
way it's going to work today we're not
having a talk but the whole thing will
be discussion and Q a
well uh the Neo darwinian theory of
biological evolution are the so-called
modern synthesis is still regarded by
many as ruling out fears and belief in
God
but there are big questions about it and
I can't think of anyone better to
address these from a Christian
perspective than professor John Lennox
John is a professor of mathematics at
Oxford University and a fellow in
mathematics and philosophy of science at
Green Temple College Oxford green
Templeton College he's also an associate
fellow of this of the same Business
School Oxford University and teachers
for the Oxford strategic leadership
program
Professor Lennox is particularly
interested in the interface of science
uh philosophy and Theology and his books
include against the flow seven days that
divide the world on Genesis 1 gunning
for God on the new atheism Stephen
Hawking and God a response to The Grand
Design God's Undertaker has science
buried God and where is God in a
coronavirus world and 2084 I can really
recommend all of those books for a good
uh workout uh he's also written another
book more recently which is the subject
of today's discussion a bit more about
that later
John has also debated a number of
prominent atheists including Richard
Dawkins Christopher Hitchens and Peter
Singer and you can access his uh website
at www.johnlinux.org
so John it's a real pleasure to have you
back on icmda webinars today we're very
grateful for you giving the time to this
and uh we're we're really looking
forward to what you have to say
now uh as we've mentioned many listeners
will be familiar with your book God's
Undertaker has science buried God which
came out some years ago but uh I think
far fewer will be familiar with your
more recent book
Cosmic chemistry
uh where you build significantly on the
arguments from your first book and I was
intrigued to read it recently
and was on the strength of this that
I've asked you to come along today and
address questions on the topic evolution
of theory and crisis and of course
there's much much more in that book
about faith and science than just
Evolution but that's what we want to
concentrate on today
now of course we're told aren't we that
the extraordinary biological complexity
and diversity we see on planet Earth is
the result of a long process of millions
of years involving inanimate metaphors
giving rise to DNA and protein DNA and
protein producing
organisms uh then unicellular organisms
giving rise to multicellular organisms
Dental invertebrates and then to
vertebrates reptiles birds and mammals
and I want to get into the detail of
this with you as much as we can in the
time we've got today but I first want to
ask you about the impact of the theory
of evolution on Christian belief and the
best apologetic approach to use when
discussing
so uh first of all but before the theory
of evolution came along most people
living in Europe were theists they
believed in God and one of the strongest
Arguments for theism was the so-called
teleological argument the argument from
design which the Apostle Paul himself
uses in Romans chapter one but what
evolution did in effect was to offer an
alternative explanation for biological
diversity and complexity that did not
require God in other words it made
atheism intellectually respectable at
what impact do you think the theory of
evolution has had on Christian belief
John especially in Europe and how
important is it for Christians to be
able to talk about Evolution
intelligently
well I'm delighted to be with you on
icmda and greetings to all of you around
the world
the impact of the theory of evolution
has been very deep particularly in
Europe
and I still meet it even in academic
circles as one of the number one reasons
for believing in God people just say it
was okay up to the time of Darwin
to believe in an intelligently designed
universe but now we've got this
explanation in terms of natural
processes of the kind that the Natural
Sciences study so we don't need God
anymore
now even at the time of Darwin though
there were people who rapidly rushed in
and said but just a moment isn't it
possible that what he discovered and
what was subsequently added to it was
God's method of creating the world so it
didn't create worldwide atheism
but it still as someone has said a
wonderful
engine for generating atheism the impact
is great and among students particularly
in young people you still find it's they
feel it's the knockdown argument against
God
to talk about Evolution particularly
Christians from a scientific background
our audience today of course are all
dentists and and doctors
I think it's extremely important
though not everyone is a biologist I'm
not a biologist I'm a mathematician but
I'm encouraged by the fact that from
Darwin to Dawkins
people have written to try to convince
the thinking public of the truth of this
Theory so I approach it at the level of
the public understanding of Science and
I think it is extremely important that
Christians especially educated
Christians and certainly Christians in
the medical and dental fields know how
to
find a way and navigate the issues
because it's very easy to get lost in a
morass of
side argument rather than concentrating
on the main issues
yeah absolutely and and the theory of
evolution of course
creates a lot of tension even between
Christians let alone between Christians
and atheists and the Bible believing
Christians seem to be divided into three
main camps uh in the UK I I know it's
basically a third in each of these there
are first of all there are the young
Earth six day creationists who take
Genesis chapter one very literally in
terms of six 24-hour periods then there
are the old Earth uh theistic
evolutionists who accept Darwin's theory
but argue that Evolution was a divinely
guided process that God used that you've
already mentioned that uh back in the
19th century and then in between we've
got old earthers who are special
creationists in other words they argue
that God made a number of interventions
in history to create different kinds of
life and I'm not going to ask you which
category you most closely identify with
but rather I want to ask you about the
best way of talking about Evolution to
atheist yes who see Evolution as a real
barrier to Faith should we be promoting
one of these three views our favorite
one or should we rather just be laying
bare the shortfalls of evolutionary
theory uh to show that believing in a
Creator God is still a plausible
position what what's your your own
apologetic approach addressing this well
it's very kind of few not to ask me to
commit myself to one of these three
views
I have of course written the book on
that very topic and you might be
interested to know there's a very new
edition of it seven days that divide the
world but the the important point is
exactly that of course we should promote
a Biblical View and of course we should
labor the shortfalls of evolutionary
theory but I would stress at the very
beginning that we need to distinguish
very carefully between primary and
secondary issues for example the fact of
Creation in the beginning God created
the heavens and the Earth
is vastly more important in
representing Christianity to the
Contemporary atheistic world and
postmodern world than when it happened
or how it happened although both of
those questions are interesting the
first one is more interesting to
scientists and the second one is more
interesting to theologians so if we
distinguish between those two and
remember to be humble intellectually
humble that let me put it this way
I believe that scripture is God inspired
it is the word of God but I'm not
claiming to understand all of it I also
am passionate about science but there
are questions of interpretation on both
sides and we need to try to distinguish
what is reasonably evidently fact and
what are our deductions from that and
my Approach is simply this that on the
precise issue that you've asked me
deducing atheism as many do from
evolutionary biology depends on the
truth of two propositions which are very
different the first is is it
philosophically legitimate to deduce a
worldview atheism from biology
Leo darwinian evolution
the second thing does Neil darwinian
Evolution actually Bear all the weight
that people put on it now those are two
very different questions the first one
is philosophical and logical the second
one is primarily scientific and we need
to distinguish between them
one of my colleagues at Oxford here
who's just retired Aleister McGrath
points out that there's a substantial
logical gap between Darwinism and
Atheism and he adds the rather
delightful point which Dawkins he says
seems to prefer to bridge by rhetoric
rather than evidence now my position on
that is that to the extent that guided
biological evolution in any sense has
occurred then of course it's certainly
compatible with theism because God is
behind it but the issue is has it
occurred and does it Bear all the weight
that's put on it and I understand you
want me to concentrate on that point
that's right and and I want to I want to
as much as is possible and the time
we've got to to walk you through the
different stages from inanimate matter
up to uh vertebrates and particularly
human beings so let's start right at the
beginning and uh with the biochemistry
John we were all taught at school uh
that amino acids which of course are the
building blocks of protein were produced
in a primeval soup where electrical
discharges acted on a mixture of water
vapor ammonia methane and hydrogen uh
you know the the operand theory I think
it is Miller's experience experiments
now I know you're very skeptical about
this uh on scientific grounds why why is
that
well the important thing here Peter is
to realize and I want to emphasize this
point
I'm not a professional biologist or I've
studied a great deal of biology so what
I'm going to say is primarily coming
from the mouths of people at work in the
field that's extremely important to
check out what is actually happening and
before we get into this we need to
distinguish between what's called
chemical Evolution and biological
evolution that ha that is what happens
after life has started now Richard
Dawkins has confused this issue for many
years because he wrote in his famous
book The Blind watchmaker that natural
selection accounts for both the
existence and variation of all of life
and it took him a very long time to
really realize that natural selection
cannot account for the existence of life
because of course natural selection is a
biological phenomenon it depends on life
existing in the first place so it cannot
account for it so we need to distinguish
very carefully between those two
different kinds of things which
unfortunately are both called Evolution
although they're very different
processes now to address your question
directly
geochemists first of all now think that
the Earth's early atmosphere did not
contain the quantities of ammonia and
methane and hydrogen needed to produce
the kind of atmosphere that was required
by oberyn's hypothesis
secondly
getting amino acid building blocks which
they did they got some of them would
only be the beginning because the
problem is not so much getting the
blocks although that theory does not
produce them the problem is getting them
in
the right kind of order you see let's
take the simple thing first if you
proteins are composed of amino acids and
a short protein maybe has a hundred most
of them are about 300 and they exist in
two forms the L and D forms that are
mirror images and these two forms appear
in equal numbers in a Prebiotic
simulation so that the probability of
getting one or other is a half
but the great majority of proteins
contain only the left form
and the probability of getting a hundred
of L form is a half to the power 100
which is about one chance in 10 to the
30. so right at the very start you're
having huge probabilities to face
minuscule probabilities to face just in
getting the right size but then you have
to join the amino acids together and
protein demands bonds the peptide bonds
to be of a certain kind in order that
and this is hugely important that the
protein folds into the right structure
in three dimensions
yet only half the bonds in simulations
are peptides so here we go again the
probability of getting a hundred like
that is one in 10 to the 30. so you're
now down to one in ten to the 60. so at
the very start before we even begin to
discuss the ordering of amino acids
the probabilities are very much against
getting this by Prebiotic simulations
yeah now so let's move from amino acids
to proteins then and in your book you
just you say that proteins are and I
quote immensely specialized intricate
constructions of long chains of amino
acids in a specific linear order and of
course as you've also said it's
particular configuration they've got to
fold and bend in the right way to work
as enzymes or proteins and you you say a
major problem for scientists to explain
is the origin of the informational
structure of protein can you explain
what you mean by that and and why it is
such a problem
well
I think the simple way to look at this
is to take us immediately to the most
famous molecule in the world the the DNA
molecule which is
consists of 3.4 roughly billion chemical
letters
in a specific order looking very much
like a piece of computer code in fact
that's the language that is used and
that determines the sequence of the
amino acids they have to be lined up in
precisely that hugely long and hugely
complex sequence and that is the problem
that has to be addressed now I love
reading physicist Paul Davis he's
usually very graphic and he says making
a protein by simply injecting energy is
like exploding a stick of dynamite under
a pile of bricks and expecting it to
form a house
the point is that you can produce bricks
but making a house requires a plan that
requires information
it so the builders can follow that and
put the bricks into the right place and
that's a trivial job compared with uh
getting the amino acids in the right
places in this chain get a single one in
the wrong place just like if you get a
single letter in the wrong place in a
computer program it could become another
word but it's more likely become
complete nonsense
and the the problem for example there
are 20 amino acids and getting one in a
specific site
probability is one in 20. so getting a
hundred in the correct order would be 1
over 20 to the power 100 which is about
one
in 10 to the power 130.
and then once you get there you realize
that that kind of simple mathematics
concerns only a single protein but life
requires hundreds of thousands of
proteins and it has been calculated that
the odds against producing these by
chance is more than one in tenth of the
Forty thousand and that's what provokes
sir Fred Hoyle who was a formidable
mathematician to say that the
probability against the spontaneous
formation of life was something like the
chance of a tornado sweeping through a
junkyard and producing a Boeing 747.
yeah I mean that really puts it into
context in terms of those big numbers
John just remind us what the number of
atoms in the universe is I think they
they reckon about 10 to the 80. and so
these other numbers are just incredibly
great
sir Roger Penrose is probably one of the
greatest living mathematicians
he says the probability of the Creator
no he's not a theist he's an atheist the
Creator producing a universe like this
one in which there's a second law of
Thermodynamics is around 1 in 10 to the
30. and that means that if you put a one
and then zeros on every elementary
particle in the universe you couldn't
even write the the number out so there's
something going on here and the
mathematician in me says look there must
be something else and my answer is this
is the evidence of an input of
intelligence because the way we measure
it is in terms of information and
information and intelligence are
associated in our minds intimately
yes well and those numbers are
astounding let's um let's move from
proteins to the interaction between
proteins and DNA and you know we're all
familiar with the the old riddle what
came first the chicken or the egg and
you quote Roger Shapiro expert on DNA
chemistry in your book
as saying that DNA holds the recipe for
protein construction yet that
information cannot be retrieved or
copied without the assistance of
proteins already in the cell in other
words you need DNA to get proteins but
you need proteins to get DNA uh doesn't
this create a problem in explaining how
proteins and DNA both came to exist in
the first place and and what does what
what do scientists say about that
well it creates a vast problem because
the replication of DNA which is a
absolutely mind-boggling process cannot
proceed without the prior existence of a
number of other proteins already in the
cell now Robert Shapiro who's a world
Authority on DNA chemistry he points out
that proteins though they are built
following instructions in the DNA are
large molecules themselves that
chemically are very different from DNA
so the question is which large molecule
appeared first proteins the chicken or
DNA the egg and what is becoming
increasingly clear is that it is the
cell not DNA and not the proteins but
the total cell that's all important
which leads to the question the chicken
egg question which is is massive is the
whole thing bottom up
or is it top down and
I attended the quite a few of the
systems biology seminars here in Oxford
that were led by an absolutely brilliant
scientist uh Professor Dennis Noble
who's a fellow of the Royal Society and
he points out he says look Jeans by
themselves are dead it's only in a
fertilized egg cell with all the
proteins lipids and everything else
inherited from the mother that the
process of reading the genome can get
going at least a hundred different
proteins are involved in this without
which the genome would Express nothing
so he adds even at the very beginning of
a new organism's life more is happening
than is dreamed off in the reductionist
bottom-up model and so what he's doing
here is critiquing and criticizing
the reductionism that permeates this
whole system that is the idea that
everything basically reduces the physics
and chemistry and if you've got the
physics and chemistry there if you like
it the Primeval soup everything else
will
followed by natural unguided processes
and they're saying there is no way the
very structure and relationship between
DNA and the cell rules that entirely out
so you have to ask a very big question
in fact
there's a very interesting book by one
of Brazil's top biologists who's
actually a Christian a very interesting
writer Marcus a Berlin and he calls this
chicken and egg circumstance causal
circularity and he points out that it's
found all over living systems and he
says that there's no way out of
circularity without introducing the
foresight of a mind
which is a very interesting way of
putting it I think
but I found one of the most interesting
chapters in your book it was all
enthralling but uh was the one on
systems biology right at the end we'll
come we'll come back to that but um you
know you you point out that that the
genetic information contained even in
the smallest of organisms but you know
viruses or bacteria is much larger than
the information and the laws of physics
and chemistry you say that scientists
have failed to give any plausible yet
alone convincing explanation of the
origin of that information and and you
you add that the only source we know of
the kind of language type information
that we see in the living cell encoded
in DNA and RNA is actually mind not not
matter do you want to unpack that a bit
more for us
well
as you said it's not simply I will say
it and think of Francis Crick who
unraveled the DNA molecule he once said
that the origin of life seems almost to
be a miracle
so many other conditions which would
have to be satisfied to get it going and
I once met his colleague James Watson
and I quoted this to Watson
and I said what's your take on this and
he got very angry and he said well it
happened and he turned around and walked
away
it's very interesting this that it
raises such big questions and I think
the short answer to your question and
the only answer to your question Peter
is we just do not know the really top
people say they don't know that Francis
Collins for example who
was led the Human Genome Project he was
very open about it and he said at the
present time we don't know no current
hypothesis comes close to explaining how
in the space of a mere 150 million years
the Prebiotic environment gave rise to
life and you mentioned specifically the
laws of physics well they're not a good
candidate Hubert Yaki one of the pioneer
writers in information
Theory and actually also a Christian
where together with Dean Overman who is
also a Chris question said Look by
definition a law of nature is a short
algorithm life requires much more
information than contained in these laws
and for example the genetic information
and even the smallest living organism is
much larger than the information
contained in the laws and they made the
interesting point that if we think that
the laws of physics and chemistry will
explain life's origin we're looking
through the wrong end of the telescope
but the most interesting writer on this
and I really recommend to all of you to
watch the Pascal lectures by Professor
James tour
t-o-u-r of Rice University
in Houston he
is regarded as one of the world's top
synthetic organic chemists and here's
his verdict he's done a lot of work on
origin of life and his verdict is based
on what we know of chemistry life should
not exist anywhere in the universe
life's you ubiquity on this planet is
utterly bizarre and the lifelessness
found on other planets makes far more
chemical sense and even Paul Davis
with his colleague in Arizona Sarah
Walker says look in our view an
explanation of life's origin is
fundamentally incomplete
in the absence of and I regard this as
important in the absence of an account
of how the unique causal role played by
information in living systems first
emerged
we need to explain the origin of both
the hardware and software aspects of
life or the jobs only half finished
explaining
the chemical substrate of life and
claiming it as a solutions to life
origin is like pointing to silicon and
copper as an explanation for the
goings-on inside a computer and I think
that
absolutely gets it it's not a question
of matter it's a question of information
and of course information is not
Material it's carried on material so
this is one of the things that leads me
to think that the whole philosophy of
materialism is doomed
because of the discovery within science
of
information and its function within
biology
now that that analogy with software and
Hardware is very interesting and you
know about the the software if you like
is the DNA code the program and and the
hardware is the structures which it
requires to to work and I want to just
move from amino acids DNA and proteins
now to the cell or you've already
alluded to this but uh you you quote
Michael Denton geneticist is saying that
the gulf between the non-living world
and the living world
he says represents the most dramatic and
fundamental of all the discontinuities
of nature he says that the tiniest even
of bacterial cells is a veritable micro
miniaturized Factory containing
thousands of exquisitely designed pieces
of intricate molecular Machinery made up
altogether of a hundred thousand million
atoms far more complicated than any
machine built by man and absolutely
without parallel in the non-living world
and and I guess the question there is
what evidence is there that the first
cells arose spontaneously at as a result
of random physical processes as opposed
to being the product of intelligent
design you know whatever the mechanism
none that I have ever seen that's
convincing now Michael Denton by the way
gave you your title for this webinar
evolution of theory and crisis and I
know Michael Denton the a he is from
your country I believe New Zealand but
Michael still thinks that evolution is a
theory in crisis as of 2022 so he feels
that the evidence is even stronger and
you can add to what you just quoted the
Staggering fact that each of the
approximately 37 trillion cells in the
human body performs each of them
millions of operations each second now
the major to directly go to your
question the major problem is the one
we've already covered it's the language
like structure of the N A that natural
Pro processes and particularly random
ones do not produce language but if they
had which nobody like Denton believes
you would expect that cells have shown
some kind of sequential Evolution
through past time but he says there are
very little evidence of that in fact
molecular biology has demonstrated that
the basic design of sales is the same
and all living systems essentially the
meaning of the genetic code is virtually
identical the size structure and
component design of the protein
synthetic Machinery is practically the
same in other words he sums up by
telling us that no living system can be
thought of as being primitive or
ancestral with respect to any other
system and here's The Clincher nor is
there any
not the slightest
experimental hint of an evolutionary
sequence among all the diverse cells on
Earth
it just seems that the bewildering
complexity now I think I need to say
this
we need to be careful with the word
complex
the living cell is complex if I pick up
a stone it's complex but the difference
between the two is that although the
stone might be a crystal and they
exhibit certain uh symmetric symmetry
properties it's still very simple it
doesn't
show any of the complexity associated
with language that is a different sort
of complexity it is semantic and that's
what we're dealing with we're not saying
look
intelligence is demanded by complexity
on its own it's demanded by specified
complexity that is linked in with the
language whether it's the language of
DNA
or it's ordinary language
if I look at the logo
on this webinar icmda I see there are
five letters
and I see the symbol of a cross and I
know immediately from those five letters
and the symbol that there's intelligence
behind that whatever processes have been
involved in producing it we recognize
that from five letters plus a cross
let's say seven
strokes or eight
foreign
four billion letters in the right order
and people will just throw their hands
up and say well that's chance and the
laws of nature it's sheer nonsense
whenever we see language we instantly
infer not downwards to the laws of
physics and chemistry but upwards to
mind
the mind yeah now uh just to change uh
Tech again John you've talked about the
lack of evidence for any sequential
change among cells in all living human
beings whether it's human being or all
living things whether it's human beings
or or viruses at the other end but let's
go more macro now and and Darwin
predicted that the fossil record would
vindicate his theory of evolution by
showing us Myriad transitional forms
amongst extinct species and we often
hear the argument that the fossil record
proves the theory of evolution you know
the coelacanth fashion and so on what
what does the fossil record really tell
us about uh the evidence of sequential
change
among more complex species
well I asked the paleontologists who are
the experts on this and one of them was
the David rope and Chicago's Museum of
Natural History and
some years ago he said we're now about
120 years after Darwin and we know a lot
more about the fossil record we've got a
quarter of a million fossil species but
the situation hasn't changed much and I
quote the Record of Evolution is still
surprisingly jerky and ironically we've
even fewer examples of evolutionary
transition that we had In Darwin's time
and more recently Stephen J Gould who
had no sympathy with the idea of an
intelligent God behind the universe said
the extreme Rarity of transitional forms
in the fossil record
persists as the trade secret of
paleontology now when I first came
across that I found it amazing and then
I came across his colleague Niles
Eldridge and he admitted this which
astonished me he said we paleontologists
have have said that the history of Life
supports the story of gradual adaptive
change in other words Evolution knowing
all the while it does not
and so my brief answer to your question
what do we make of this is well the fact
that leading thinkers such as those I've
cited and there are many others publicly
expressed concerns about it shows at the
very least that the fossil record
doesn't give the support to Neo
darwiners of that many people think it
does
can we move John onto the the mechanisms
of evolution and um there was you quote
George Gaylord Simpson famously saying
that the product of a Mindless and
purposeless pro that human beings are
the product of a Mindless and
purposeless process which did not have
us in mind and the of course the
fundamental tenet of evolution at the
macro level is that the biological
complexity and variation we see in the
natural world
came about as a result of genetic
mutation natural selection and genetic
drift those are the three mechanisms and
and of course very few people who know
anything about the science would doubt
that Evolution exists at least on a
micro scale Darwin's finches the
peppered moths the development of
antibiotic resistance and bacteria and
so on but I know you're very skeptical
about the evidence for macroevolution as
opposed to microevolution in other words
that the gene mutation natural selection
and genetic drift could produce new body
structures new body plans and the like
what what why your skepticism about that
because that's really the heart of of
darwinian evolution isn't it natural
selection it is indeed and what I've
discovered with great interest is that
that skepticism is very much increasing
among biologists
for example Gert Mueller who's a
brilliant theoretical biologist in
Vienna one of the world experts on
what's called Evo Devo which is a theory
that integrates evolutionary theory and
developmental biology
he says this he says
because that
um selection
has no Innovative capacity it eliminates
or maintains what exists the generative
and ordering aspects of morphological
evolution in other words producing new
body plans
Etc are thus absent from evolutionary
theory now that's almost a revolutionary
notion because it's going right in the
face of the Dawkins type
um talk about Evolution the late William
Provine he on the same thing he says
having and he was not a theist having
Natural Selections select is Nifty why
because it excuses the necessity of
talking about the actual causation of
natural selection such talk was
excusable for Charles Darwin but
inexcusable for evolutionists
creationists have have discovered our
empty natural selection language
and the quotes actions unquotes of
natural selection make huge vulnerable
targets now that led somebody as famous
as the late Lin margulas
saying that to say that Neo Darwinism
Saints intellectually Cura State's
intellectual curiosity with abstractions
bereft of actual details so there's this
increasing swell and there's a lot more
evidence for this the natural selection
yes is responsible for variations we can
observe it and Darwin did so brilliantly
but it doesn't
tell us anything about innovation
that that where is the creative power
coming from I I think someone explained
it by saying that that Evolution makes
explain the survival of the fittest but
it doesn't explain the arrival of the
fittest how how you can get as I say new
structures body plans and and so on uh
out of just these three mechanisms of
genetic mutation natural selection and
genetic drift yeah that's right I like
that quotation because I think it's
precisely right and
I get the strong impression that
biologists are coming now to see it you
see James Shapiro is now one of the
world's leading uh biologists and here's
what he says the DNA record definitely
definitely
does not support the slow accumulation
of random gradual changes transmitted by
restricted patterns of vertical descent
in other words
microevolution building up to macro
Evolution he goes on to say this
little evidence fits unequivocally with
the theory that Evolution occurs through
the gradual accumulation of numerous
success of slight modifications as
Darwin said clear evidence does exist
for abrupt events and it's very
interesting to me that one of the
neglected figures in the whole history
of this which is Alfred Russell Wallace
who really is and should be much more
credited with as being the co-discoverer
of the darwinian What's called the
darwinian account of evolution he felt
back then that there were limits to what
could be accomplished by what they
observed even though they knew and
Darwin knew absolutely nothing about the
gene drift and and mutation they knew
absolutely nothing about that at the
time and in much more recent years
mathematician John Maynard Smith was a
famous dominist and with one of his
colleagues he says that
there is no theoretical reason that
would lead us to expect that
evolutionary lines would increase in
complexity with time there is also no
experimental evidence that this happens
and a lot of experiments have been done
to that indicate that there do appear to
be measurable limits to what
microevolution can do
landscape and his group
showed that E coli bacteria still E coli
after 60 000 generations of breeding in
the laboratory so there are people who
are seriously doing
experiments to determine what are the
limits and one of the most famous of
biologists
said that there appears to be what he
called genetic hemostasis even living
things can only go so far
but Innovation well obviously it must
come from somewhere else
I think that my next question was was
going to ask you whether research had
shown any evidence of a limit
to what the mechanisms of microevolution
can achieve essentially gene mutation
and natural selection and you're saying
well with that example of E coli that
that uh change happens within very
narrow limits that that's right and I
would recommend that people want to
follow this up there's a very
interesting book called The Edge of
evolution by biochemist Michael behe and
he refers to malaria research on malaria
shows very interesting results in this
direction and supports that thesis that
there is an edge there are limits and
science can determine them they're not
limits we guess so we have to go
elsewhere because we do know that there
are very different kinds of body plans
and and so on in nature
now John at heart you are a
mathematician you're a professor of
mathematics
and uh Richard Dawkins in his book The
Blind watchmaker one of those books that
many know more by title than having read
but he uses this illustration of uh a
monkey typing and a typewriter and and
saying that a monkey typing randomly and
granted long life a very long life and
with unlimited supplies of paper and
endless energy could eventually type up
one of Shakespeare's sonnets or even a
whole book purely by chance that you've
been very critical
of this argument and and I wonder if if
you could tell us why uh from your
experience of mathematics make some
comments about the mathematics of
evolution and particularly the the
Dawkins example I think he talks about
the sentence me thinks it is like a
weasel from from Shakespeare that uh he
thinks any monkey get enough time and
paper and energy would eventually get it
well that's not quite right and that's
what's interesting about it that even
Dawkins I believe has totally given up
the idea that evolution in his view is
purely by chance because if you
concentrate on the first part of your
question monkeys given unlimited time
and all this kind of thing
it's very easy to calculate that that's
just absurd Fred Hoyle again uh
brilliant mathematician
um
says that the reason that trips of
monkeys thundering away at random and
typewriters couldn't produce the works
of Shakespeare because the whole
observable universe is not big enough to
contain the necessary hordes of monkeys
and he says similarly the likelihood of
the spontaneous formation of life from
inanimate matters is one to a number
with forty thousand knots after it and
he adds that I must quote this it's
lovely it's big enough to bury Darwin in
the whole theory of evolution
um there was no primeval soup this is
Fred Hoyle and if the beginnings of Life
were not random they must therefore have
been the product of purposeful
intelligence and he summarizes all this
by saying well as common sense would
suggest the darwinian theory is correct
in the small but not in the large
rabbits come from other slightly
different rabbits not from either soup
or potatoes where they come from in the
first place is a problem yet to be
solved now your mention of the phrase
May thinks it is like a weasel modifies
this whole thing because realizing that
you can't get it by chance
Dawkins no sense
that Evolution
involves random elements but it's not
purely random so his famous attempt
to reduce those probabilities to
manageable sorry increase the
probabilities to manageable terms he had
the idea that the monkeys are typing
but there's a head monkey watching them
and when they get a correct letter like
the first M the head monkey presses a
switch and that thing is held and of
course you then get the whole uh phrase
quite rapidly and he said there you are
that's how it's done but it's laughable
actually as many people have pointed out
that the very thing Dawkins hates that
is intelligent input is precisely what's
built into his machine right from the
very beginning there's a Target phrase
but he says that Evolution has no target
there's a head monkey that recognizes
the phrase recognizes when a monkey has
hit a letter and is able to focus it
it's absolutely absurd and I have
laughed many times but what worries me
Peter is that people thought this was a
brilliant solution when really it's a
one wonderful illustration of subtly
introduced intelligent design and to
enter the system
John we're almost out of time and um I
just have one last question for you I
said I'd come back to the
the uh the whole matter of systems
biology and and chapter 19 of your book
outlines some of the exciting
developments in the burgeoning field of
systems biology a new site in particular
Nobel Laureate Barbara McClintock who
demonstrated that an organism could
actually modify its own genes known in
in in getting complete contradiction of
established darwinist wisdom can you
tell us a little bit just briefly about
about that and what challenges it's
created for the theory of evolution I
think this is coming back to your whole
question of is it bottom-up or top down
and you were very much leaning to to top
down
well it's probably both bottom up and
top down but McClintock is very
interesting and you know I'm into my
80th year this year and the year I was
born
and this is uh important because it
tells you how long ago this was noticed
Barbara McClintock made a startling
discovery that segments of the maze
chromosomes a plant could switch places
on the genome this is now called the
jumping Gene and
this so alarmed they the darwinist world
that she was essentially persecuted she
got so opposed by the scientific
establishment that in 1953 she felt she
had to stop work but in 1983 she got the
Nobel Prize in physiology for the
discovery of what are now called mobile
genetic elements now the interesting
thing is Peter you have a namesake
who is a very well-known theoretical
biologist Peter Saunders
and Peter Saunders works with a man a
geneticist called my one who and in 1979
that far back he they published a paper
that says that the basic Neo darwinian
Theory based on natural selection random
mutation does not adequately account for
evolution
who thinks that the quotes the modern
synthesis has got to be completely
replaced and unfortunately he says those
people who are very attached to Neo
Darwinism won't look at the evidence
life is achingly beautiful and creative
Heards once you free yourself from the
mind-numbing shackles of Neil darwinian
Dogma now that's a hugely strong
statement and mcclintock's work has been
built on particularly by a colleague at
Oxford the physiologist Dennis Noble who
I mentioned earlier and he building on
hoe and Saunders has made groundbreaking
advance in further elucidating the
epigenetic dimension that is the thing
that goes beyond just the structure of
the genome and DNA
this led to the founding of What's
called the Third Way of evolution and
it's worth looking up the website
and the website says the DNA record does
not support the assertion that small
random mutations are the main source of
new and useful variations we now know
that many different processes of
variation involve well-regulated cell
action on DNA molecules and there's the
top down and amazingly in 2016
this work was recognized to the extent
that the Royal society
organized a special meeting for 300
scientists and the title was new trends
in evolutionary biology
biological philosophical and social
science perspectives
and Noble has been very
um outspoken and I quoted earlier DNA on
its own does absolutely nothing and the
ads until it's activated by the rest of
the system through transcription factors
markers interactions with protein so on
its own DNA is not a cause I think he
says it's better to describe DNA as a
passive database which is used by the
organism to enable it to make the
proteins that it requires there's the
Chicken and the Egg with the vengeance
and other workers have added to that DNA
does not contain a blueprint for
building the entire cell but instead
contains only small parts of a much
larger biological algorithm
that may roughly be described as the
epigenetic components of an organism now
this is very interesting what we're
saying here is that there is a vast
level of complexity simply at the level
of the genome and the DNA molecule but
on top of that there is for example the
fact that the proteins fold there's
information contained at all kinds of
different levels and
Dennis Noble has written a book that I
enjoyed enormously it's called the music
of Life biology Beyond The genome
and he says look the human genome has
roughly 30 000 genes imagine it like a
huge pipe organ with 30 000 pipes now he
says
to think that the genome completely
determines the organism is almost as
absurd as thinking that the pipes in a
large Cathedral organ determine what the
organist plays of course it was the
composer who did that in writing the
score and the organist himself who
interprets it the pipes are his passive
instruments until he brings them to life
in a pattern that he imposes on them
just as
multi-cellular organism use the same
genome to generate all the 200 or so
different types of cell in their bodies
by activating different expression
patterns and I come into this and I want
to ask
who are what or who is the organ player
and what I believe in concluding this on
this point Peter is this all of this
development in biology
confirms in my mind that this is a word
based World Hans Christian from buyer
who is very interested in information
coined the phrase in the beginning was
the bit I think he got it almost right
because I believe that the right way of
looking at this is in the beginning was
the word the statement at the beginning
of the fourth gospel in the beginning
was the word all things came to be
through the word in other words the
biblical perspective is that the word
information
is primary
and mass energy are
derivative that's exactly the opposite
way round from the standard atheistic
evolutionism that has been pumped out at
a great speed today but it makes far
more sense now scientifically not just
theologically
fascinating and you brought us right
back to to John 1 1 hasn't haven't you
in the beginning was the word and the
Word was God I remember Professor Ian
blakelock at Auckland University uh find
uh Evangelical Christian speaking on
this and saying that that one of the
best translations of logos the word was
an intelligence expressing itself an
intelligence expressing itself and of
course we we quoted Saint Paul earlier
or alluded to Romans 1 where he says
that since the creation of the world
God's invisible qualities namely his
eternal power and divine nature have
been clearly seen being understood from
what has been made so that men are
without excuse and and you've put a lot
more uh flesh on those bones uh today
and where to our appetites about such
things as epigenetics and the Chicken
and the Egg and so on so thank you so
much John for your time your wisdom
being with us today may God bless you
all thank you
thank you too
