we're deep in the climate crisis we're
deep in the red on the climate boundary
but what the planted boundary science
shows clearly is that even if we were
successful in phasing out fossil fuels
we would still breach the 1.5Â° cus
boundary if we do not come back into the
safe space on the biosphere boundaries
there's so few people who really
recognize that 30 30 30% of the carbon
dioxide that we emit from fossil fuel
burning is actually absorbed by intact
nature on land
it's it's thanks to the biodiversity and
the the intact Forest systems in
particular that that are buffering this
and if you don't have a healthy planet
that capacity of buffering that stress
is reduced so my fear is that we we're
shooting ourselves in the foot by
emitting greenhouse gases and causing
the climate crisis and at the same time
making the planet in it in her weakest
state to deal with that crisis
I would like to welcome Professor Johan
rockstrom to the program Johan is the
co-director of the potam institute for
climate impact research in potam Germany
which is a suburb of Berlin where he
leads an international staff of over 400
scientists and researchers including the
team of scientists that presented the
planetary boundaries framework first in
2009 updated last year in 2023
these nine planetary boundaries
presented in this framework of which
climate change is but one are thought to
be fundamental for humans to maintain a
safe operating space of the anthropos
scene this is incredibly important work
it goes Way Beyond just Global Heating
and climate change though that is a
biggie um Johan and his team continue to
forge new ground in understanding the
natural systems and humans impact on
them uh I hope to have more
conversations with his colleague Stefan
rorf is on Deck I already talked with
Lev Caesar on uh the amok please welcome
Professor Johan
rockstrom Johan rockstrom welcome thank
you for taking the time today thanks so
much and great to have you here at the
poam Institute I have so many questions
let me just start with an obvious one
can you give us a an update on planetary
Health where are we today well I can
tell you that in my professional life
and in in all my scientific work there's
never been reason for such deep concern
as today all the you know curves are are
still pointing in the wrong direction
we've been mapping for 15 years the
earth system processes that regulates
the stability the resilience and the
life support capacity of the earth
system the nine planetary boundaries six
of the nine are outside of the safe
operating space and if you just lift out
one of them on climate we're seeing that
we are not only continuing to increase
emissions temperatures are not only
Rising they're actually accelerating and
we don't even understand that fully but
very likely it is because the planet is
is losing resilience the health of the
planet the capacity of the planet to
buffer is is is is reducing and we've
already reached the warmest temperature
on Earth over the past 100,000 years so
we are rapidly deviating away away from
the last 12,000 years that enabled
civilizations to develop since we left
the last ice age so we are in a in a you
know in a deep crisis situation with
regards to the to the overall health of
the planet I have a lot of questions on
that but my my first one
is how can a vast majority of humans
alive today not know what you just said
well I you know to be honest that that
is one of the big disappointments I'm
quite self-critical here as well I think
we in the scientific Community the
environmental movement over decades how
can we not have been able to to
communicate the most important message
of them all that we are threatening the
very Branch upon which life depends
planet Earth and um uh it's uh it's it's
one of these um reasons why we see more
more
scientists stepping out of our comfort
zones and and and trying to reach out
more broadly with our science it's no
longer possible to just do science for
science we're doing science for Change
and science for bridging to
society but there's also of course um
something we have to recognize which is
that you know for 200 years we've been
moving into this industrial globalized
economy powered by fossil fuels based on
linear system for overe extraction and
and resource use which has um now come
to the end of the road and we are um at
this point where science shows clear
that we have to transform the
entire U logic and structure of the
whole global economy and all societies
and that is a big step and and as a as a
as a fundamental human uh feature we are
resisting change and there are so many
vested interests in in in status quo so
it's not so surprising that um it's it's
for many uh quite uncomfortable to to
recognize that we are in this this
massive transformation phase um the
beauty though which which I hope we can
come back to is that not only a sign
showing that we're heading towards
unmanageable potentially catastrophic
risks we also have more and more
empirical evidence I mean from the
ground real real evidence in the real
economy
that we have the solutions they are
scalable and the outcome in the end
makes us all winners that that actually
a sustainable future within a safe
stable planet is actually a future that
is more attractive and and more advanced
and more peaceful and healthier and more
secure it's just that this
transformation this transition phase is
like a gauntlet it's very jumpy it's
very turbulent the winners and
losers how do we do do we leave the
internal combustion engine um do we go
hydrogen do we go electric do we go
biofuels um how do we scale renewable
energies is it nuclear power it's very
messy right now we don't have the
policies we don't have the financial
institutions they don't know where to
put their money uh the oil industry is
still very wealthy so it's a it's a it's
typically what you experience in big
Transitions and that's exactly where we
are right now so you are uh known for a
lot of things but one of the things that
I think you developed uh 15 years ago
was the the concept of planetary
boundaries you did a report in 2009
again in 2015 and then there was one
last year in
2023 what broadly are the planetary
boundaries and what gave you the idea to
uh originate that that uh concept and
framework in short the planetary
boundaries are all the environmental
systems what we call the the Earth
system that regulate
the stability the functions and the
resilience of the planet um where does
this originate from well it's because
we've had such enormous scientific
advancements over the past 30 years in
in climate science and Earth system
science and resilience Theory but also
in understanding that the planet is a is
a complex self-regulating system where
all the Spheres so you think of the
biosphere all nature you have the ocean
system the hydro spere the hydrological
cycle the atmosphere the cryosphere all
the eye sheets the geosphere so
basically all the soils and and rocks
all these spheres are interconnected and
interact to regulate the state of the
planet and when you combine this with
the phenomenal advancements in ice core
data which now date back you know first
we had 1 million years but we can now
date it back we understand the Journey
of planet for the past three million
years we see very clearly that over the
past 12,000 years since we left the last
ice age we've had this
remarkable stability of the planetary
system and when you package all that
together the stability of the planet
since we left the last ice age this
understanding of all the
interconnections of the biology the
chemistry and the physics of the
earth and the evidence that we have this
hocky stic pressures of human
increased
unsustainable pressure on the planet to
the point where we can you know already
in 2006 so 3 years before we published
the first planet boundary paper um the
the report came out showing that we've
reached a great acceleration that we
have all these exponential pressures
that led to the conclusion that we've
even entered the anthropos scene
anthropos scene being anthos Greek for
humans that we're now in a whole new
geological Epoch where we anthos are the
dominating force of change on planet
Earth when you put that all together the
risk of tipping points the Hollow Scene
the last 12,000 years being uniquely
stable and the exponential rise of
pressures that led us in the scientific
Community to to ask two questions one is
what what are the environmental
processes that regulates the stability
of the planet because we're now putting
pressures on the planet at an
unprecedented rate in the anthropos
scene but secondly which was the
Breakthrough in the plan boundary Theory
can we for each of those environmental
processes that regulates the stability
of the planet identify a control
variable a parameter that functions as
an indicator of the state of that
boundary process and can we quantify a
safe boundary level Beyond which if you
exceed that point you risk starting to
slide in a direction where the
livability the life support the
resilience is reduced you might even
trigger tipping points but stay within
them that we have a a good chance a high
likelihood of keeping the planet as Clos
as possible to the Holocene State the
state that has enabled civilizations to
develop and that science is what is now
the planeter boundary framework but it
was only possible to to to advance it
thanks to the fact that we knew so much
about the holos scene and its stability
we knew about the anthropos scene and
the pressures and we knew that the
planet is this complex self-regulating
system with tipping points and with all
that evidence we could use the holos
scene as a reference point and we could
use Tipping Point science you know to
put it simple you you put a safe
boundary to avoid Crossing tipping
points so you could use science to say
at what pressure points are we at risk
of crossing a Tipping Point so all that
evidence was maturing and in 2009 when
we put all these pieces together uh I
was able to convene um you know a broad
group of scientists from oceanography
ecology ice sheet experts Tipping Point
scientists climate scientists so we had
a series of workshops basically saying
that the question was very simple what
are the Earth system processes that
regulates the stability of the planet
number one turn every stone we have just
try to gather the list of what is it
that keeps the planet in a healthy State
and then question two once we've
identified those can we find a control
variable and start quantifying a safe
boundary level to be honest the the big
surprise to all of us when we were
working through this for three years
between 2007 2009 was that the list was
not 50 plus systems and it wasn't only
climate as often is given you know the
impression is often that that's the only
parameter that matters for the planet we
could only find nine nine planetary
boundary systems and that's what we put
out in this first publication in 2009 we
were only able to quantify at that point
you know reasonably with science um six
of the nine and um so we had major gaps
still and that was published actually
deliberately as a as a as a call for
action in the scientific Community it
was a challenge to the scientific
community to say we feel that we now
have all this evidence gathered together
on the great acceleration the anthropos
scine The Tipping points the resilience
theories the complex dynamics of the EOS
system and here we're putting out a new
framework coming out of all that
evidence uh help us please to to
critically scrutinize this and um and
that is what then six years later in
2015 gave us the the second publication
on pled boundary science which which was
based on all the papers and scientific
scrutiny that this triggered the first
publication and that confirmed the nine
it was quite interesting uh there were
many suggestions back and forth of
adding a boundary or deducting a
boundary but there was no scientific
evidence that
convincingly said that you should add
one or deduct one so so in 2015 in the
publication there we I would argue that
we scientifically confirmed the nine
and that to me is a is a very that that
gives confidence if we can be stewards
of the nine planetary boundaries we have
a good chance of handing over a healthy
livable planet to all future Generations
I I found that to be that that is quite
a quite a Line in the Sand scientific
advancement and then even in 2015 we
could still just quantify seven of the
nine and we showed that four of them
were outside of the safe space we
Advanced the methodology and it's only
in 2023 only last year then we for the
first time quantify all the nine and
show that six of the nine are outside of
the safe space so the science continues
the quantifying safe boundaries is
really complicated but that we need to
be stewards of these nine is now I would
argue scientifically quite well
established you mentioned the Hollow
Scene what was the the year the years of
the Hollow Scene again the Hol scene is
is the geological Epoch that geologists
still consider that we we are in it
starts 12,000 years ago and has gone up
until present it's a geological Epoch
it's a warm so-called interglacial state
of the planet so when you look at the
ice core data we have superb ice core
data now from both green and ice sheet
and from Antarctica shows that over the
past 1 million years we've been you know
oscillating between 100,000 years
roughly of ice ages so that's a
-6Â° colder Global mean surface
temperature on planet Earth and then we
have 15 to 30,000 years shorter warm
inter glacials so we've had roughly six
to eight warm interg glacials and the
last one is we leave the last ice AG
start leaving the last I AG 18,000 years
ago and then we come into the warm holam
period 12,000 years and the interesting
thing is that we've been we as Homo
sapiens have been modern humans on
planet Earth just for the past two ice
ages we've only been on planet Earth for
250,000 years so we've lived through two
ice ages and two interglacials the Eman
one interglacial some 100,000 years ago
and the Hol scene but you know during
these 250,000 years as fully modern
humans I mean basically with the
physical intellectual capacity you and I
have we we lived as you know hunters and
gatherers we were a few million people
on planet Earth we had a very variable
environment jumping up and down in
temperatures uh it was a rough time to
put it simple until we leave the last
ice age and we come into this
extraordinarily stable interglacial
12,000 year phase the hallene and we
barely enter it we're we're just 2,000
years into it and we we go through the
the most important revolution of all
revolutions for human existence on
planet Earth we shift over from being
hunters and gatherers to domesticating
animals and plant uh plants we we become
farmers and we become Cent and and that
happens across all continents on planet
Earth more or less simultaneously which
of course is a proof of the stability of
the Holocene so in a way you could say
that climate change caused
humans climate
change yes caused civilizations and and
the development of societies as we know
it so the world as we know it is is a
result of the stability and the hallene
so how many times in the past do you
have any knowledge or speculation
on what you're claiming as planetary
boundaries today would those be the same
Looking Backward in time or would the
planetary boundary threshold been
different a million years ago or
whatever I we didn't have one of them is
novel entities like chemical pollution
endocrine disruption I mean that didn't
exist back then so obviously that
wouldn't have been but I guess my
question question is are planetary
boundaries an absolute or relative to
the recent past sort of phenomenon I
would argue that if you uh take the
perspective just 1 million years back uh
or you could even take three million
years back 3 million years then you're
in the
query um as far as we know today during
the entire quary period well why why is
the quary relevant to start with well
it's because it's only during the past 3
million years that we have a planet that
that resembles the planet we know today
I mean in terms of the configuration of
continents the oceans the ice sheets
theological cycle the chemistry in the
atmosphere um the planet we know has
only been around during the quaternary
if you go deeper into geology you you
you have a different planet chemically
biologically physically so that the
planet of relevance for us is the past 3
million years as far as we know today
the planet during these entire 3 million
years has never been beyond 2Â° C warming
can you imagine the warmest temperature
on Earth over the past 3 million years
is probably never exceeding 2Â° C of
global Bean surface temperature rise and
it's never been colder than - 6 as deep
ice ages so I would argue that the
planted boundaries in that sense are
absolute because during that entire
period um we would basically
scientifically always land at the same
boundary definitions to keep the planet
in a safe state but you could argue that
3 million years is a bit unnecessarily
long period because it's only in the
last 1 million years so in the So-Cal
PTO scene the latter part of the query
that the planet starts oscillating
between I sages and interglacials I
sages and interglacials the So-Cal
milanovic Cycles which which are
driven naturally and they are a result
of of Earth's elliptic Journey around
the sun and the wobbling of the Earth's
axis so they're very well
mathematically defined in the malanovic
equations and and so we can show quite
exactly uh the length of interglacials
not exact but at least predict them
reasonably well and also uh reproduce uh
long ice ages so it's only in the last
million years that Earth has been
dancing according to this logic and
during that entire period I would argue
that the planet are boundaries as we
Define them today are applicable
definitely because we we do not set the
safe boundaries to to match human
demands or human wishes or human needs
we set the boundaries only to keep the
planet as close as possible to um a
healthy resilient State as close as as
possible to the Hollow Scene reference
point and we are now in a warm
interglacial and what the question is
what is required in our management of
nature of oceans of ice sheets of the
atmosphere to keep the planet in that
stable interglacial Holocene State when
I used to teach College um on Evolution
I marveled at the fact that we evolved
and the fact that we figured out that we
evolved and hearing you describe this
it's just amazing to me that scientists
have been able to piece together this
history of the coronary and the
different uh uh Ice uh cores and it it's
truly amazing what you all have been
able to figure out but it's still a tiny
percentage of humans that are working on
this right and and you're all working
together and speaking the same language
yet it seems to me the broad swaths of
humanity are just have no concept of
what we're I mean is this too complex
for a human brain to understand I would
you know adamantly with full of with
full of my heart say no it's not too
complex I mean admittedly it is complex
but we have to learn many complex things
in life I mean just tax regulations in
any country is quite a complex uh matter
and uh we have laws and regulations we
have to uh learn and and and and you
know try to follow um so I would say
that understanding the the fundamentals
of why for example the oceans and the
land systems and the eyce sheets
function as cooling systems on planet
Earth that can buffer stress and help us
to keep temperatures at a livable level
I think everyone should know that it's
like knowing about our home it's like
knowing about our body and our health
you want to know something about how do
you avoid a heart attack and um everyone
has interest in in kind of understanding
how your lungs and your liver and your
heart and your uh you
know your Ju Ju Just your weight and
your health levels well think of planet
Earth as the organs of your body and and
you want to have a a sense I mean I
tried to convey in in all my lectures
that you know we've come so far in our
science today that we're even suggesting
that the green and ice sheet the Amazon
rainforest the permafrost in si area the
tempered forest in Canada should
actually be redefined AS Global Commons
they should be seen even though they are
inside National jurisdictions and of
course are the responsibility of those
countries citizens they are actually
system that we all depend on they are
they are systems that every human being
should feel even if we're sitting in pot
stum as we are right now I must be
concerned of the health of the green and
ice sheet because the GRE ice sheet
regulates the temperature where I live
here in potown so so it's like how how
can I not be interested in that um I
cannot just shove it away so said
differently there are certain countries
that have a lot of Natural Resources
like oil or copper or lithium but then
there are other countries that have a
lot of ecological resources that affect
all of us and we don't really think
about it that way like Brazil the the if
the whole Amazon becomes uh a source of
carbon instead of a sink that would be
bad would be bad and Not only would it
be bad it would affect all of us
irrespective of where you live on planet
Earth so the Amazon rainforest therefore
is a global common and if I was
President Lula Silva I would say dear
Humanity um I'm willing to provide this
service to humanity of keeping the
Amazon rainforest intact that is a
service it's a Global Commons it's a
service to humanity and therefore you
should compensate me for this um so you
know you you you can actually have a
quite a powerful uh policy position as
well of that service that you provide to
humanity because it is a true service
building on what you just said uh what's
the sequence that gets us there I I
think it's awareness and education then
there's caring M then there's being
willing to play a role and then there's
action and policy and behavior change
and we're still in the awareness stage
there's so many people that are not even
aware but we need all those things do
you think there's a possibility that we
could get to a planetary Commons or
someone like the president of
Brazil Rec being recognized
internationally for how important the
lungs of the planet are well I think you
you're putting the the finger on on
something really important that um I
think we have to act on all fronts but I
don't think it it can be acted upon in
in production sequence you cannot start
by awareness creation and then get um
policy framework and then get the action
I think you have to work because of the
urgency on all these fronts in parallel
because we've learned the hard way
actually over the past 50 years that we
don't solve sustainability Problems by
only raising awareness it's not enough
yeah you also need some um some some top
down influence on what I call Keystone
actors to to get key players in the
economy or or key decision makers to to
move and and we we know that we've
succeeded in the past I mean one of the
nine planetary boundaries is the
stratospheric ozone layer which um
science identified you know in the early
1980s that we were actually at an
existential threat of depleting the
stratospheric ozone layer because of the
emissions of our chlorofluorocarbons the
freons from Air coolants and
refrigerators and air conditioners and
spray bottles and um science came out
and um policy listened and Industry
listened and it took us to a point where
the Montreal protocol was signed in 1987
quite a top-down regulatory framework
the US was very a republican us uh
government was was quite driving in this
process and and we got a a solution
which then benefited Humanity there was
awareness as well in parallel but it was
certainly not the global there were not
demonstrations on the street that got us
to the Montreal protocol it was in the
end uh an elaborate effort of science
policy interface but also with industry
um dialogues that that brought us to
that points I think one has to act on
multiple fronts so you mentioned uh um
the ozone later and you mentioned
climate what are what are the rest of
the uh the nine planetary boundaries for
the Simplicity and and see people can
can remember them by heart categorize
them in three categories so so the first
category are the obvious ones which I
call the big three because they operate
at a global level they're globally mixed
they are kind of obvious planetary
boundaries and number one is of course
the climate system a stable climate
system number two is the ocean a stable
ocean system and we use ocean
acidification here as as the parameter
and number three the stratospheric ozone
layer so these are Global Systems
connecting the entire planet
second category is what I call the
biosphere boundaries think of them as
the nature boundaries they don't have
scientific evidence of global tipping
points they don't operate at the global
level but they work under the hood of of
the planetary Machinery to keep the
system intact and the number one is
biodiversity all the species you hear
all the bird outside of the window here
so basically we now scientifically know
that that the richness of Nature and the
diversity in nature giv resilience and
strength for carbon uptake for moisture
recycling for uh the whole turnover of
materials in in in the organic system on
planet Earth the second is of course the
bloodstream of the whole planet the
hydrological cycle without fresh water
there is simply no no no Health in the
whole system the third one is is land
system configurations we we understand
today that we do depend
disproportionately on certain big land
systems the rainforests the tempered
Forest the Boreal forest the these are
fundamental regulating systems in the
whole earth system and the final one is
so the climate system has one Global
cycle the carbon cycle but there are two
additional Global Cycles in the
biosphere which is the nutrient cycles
and we are particularly singled out
nitrogen and phosphorus so the nature
boundaries are the are the four the the
four you know workhorses under the hood
of the machine of the earth system
biodiversity land fresh water and
nutrients and then finally the the the
final category are what I a bit sloppily
called the aliens I mean you you
mentioned that before Nathan that they
they have nothing to do on the planet
they created by us humans and number one
is the novel entities and they're novel
because nuclear waste microplastics
persistent organic pollutants endocrine
disruptors are are simple compounds that
we're loading into the biosphere that
have never existed and they're just
accumulating and that they could
threaten life on earth and the final one
is aerosol loading we we see more and
more evidence that uh pollutant
polluting the air at the lower
atmosphere think of the smog in cities
creates a dimming of the whole earth
system which changes the energy balance
because it becomes a reflector of
incoming solar radiation it changes the
monsoon systems it's actually
paradoxically uh a cooling Factor on
planet Earth it's a huge environmental
problem because it's um having massive
human health implications we don't use
human health to measure as a planetary
boundary we're only uh defining aerosol
loading air pollution as a planet
boundary because it affects the
functioning of the a system so there you
have the nine climate oceans
stratospheric O Zone The Big Three the
four biosphere boundaries biodiversity
fresh water land and nutrients nitrogen
phosphor
and then the the the two aliens the air
pollution and novel entities and as I
mentioned earlier these nine they've
been scrutinized back and forth and
there been turning uh you know so many
Publications trying to you know
critically assess these and and we can
today with quite High degree of
confidence say that if we can be
stewards of these nine we have a good
chance of keeping the planet in in this
this desire state for us humans so you
first wrote about those in 2009 and then
two subsequent reports but there seems
to be an alarming change in the most
recent one in 2023 what what happened
did you have better data or you
understood things better or did things
actually get significantly worse it's a
combination of both um we have better
data we've made major advancements um
and actually that's quite important to
mention I say we've made major
advancements but what I mean by that is
different research groups have been
working and Publishing research for
example quantifying the novel entities
boundary was done by independent
chemical experts and we brought in that
science into the update for 2023 so that
was scientific advancements the second
is that we have better data and
unfortunately that data shows that we
are deeper into the red so we've been
able to add new science enabling us to
quantify for example the entities
boundary but those boundaries that we
had Quantified previously are deeper
into the risk zone so so that it's a
combination of both and today we
conclude which is really worrying that
six of the nine boundaries are outside
of the safe space and and to me that
that leads of course to many conclusions
I mean the fundamental one is that that
proves the point that we are starting to
see the planet sending invoices that are
hitting human well-being across the
entire world I mean immediate effects of
livelihoods for those who depend on
Coral Reef systems or Fisheries in
coastal zones or or food insecurity but
at an higher level the deepest worry for
me is the following we're deep in the
climate crisis we're deep in the red on
the climate
boundary and that's the only
environmental challenge in general that
is recognized in the broader policy
scheme and we are struggling with that
one and focusing only on fossil fuels
basically phasing out fossil fuels and
that is absolutely necessary but what
the plany boundary science shows clearly
is that even if we were successful in
phasing out fossil fuels we would still
fail on the climate bound we would still
breach the 1.5 degre celsus boundary if
we do not come back into the safe space
on the biosphere boundaries because
biodiversity freshwater land and
nutrients will determine the ability of
the planet to buffer you know it's it's
is so few people who really recognize
that 30 30 30% of the carbon dioxide
that we emit from fossil fuel burning is
actually not in the atmosphere causing
the 1.2 de Celsius warming so far and
and all the extreme events and and the
crisis we're in right now on climate 30%
is actually absorbed by intact nature on
land it's it's thanks to the
biodiversity and the the intact Forest
systems in particular that that are
buffering this and and why are they
buffering it well it's a stress response
it's actually a planet that
biogeochemically applies the processes
to try and stay in the Holocene it's
quite interesting that the Holocene is
an equilibrium state which has
resilience to cope with stress and you
know geologically that stress has been
natural it's been basically um solar
forcing or earthquakes or volcanic
eruptions that the Earth syst
has had to biogeochemically deal with
and now the planet has to deal with us
humans and and that stress is is is
unprecedented you know the stress we're
causing with the energy imbalance is
something we haven't seen for the past 4
million years in terms of loading so
much energy IM balance and and if you
don't have a healthy planet that
capacity of buffering that stress is
reduced so my fear is that you know we
have a double whammy here we we're
shooting our elves in the foot by
emitting greenhouse gases and causing
the climate crisis and at the same time
um making the planet in it in her
weakest state to deal with that crisis
that that's what makes the planet you
could put it in the following way we
cannot succeed in delivery on the Paris
climate agreement unless we take a full
planetary boundary framework we need to
come back into the safe space on planet
boundaries even if we care only about
solving the climate crisis and it won't
be enough to just phase out coal oil and
gas how has that narrative changed and
how has that been received in the
broader uh political and scientific
Community because there does seem to be
awareness now that climate change is a
serious issue but it often just stops
there and it doesn't go to these other
issues is it changing it is changing but
it's changing much too slowly but but
there two factors that are starting to
be increasingly understood I mean one is
that three things actually number one is
and now I'm quoting Secretary General
Antonio GES in his speech just two weeks
ago uh when he said based on the science
that 1.5Â° celus in the Paris agreement
is not a goal it's not a Target it's a
physical limit and and that is basically
coming directly out of our planet
boundary science because as I mentioned
to you earlier we one of the most
important pieces of evidence we use to
quantify the safe boundaries is the
science on tipping points
and when we map The Tipping points we
can today show clearly that several of
the climate Tipping Point systems are
likely to cross their thresholds already
at 1.5 deg C that is what informs the
safe climate boundary to stay away from
that risk and and therefore we have so
much proof today in the even in the
climate policy scheme that 1.5Â° c is is
is a real limit it's not something you
can negotiate and play with it's it is a
planet AR boundary and and you don't
negotiate with planetary boundaries
because they are they're hardwired
they're hardwired in the planetary
fabric but the second thing that is
increasingly being understood in the
climate regime is that yes to keep
within that limit of 1.5 it won't be
enough to just phase out fossil fuels we
also need to keep the buffering capacity
in the ocean and on land intact it's
it's getting there but I can tell you
that for example right now many of us in
the scientific community and and in the
policy communities well uh focusing
already on on what is called cop 30
which is when Brazil hosts the climate
negotiations not this year but next year
in 2025 in in bin in in the Amazon
rainforest
Brazil the country hosting Earth's
richest terrestrial ecosystem is leading
the climate negotiations and is also now
chairing the G20 and uh we foresee uh
and we have quite good signs that that
is going to happen that this will be the
the climate negotiating moment where
nature and climate gets fully integrated
I mean we are already moving in that
direction but but we're seeing a very
clear Trend
towards let's call it that that that the
planetary boundary framework is
increasingly understood as being Central
also to The Climate action you mentioned
that six of the nine are already
transgressing um is that measured in
2023 or the most recent data or does
that take into account what's built in
the pipeline already because some of
these things like CO2 and methane have
longer term residence periods so can we
anticipate that these boundaries will be
even further exceeded or more than six
of the nine will be exceeded because of
the momentum of what's been built in our
economic civilization no that that's a
really important question and
unfortunately the answer is that it's
based only on the current state so
you're right for climate we know that it
will get worse before it potentially
gets better I mean we we know today that
we are heading towards overshoot meaning
that we will be transgressing the
climate boundary deeply past 1.5 and at
best having a 30 40e overshoot before we
may come back to 1.5 by the end of the
century and by the way the only reason
why the climate models can take us back
to 1.5 is this assumption in the models
that we won't cross any tipping points
that all the land systems remain intact
that the ocean remains intact so so the
the the climate models have indirectly
already built in assumptions that we
will come back into the safe space what
would be the mechanism that we we
overshoot and come back well the
mechanisms is that once we stop pumping
out greenos gases from fossil fuel
burning so so it means we phase out
fossil fuels according to the agreements
we signed on to in the Paris agreement
to cut emissions by half by 2030 and
reach a net zero World economy by 2050
once we do that then then the the supply
line is is reduced and when that happens
and if the planet continues to be
healthy then we know over over a long
period of time actually over centuries
the ocean and intact nature on will
continue to absorb carbon because the
the stress does not disappear immed
mediately the the planet will continue
to try and buffer and that capacity is
only is determined by whether the forest
systems on land remain intact and the
ocean system remains healthy so we so
that's why I'm saying that you need you
need a healthy set of Biers for
boundaries to be able for that return to
work I should say also of course that
the models also assume a very optimistic
scaling of carbon dioxide removal
Technologies so so so the models depend
on both nature the boundaries and uh
this assumption that we'll be able to
have direct air capture and different
forms of pretty skeptical about that but
um now what about oceans because it
seems to me in the current planetary
boundaries set up that ocean
acidification is is the metric but
there's tons of ocean risks there's sea
level rise there's lack of oxygen
there's your organization here just did
a major paper on the amok and and the
current
there's lots of different aspects of the
ocean um do you just parse that into one
or what are your thoughts there as I
said earlier the pled boundary science
is not finished in any way there are
gaps and and I would argue that today
the biggest Gap is that we are not able
to represent fully with the control
variables we use today the ocean because
ocean acidification is is actually only
a physics and chemical indicator for the
ocean
we don't have a control variable for
ocean biology and we don't have a
control variable for the big ocean
conveyor belt system which holds the big
potential Tipping Point systems like the
amok the overturning of heat in the
North Atlantic which more and more sign
shows we cannot exclude a risk of
collapse that it has a Tipping Point
behavior and if by the way if the amok
would
tip which would then change
fundamentally the whole heat exchange in
the North Atlantic and the exchange
between the North Atlantic and the
Southern Ocean in Antarctica it would
impact the monsoon systems sea level
rise catastrophic impacts on on
livability in the northern hemisphere it
it would have a global global impact so
so yes we are um definitely in need to
advance more planetary boundary science
on the oceans and I foresee that we are
looking for a control variable on Ocean
biology because that's you know the the
whole on on land we use net primary
production as an indicator for
biodiversity so basically the richness
of of all biomass on land but the ocean
is also a massive food web of net
primary production from phyto Plankton
to the you know the big sharks and
whales and and we we we need to be able
to to represent scientifically what are
the the minimum levels of keeping intact
food webs in the ocean to keep the ocean
functioning oxygen levels as you
mentioned as well that's ongoing work
right now what if you had unlimited
funding not just you but all the earth
scientists in the world like unlimited
funding to hire uh the necessary
scientists what are the like most
critical questions that you're curious
about that need to be answered they just
don't have the the Manpower computer
power resources applied to them now m
yeah that that's um that's a really
important question and there are many
answers to that actually I mean number
one which actually is something that we
are embarking on right now which is that
you know as you mentioned we've been um
publishing three iterations of the plany
boundary science with with a with a
cycle of seven years in between each one
so we actually it's been taking more or
less like an ipcc cycle for each of the
pled boundary Cycles um we're now set
out to update this every year and to
connect that with satellite data across
all the planetary boundaries so we can
produce what you can think of as a as a
control room for the whole planet like a
situation room for planet Earth with
nine Global numbers and nine high
resolution Maps based on satellite data
mapping all basically measuring the
planet and and measuring against the
safe boundaries and that is is is
urgently needed
we have the Technologies and we we are
aiming to do that now so so we're we're
calling this the planetary boundary
health check and that requires not only
massive funding but also Partnerships
around around the world the second is
something that I feel still you know
quite uncomfortable about the fact that
we have such uncertainty ranges on
Tipping Point risks I mean as you know
for the Amar for example you have one
set of scientist saying that you know
the amok is likely to collapse within
the next 70 years I mean before the year
2100 and you have other great scientists
saying that that is exaggerated we have
no evidence of a risk of a collapse of
the amok in this Century so it's it's
huge uncertainties here and we need to
we need to reduce and get better better
Precision on the risk assessment the
problem is is once we have much smaller
uncertainties the events will already
have happened
that's right I mean there there's
there's definitely a risk that our
predictive power comes too late um
definitely but I still think that
science needs to continue working on on
reducing the uncertainty ranges and just
to give you one one story of of a very
unsatisfactory uncertainty range the
Amazon rainforest yeah so in the latest
uh paper and work that we've been
leading uh from exit University and The
poam Institute we show that the risk of
a of a collapse of the Amazon rainforest
which we know can happen and what
happens is that the Amazon tips over and
becomes a savan releasing massive carbon
and losing biodiversity and changing
hydrology so that is well known we put
the risk at 3 to 5Â° celus of global mean
surface temperature rise so basically a
temperature that we're not even likely
to reach actually that that would be a
complete disaster if we would come to
those kind of disastrous levels of of
heating when we then discussed this with
our colle colleagues in Brazil
ecologists in Brazil they tell us you're
wrong this is um not likely to be
correct because what can tip the Amazon
rainforest is not only heat and heat
causes changes in rainfall and more fire
and that is what could trigger a Tipping
Point they say
deforestation is is a is a fundamental
factor that would um combined with
temperature lower the threshold
dramatically so they say basically that
if if we cut down more than 20 to 25% of
the force cover which opens up so much
Forest that the whole system just dries
out because of the opening then it could
tip already between 1.5 and 2 degre CSUS
of warming and we simply don't know we
don't have the scientific evidence fully
what's the what's the combination that
could tip the forest but you should know
we are at 1.2 de cus warming now and
we've cut down 177% a forest so you know
we're moving very close to that that
potentially catastrophic combination
certainly within the air bands yes so
that requires more scientific assessment
to to really get the again it's it's
different boundaries interacting and um
and unfortunately disciplines have been
looking too much separately and not into
the combinations of how biodiversity
freshwat deforestation and climate
interacts and that's what we also need
just personally how do how do you carry
all this with you are are you fun at
parties do you crack jokes and do normal
things because I'm I'm a podcaster on
these same topics so I mean there's so
much and it's so intense and scary we
didn't evolve to carry this amount of of
heavy stuff with us every day can you
separate it from your personal life and
and enjoy yourself or is this always
with you
24/7 I have difficulties in separating
it to be honest but it's not it's
certainly not um uh depressing me uh on
the contrary I'm I'm I'm more of the
kind of person who gets angry and um and
and get more adrenaline from from this
evidence and uh uh feel the strong urge
to to be out there and and really change
things but I I don't go to parties and
give lectures I can promise you but but
but but it's so I can't of course
separate in that sense but but I'm I'm
very convinced today that um um sitting
on the risk assessment and and having
all this very dire diagnostic that is
not the problem that that's not the
issue that that U should make us despair
what what should make us really
concerned is is the lack of leadership
is is the lack of of of efforts of
acting on that evidence so if there's
anything that that all this leads in in
for me personally is is more you know
the wish to be even even more active in
in in reaching out with the science and
engaging with policy makers and and um
you know shaking up the system and
saying look here come on guys you know
we and as I mentioned earlier what what
makes me doubly frustrated is that not
only do we have all this evidence of you
know potentially unmanageable risks but
we also have so much evidence that
solving them is not a sacrifice you know
it's a it's a it's actually a more
modern attractive healthier more secure
more peaceful more stable future it's
even better for the economy it's even
better for jobs and you know this is
this makes me just um actually it to me
it just gives me even more wish to to
continue working along these along with
this this work so it's
um it's
it's not easy to deal with but it's at
least not it's not like a like a black
wall let me ask a follow-up question to
that so I know that um John hren who was
Obama's science adviser made him a
weekly report that was like 10 pages
long on the science and Obama read it
but you're dealing with climate and
endocrine disruptors and oceans and
biosphere and ozone and everything do
you get like a weekly report as the
Director of this institute to give you
updates on all all these different
things and how do you stay on top of it
all it doesn't work really that way um
but I'm really privileged to have a
fantastic team of research analysts
working actually helping only me and
then we have a very close communication
between my senior scientists at The
Institute here at the potam Institute
but then you have the planty Bounder
science Community which is quite a quite
a tight-knit community
and I'm today co-chairing something
called the Earth commission which is the
first attempt of creating a uh a Global
Science mechanism to to synthesize the
planed boundary science and to introduce
the social sciences as well so not only
safe boundaries but also just boundaries
and this community interacts very very
regularly to update each other and we
advance research together so you know
this is really an International
Community effort and um so that that's
the way I can keep reasonably you know
uh on top of of things and and as I
mentioned earlier the Plenty Bounty
framework have now has now become so
mainstream that you have different
independent research groups that you
know I can get surprised one Monday
morning I suddenly get informed yes so
now you have a new publication of an
update on um the freshwater boundary and
um and and I was not even aware of it
perhaps but it's fantastic as a as a way
of of as an input and and we then
synthesize that in a plet boundary work
yesterday I was with someone who earlier
in the week was with Bill Gates at a at
a conference and he said that Bill Gates
just picks up the phone and says get
this professor get this scientist on the
line and in five minutes they're talking
wouldn't it be amazing if we could turn
the tables and the earth scientists like
you that are dedicated their whole
career to this could get this politician
uh on or billionaire on the line CU we
need to talk about that Amazon today
like it do you feel like it's a David
and Goliath situation with science
versus the rest of the world on on these
really critical issues for our home
planet well I have felt that for a long
time and of course I would find it very
useful to be able to do exactly what
what Bill Gates is able to do but I must
admit that I think I think the tables
are turning not not fully but I would
say that today we in the earth science
and climate science Community we we
actually should not complain at our
access to decision makers Business
Leaders um it's it's it's it's really
quite a you know not easy access but at
least uh quite quite a
straightforward um way of of interaction
and particularly the private sector in
the world has has shown you know since
the Paris agreement quite a quite a
significant commitment to to start
moving towards I mean admittedly it's
still very climate centered but it is at
least moving the right direction I me
just take one example the world Business
Council for sustainable development the
world's largest Association of big
multinational
companies they have just adopted a new
action plan to 2050 and it's framed
around planetary boundaries um and and
that is uh quite significant the world
economic Forum we're working very
closely there also integrating Planet
bound in in their global economy um kind
of policy agenda uh so we we see things
you know it's it's not as if we are shut
out of these dialogues but of course
again we are at an urgency point I mean
we know we need to cut Global emissions
by half within the next 5 years by 2030
and we're not near to that we're still
increasing emissions so we need you know
we need to intensify scientific
communication into the policy regime
even further so we have a mutual friend
uh Jeremy Grantham he was on my podcast
and as worried as he is about climate
change and has been for a long time he
actually thinks that endocrine
disrupting chemicals may be a bigger
risk to human uh Futures and other
animals than climate which is a pretty
strong statement do you have any opinion
on that and what is your what is the
state of the the novel entities more
broadly
you know I mean one cannot exclude that
he's right um the challenge is that the
science is is is really not um is very
inconclusive on on the cocktail risks of
chemicals in the biosphere but that is
why we have it as one of the planetary
boundaries that we have enough evidence
to say that the loading of for example
endocrine disruptors pasas persistent
organic pollutants uh all forms of of U
um
chemical longlasting chemical products
many of them that are persistent in the
environment we simply do not know what
are the risks for our own genome for
example is there a risk of getting
permanent damage on the configuration of
our of our human species and and of
course these are uh factors that that
can could even be equal to or even
exceed the risks of many other planetary
boundary uh breaching processes so I I I
would say that's why we have a very
strong focus on novel entities and just
to take another one which we don't know
is um the interactions between
biodiversity land and climate which we
increasingly know increases risks of
xonotic viral disease outbreaks so we
know that there is a hockey stick which
is that every pandemic over the past 100
years are all zoonotic viral disease
outbreaks and these are viruses that
spill over from Wildlife often via
domestic animals to humans and we know
that increasingly evidence shows that
the risk increases when we when we
breach the biodiversity boundary because
it it increases the penetration of
humans into natural habitats but it also
changes the configuration of species so
you get more generalist species that can
carry more viruses moving into urban uh
habitats and you know if we get uh bird
flu mutation causing a humano human uh
viral um mutation that that could cause
also a catastrophic outbreak of a
pandemic that would exceed you know by
far what we experienced with covid-19 so
there are elements here of risk that we
really need to be you know have a have a
very strong focus on Beyond just the
climate and biodiversity risks to to add
to the complexity of of what you're
already describing how do the Tipping
points and planetary boundaries
interrelate with each other are there
tipping points within tipping points
like I I would assume that climate is
probably the most important one but I
don't even know if I can say that really
uh because they're all important but
that one seems like if we go like you
said 3 to 5 degrees then Brazil Forest
would become a savannah which would
disrupt all kinds of other things in
turn but do the different planetary
boundaries influence the other planetary
boundaries and or is that just too large
of an air band to to know no they they
do I mean as as a as a starting point
the the
simple way of of of describing this is
that the planeter boundaries are are
Quantified are set to avoid Crossing
tipping points okay simple as that so um
we we know that if if we keep the
Tipping points on the right side of the
fence uh the Hollow Scene side of the
fence the fence where a green and ice
sheet reflects 90% of incoming heat back
to space because it's a permanent wide
surface where the amok has a capacity to
keep the ocean conveyor belt in a stable
Ocean State where the Amazon wave Forest
is is planet Earth's largest carbon sink
on terrestrial land as long as we keep
the the Tipping Point systems in this
Holocene side of the fence we are we are
safe secondly you're absolutely right
that the risk of these 16 tipping points
systems that we have mapped that they
would cross a Tipping Point we've so far
analyzed that risk predominantly based
on climate uh based on temperature rise
we need to work much more closely on if
we change the hydrological cycle drying
out Landscapes if we change biodiversity
change land what are then the the risks
of these tipping points being crossed
but then there's a there's a second
dimension to this which is also in the
scientific Frontier in a way which is
that we've only map the climate Tipping
Point systems that the Tipping Point
system that that we know regulate the
climate stability but there are other
tipping points like for example lakes
that can flip over from you know oxygen
rich fish rich rich clear water lakes
into these murky algal bloom dominated
anoxic States dead States based on
nutrient loading and over fishing and
that is oh not from climate or
temperature not anything no no has
nothing to do with climate or
temperature it's just a just a
mismanagement you know overfishing
sediment inflow because of uh mismanaged
tillage systems in agriculture and and
leeching of fertilizers and that leads
to dead zones and of course if you have
one dead Lake that may not impact the
planet
but if you have thousand dead Lakes
still perhaps may not impact the planet
but if you have 10,000 dead lakes or
100,000 dead Lakes you know when you
start to accumulate these ecological
regime shifts as they're often defined
rather than big climate tipping points
then you can also have an impact on
Boundary uh breaching of the stability
of planet and we are actually using that
evidence as well when setting the the
biosphere boundaries so so we work with
tipping points on several levels here to
to to give ourselves that scientific
evidence so there's something in
chemistry I'm sure you're familiar with
the liebig's law of the minimum that
says there's some input that constrains
uh the growth of a plant um given your
vast knowledge on all these different
boundaries and and tipping points could
you speculate what is the most likely
thing that's going to trip us up like
what are you most concerned about um
that would Cascade into other systems m
well right now I think the evidence
shows that the ground zero on planet
Earth is actually the
Arctic for two reasons one is that is
warming up three times faster than the
planet on average so we are ready at 3Â°
C in the Arctic which is in itself very
dramatic but secondly when you look
carefully at the at the data you have
six of the 16 Tipping Point systems in
the Arctic region so we're talking about
the green and ice sheet the amok the
overturning of heat in the North
Atlantic you have the permafrost systems
sitting there with all the methane and
carbon you have the Barron CIS and the
labrador current and then you also have
the Arctic sea ice which is not
considered as a global Tipping Point but
it is a Tipping Point system because
this is this is the white Chapo on
planet Earth that cools the planet and
we do have increasing evidence so so now
I'm at the again on the scientific
Frontier here not in the ipcc that if
these tipping points are crossed in the
Arctic then they can
Cascade through Domino effects and hit
the Amazon rainforce and hit Antarctica
how can that be well the conveyor there
is the amok so if the green and ice
sheet uh and the Arctic Ice systems
continue melting
faster and releasing fresh water into
the North Atlantic we know that that is
what slows down the amok the amok the
overturning of heat in the North
Atlantic and when the amok slows down
because the amok is driven through a
thermohaline engine which is driven by
the fact that you have saline warm
surface water flowing from the Southern
Ocean up into the North Atlantic when it
reaches the tip of Greenland it releases
heat to the atmosphere making it
possible to live where I come from in
the Nordic region but that heavy salt
water salt water has high high density
it's SS and that is what drives the
whole ocean conveyor belt this
thermohaline um engine now when that is
diluted by melting ice from Greenland in
particular it gets less salty so it gets
less heavy so it sinks slower so it
slows down and that slowing down we
increasingly know pushes the whole
Monsoon system further south which can
explain why you get more droughts and
fire over the Amazon rainforest so we
cannot exclude that what's happening in
the Arctic can um actually push the
Amazon closer to a Tipping Point via the
amok but not only that you can just
imagine that when you have less heavy
salt water warm saline water coming from
the Southern Ocean that water gets stuck
in the Southern Ocean more has a
larger percentage of the year which can
explain why the West antartic ice sheet
is melting faster than we had expected
so and the West antartic ice sheet is
very close to a Tipping Point so that's
another 3 met sea level rise the green
ice sheet is 7 m sea level rise so today
our understanding is that what's
happening in the Arctic is actually
connecting via uh Cascades via the amok
all the way down to Antarctica so you
know again we're all interconnected and
even these Tipping Point systems seem to
be interconnected so so I would say on
your question the Arctic is in my view
where we have to have a particular
attention right now this is also
fascinating do you struggle like I do uh
managing this podcast and talking to
scientists of all different Stripes
um navigating the uh difference between
being accurate and being helpful because
you're a scientist and this is a puzzle
that you and all your colleagues are
putting together to best describe and
understand Earth's systems but you are
also like I am incredibly worried and
want to spend our time on this planet
defending the sacredness of life um and
so we want to do more than just describe
it we want to influence it but sometimes
those things can can you know have a a
squishy boundary do you ever struggle
with
that no definitely and and you know the
struggle is um
is quite interesting because you know as
we discussed earlier this is really
complex science and and we academics
pride ourselves to stay true to our data
and uh and it means that if you try to
uh simplify the story and and kind of
step out of the academic jargon to kind
of communicate things in um in yeah you
tend to you tend to kind of turn Corners
a little bit that means that um I
personally often experience that I can
get stabbed both in the front from
climate Skeptics and in the back from
academic colleagues uh because of taking
a little bit too high degrees of freedom
and and and of course to me that's very
healthy getting stabs in the back also
from peers because it's important that
we stay very carefully on within the
evidence we have scientifically on the
other hand uh to put it a bit
provocatively I sometimes or quite often
feel that if I get stabbed in both the
front in the back I probably do
something right at least because that
means that you know it it is it is
actually having a message that that
means something it's it's clearly
threatening those who deny that we have
any problem at all but it's also um
something that that is challenging and I
think we need to be challenged as well I
I think that is one of the dilemas we
have in society at large but certainly
in the scientific community that we tend
to be so nervous and so scared of of
actually being clear about for example
talking of you know I don't I don't
think we have scientifically any reason
to hesitate at all to say not only do we
have a climate crisis we are in a
planetary emergency this is a planetary
emergency how can I say that being a
scientist well it's because emergencies
is when you have unacceptable
risks and running out of time that's a
combination unacceptable risk and time
is running out emergency means time is
short that's what is a definition of an
emergency how do we Define risk well
risk is equal to probability times
impact okay so if you have an impact
which is catastrophic I mean the impact
is actually infinite you cannot even
measure me it economically I mean if we
lose the green and ice sheet or the AAR
it would be a complete disaster so you
cannot measure it economically it's an
infinite infinite parameter so then if
the probability even if the probability
is low if you multiply a low probability
with an infinite impact then risks are
also infinitely high so I can say with
very high degree of scientific certainty
even if the even if uncertainties are
high and probabilities are low because
we're talking about unex acceptable
impacts it means that risks are high and
time is running out I mean we're in this
decisive decade we need to cut emissions
by half in the next 5 years so time is
running out multiplied by very high risk
equals emergency so you know it's but
when I say
emergency my peers will
say we cannot really say we're an
emergency but but I would say today that
I think we have to be clear I have I
think we have to challenge the world to
understand that we are in this
generation Us in charge today sitting in
the cockpit of planet Earth putting the
entire stability of the planet at risk
in this generation what happens over the
next 1020 years will determine the
outcome for the next hundreds of years
or longer or longer yeah I mean that is
what is on our plate today and and we
have the responsibility to to solve this
The Challenge and the problem is that
emergency to our neural ancestral wiring
meant a saber-tooth tiger uh or
something like that and these risks are
complex they're in the future they're
abstract there are no easy solutions the
famous people on TV aren't talking about
them uh so it's it's really difficult
and the other thing is there's no
problem there's no problem there's no
problem I listen to Johan roxom oh my
God I don't think there's anything we
can do and then apathy it like we go
from not understanding it to apathy in
the span of an afternoon uh which is
another issue um so uh so what should we
do what what what would be a couple
policy responses that you would
recommend knowing what you
know yeah well the the policy responses
I would argue are quite clear today to
begin with we need Global governance and
that might sound um very utopian but it
actually isn't because we talked earlier
about the Montreal protocol which is an
example of a global governance regime
the climate regime is a global
governance regime biodiversity has a
global governance regime so it's a
question of implementing Global legally
binding agreements that we have agreed
upon so that that's number one I mean
just just deliver on the Paris agreement
I mean we have agreed to accelerate the
phase out of fossil fuels and reach a
netser world economy by 2050 just get on
with it but secondly I mean and we do a
lot of research here at the potam
institute on this and my colleague opma
and hope for leads on this that you know
we simply have to do what economies call
internalizing externalities put a price
on carbon and and the European Union has
a price on carbon it's starting to get
there at the levels that are required to
get the incentives of accelerating the
phase out of fossil fuels but but you
know we have to come back to the to to
the real discussion of implementing a
global price on carbon uh we're so close
to to losing it on climate that we now
need at least A1 us per ton of carbon
dioxide Global price on carbon to to
rapidly um start phasing out coal in
particular there there's no excuse to
invest in coal today because um it's
more expensive even without subsidies
more expensive than renewable energy
transition work and then the third part
is equally straightforward which is U
which because we have an agreement at
cop 16 on biodiversity which is to to
stop expanding our land use into intact
nature you know we we've
transformed gr Modo 50% of land earth's
land area into
agriculture cities and and
Roads so we still have almost 50% of
nature that still functions and we now
have overwhelming evidence that that
we've come to the end of the road of
that Journey we have to stop expanding
into intact nature and you know getting
a moratorium or getting a global um you
know agreement treaty saying that we
have to stop expanding in all rainforest
all tempered forest all Boral Forest is
not so magical because cup 16 at the
biodiversity framework has this 30x30
decision which is to protect 30% land
areas by 2030 and 30% of ocean areas by
2030 and that is on a journey towards
zero expansion I mean it's this is a
target for 2030 but you could say zero
by 2050 so you know I think that is
these are a few of those big policy
decisions that that we need urgently and
that we can uh Implement does your
research suggest how resilient nature is
if we were to stop the land expansion
and allowed nature to recover or if we
stop stopped fishing one of the major
Fisheries in the ocean I mean how
resilient is nature if we were to leave
it alone in spaces for a
while yeah so there's a lot of
uncertainty here and we are not experts
on this particular but we have one of
the biosphere models um in the world
called the lpj model that that shows um
a high degree of resilience in um both
Forest Wetland aquatic systems well we
don't do so much on aquatic system but
land BAS systems the ability to to
regenerate if you uh apply the right
conservation measures but other
ecologies ecologists also confirm uh the
the the remarkable strength if you
haven't pushed ecosystems too far so
that you reach collapse or Extinction of
species you still have a chance of of of
regenerating back there are
uncertainties here though for example on
a rainforest system you know what would
makes rainforest a rain forest it's not
a coincidence it's called a rainforest
is that 40 50% of the rain is
self-generated by this full canopy cover
this this humid system that can hold its
own hydrological Dynamics intact thanks
to the canopy cover if you'd open up the
system and destroy that system so it
moves into a savan stating becomes
self-drying instead it's not obvious
that you can recreate all that moisture
by simply plan in re replanting trees so
some of these ecological transitions may
be irreversible others may be
regenerative and many of them may have
uh a positive solution but you may not
get the original system back so so I
would say that there is resilience in
the system but we have examples I mean
the classic examples is when the Cod
Fisheries collapsed out of New
Foundland which
uh did not recuperate it was basically
uh a permanent collapse the Baltic Sea
right now is another example of a system
that seems to have crossed the Tipping
Point and and permanently collapsed so
you have collapse of cod Fisheries uh
eel anoxic events are algal blooms and
and and can can that
system uh kind of regenerate
itself unclear yeah currently
so and and and again we come back to
this discuss so what does that imply
that message from science well it
certainly should not imply oh the
scientists are uncertain so let's just
continue as usual right I think the the
conclusion must must of course be okay
so this is the risk assessment we have
let's let's then we have to apply
precaution precautionary principle
exactly we uncertainty and science which
will always be there should in my view
always be connected with the risk assess
assessment and if the risks of what you
may cause are unacceptably high then
even the probability of occurrence even
if that is low means that you should act
on that in terms of precaution and and I
think that's what applies in most
ecosystems I want to ask you one more
personal question before I ask you
closing questions that I ask all my
guests if you didn't have all the
hundreds of scientists here and the
funding tasks of supporting all this
work and all your your your deadlines
but you were just a scientist what what
would be the thing that you are
personally most fascinated and curious
about if you weren't worried about the
emergency which you've so well described
here what like what scientific question
would you like to answer in your own
research yeah that that's a that's a
wonderful question actually I'm uh you
know my my origins in this research is
in global
hydrology as so I've always been
fascinated by the role of fresh water in
sustaining life on Earth and um I I
think um if I if I just had a like a
twoyear sabatical and could just dive
into a topic it would probably be um
exploring uh how much what's the minimum
wetness we need in Landscapes to keep
them healthy what was the minimum levels
of of moisture in the soil of
groundwater levels of fresh water levels
to to keep different ecosystems intact
that's a question that had been chasing
me for for a very long time that we
don't really know we don't have the
measure of of of what's the minimum
levels of fresh water to keep everything
we love and and depend on intact so that
would probably be U uh one topic of
exploration the listeners of this
program are quite scientifically uh
aware of the challenges you've described
what sort of personal advice would you
have to people who are aware of broader
the human predicament but also the
planetary boundaries and how close we
are to various tipping points as
individual citizens humans alive at this
time well number one is is to never
Despair and and to rather
turn the concern and and the you know
the engagement in in in the science as
as an asset as something that um gives
you even better ability to be emotional
and um ethical and um responsible for
your co-citizens on planet Earth so be
proud that you're sitting so deep
entrenched in the risk
understanding secondly I would say and
that's the advice I give to all my
students they often I get the question
what what should we do and they expect
me to talk about um um mobility and um
uh how to reduce flying and all forms of
consumer choices and they get surprised
when I say that the number one issue is
talk to your friends talk to your
friends keep the dialogue going speak to
your your parents your friends uh
anytime you you have a chance talk about
the planet talk about 1.5 if you go out
to the street here in poam nobody will
know what you're talking about if you
say 1.5 1.5 is the most important number
we have in the world today so I I I
think it's really important to to keep
keep the buzz going we need a momentum
here so that would be my my second uh
wish and then the third one which which
we really need to help each other on and
I know that everyone can help here which
is that for 50 plus
years this whole topic of sustainability
and environment and climate has been
about problems and sacrifice it's been
like humans are causing a major problem
and we need to back off we need to uh
you know do less uh because it's
damaging the environment and planet and
we now know that it's a completely new
narrative The Narrative of
sustainability is that if you if you
apply your scientific understanding if
you put on sustainability glasses if you
if you apply plan boundary thinking what
Emer merges is new Innovations new
technologies new advancements much more
attractive Much More Much More for young
people I mean it's it's it's a cooler
more advanced more attractive future
which also has well documented win-win
outcomes when it comes to health peace
security jobs economy so we're talking
about the World 2.0 we're talking about
moving into a a direction which is the
story of the future and we do know that
if we continue on the path we're on
that's a dead end so so either you back
into the future in a dead end and you
hit the wall and it gets dark or you
transition towards this more attractive
future and I think we need to start
talking about that attractive future
that you know what do we really really
care for and what is it that gives us
real happiness and what is it I want to
give to my children and what is it that
I how would I what would I qualify as
modern is is a coal mine modern or is a
windmill modern is an electric car
modern or is an old diesel engine driven
car modern what what is modernity what
is it what is it
I kind of get attracted to and and I I
think we talked too less we were
polarizing this question too much
politically like the greens in societies
are
still completely wrongly pered as the
leftist you know I I interact more and
more with with CEOs across the world and
you know even even the most you know
cosos tend to be
liberals Market oriented they they lean
more on the right side of politics and
left side but boy are they onto the
sustainability agenda the car industry
the Ikeas of the world the H&amp;M's of the
world you know they're all lined up for
a journey where they want to be winners
in this sustainability
race and and why don't we have more of
that narrative um broadly in society I
love the environmental activist I
respect them so much but but I don't
think the way that environmental
activism has over the decades um scared
away the vast majority by giving this
impression that you know we're doing
everything wrong humans are all to blame
and the only only way to solve this is
basically to back off from everything
that the vast
majority um considers being equal to you
know a modern life and and I'm not
saying that there are quick fixes in any
way we will need Lifestyle Changes we
will need that the rich minority in the
world definitely changes traveling
behaviors uh ridiculous unnecessary
consumption uh diets I mean for sure
but but we we also know that this
transition is not so painful and we also
know that the solutions that um
renewable green energy and consumption
patterns provide us gives us better life
outcomes so that is what I think we we
would you know we cannot shoulder that
ourselves in science we need we need
help with that and it's something that
we can hold hands and do together what
do you care most about in the world
the
planet and my
children no but definitely I mean I I I
Tred to be very clear that um you know
we we talk of integrated World earth
science here people Planet science to to
to truly truly recognize that my My
ultimate definition of justice is every
human being's right to be born on a
livable planet and that sounds like
that's a statement you could not make 5
years ago but today we have to make it
that Justice is actually about the right
to a livable planet so in my view the
planet is like stakeholder number one so
so then there's intergenerational
Justice becomes a serious thing
absolutely because the caring capacity
and the Tipping points and all the
biogeochemical flows and everything in
your work could arguably be much worse
30 years from now 60 years from now Etc
so if you have a a right
to A Healthy Planet and you're born 60
years from now that that may be a
different different existence and
remember which is very painful to
say that it's you and I it's our
generation that have caused all this you
know the great
acceleration has only been ongoing for a
bit more than 50 years and I am you know
approaching my 60th year so so it's in
it's on my watch that this has happened
and it's what happens in the coming 50
years or less than that that will
determine the outcomes for the coming
centuries so not only is it on on Our
Generations watch that everything has
occurred it's on Our Generations watch
that we will determine the future so so
it's it's in our hands to now determine
the future for Humanity on Earth so yes
it's an intergenerational Justice
fundamentally my closing question for
all my guests is if you could wave a
magic wand and you had no no personal
recourse to your status or situation
what is one thing you would do to change
human and planetary
Futures I think that the number one
issue is to
um get world leaders immediately to sit
down together and and and recognize that
we need to urgently get back into the
safe space of planetary boundaries well
said do you have any other closing
comments for viewers today
Johan no I think we've covered a lot of
ground and I'm so glad that we were able
to also talk about what's the narrative
in the future and I just want to close
by saying that you know I as you
mentioned I mean I I I live in this data
every
day that's a dark room but but I'm I'm
really privileged of
having interacting as a scientist also
with with change makers in the world and
and I can see the light in the tunnel
from so many stakeholders in the world
so it's not it it it is
not in any way a lost cause and we know
from previous large transitions in
history that you never change the world
by having everyone on board you change
the world by having large enough
minorities that can tip the quite inert
majority to move in the right direction
and and when you look at the world of
sustainability in many many Societies in
the world we are actually a double
digigit penetration on Sustainable
Solutions on people's Awareness on on on
willingness to even
politically um you know vote for for
green or or sustainable options so you
know we're very very close to that
positive Tipping Point as well and and
that's why another reason why it's
really worth now is not the moment to
back down now is the moment to just
increase momentum
thank you for your time today and thank
you for your lifetime of of work and
service of Life Johan rockstrom thanks
for inviting
me if you enjoyed or learned from this
episode of the great simplification
please follow us on your favorite
podcast platform you can also visit the
greats simplification tocom for
references and show notes from today's
conversation and to connect with fellow
listeners of this podcast check out our
Discord Channel this show is hosted by
me Nate Hain edited by no troublemakers
media and produced by Misty stinet
Leslie bat Luts Brady hyen and Lizzy
serani
