welcome everyone the video you're about
to watch was originally recorded on the
active inference Insight Channel and
podcast it's an excellent discussion
between myself and Darius harvy Wayne it
builds a lot on the current work I'm
doing integrating relevance realization
predictive processing and for
ecogy uh does some uh excellent new work
around uh bringing all of that to bear
on the topic of flow this is great work
I hope to talk to Darius again so please
enjoy the following video Welcome
everybody to the third episode of active
inference insights brought to you by the
active inference Institute I'm your host
darus parvey Wayne and today I am
absolutely thrilled to be able to speak
to John biki John is an award-winning
professor of psychology cognitive
science and Buddhist philosophy at the
University of Toronto he is also the
presenter of the renowned YouTube series
Awakening from the meaning crisis as
well as the newer after Socrates his
work focuses on 4E cognitive science
which holds that cognition is embodied
embedded enacted and extended beyond the
brain in particular John explores
relevance realization our adaptive
ability to zero in on Salient
information in a world of near infinite
complexity last year he Mark Miller and
Brett Anderson wrote the paper
predictive processing and relevance
realization exploring convergent
solutions to the frame problem which
proposes that trade off uh tradeoffs in
precision waiting a key second order
dynamic in predictive processing
hierarchies are at the heart of our
ability to be intelligently ignorant and
that alignment of predictive processing
and relevance realization is exactly
what we're going to be talking about
today John welcome to the show thank you
so much for joining us it's an absolute
treit thank you Darius uh a great
pleasure um I'm uh hoping that Mark does
make it on in December uh that'll be
great yeah absolutely but in his absence
because Mark was meant to be here today
but it's uh unfort he's not
unfortunately able to make it um perhaps
so this podcast is acting as a kind of
primer and introduction for our audience
to the critical themes in cognitive
science and psychology and biology as
well as maths and physics as they are
right now um so I think it would be a
worthwhile uh worthwhile place to start
if you could just unpick what relevance
realization is and then we'll come to
how it
with predictive
processing sure uh so relevance
realization is um sort of inverts the
way Common Sense Works common sense is
there's a lot that is obvious to us and
we know what it's obvious what we should
pay attention to we're sometimes
mistaken but it's obvious what we should
be remembering and what we should be
doing and that's all obvious and we just
run from that um our job as cognitive
scientists is to explain how the brain
generates that
obviousness that salience Landscapes
that makes the right things stand out as
relevant to us so that we can do what is
astonishing solve a wide variety of
problems in a wide variety of
domains um you're a general Problem
Solver which is just astonishing I mean
you can learn Albanian history you could
learn about swimming or rock climbing
you can take up the study of dinosaur in
the Jurassic period like it's just you
know and it's just amazing and
astonishing and there's good empirical
evidence you have something like a
general intelligence there seems to be a
general capacity there's individual
variation in Talent some people are
better at learning this domain than
other domains but there way back from
Spearman we know there's some sort of
General ability I'm going to propose
that the general ability are two
interlocking things the anticipation and
relevance realization what I mean by a
general ability is the these are kind of
meta problems these are the two big
problems you have to solve when you're
doing any other specific problem solving
and what makes relevance realization so
hard generating that obviousness so
mysterious actually that's what Scott
atran says he he says that what science
does is it makes what common sense to
take takes to be obvious mysterious
here's a table in front of me but
physics says well what is that really
and it mysterious and it's made out of
quarks and all this sort of stuff it's
the same sort of thing here because when
you think about it um outside of common
sense you realize that there's just an
overwhelming amount of information
that's constantly as you said
dynamically changing in the environment
there's an overwhelming amount of
information in your long-term memory
that's constantly changing and being
readjusted during to to the
reconstructive nature of memory there is
an overwhelming number of combinations
of actions you can perform sequences of
actions and yet you ignore
that
overwhelming almost all of that
overwhelming information and zero in on
the relevant information so that you are
oriented right in the world finding
things obvious Salient standing out and
you're and and it's and it's not just a
single thing there's like a salience
landscape some things stand out more
than others some things are more
foreground background you have all this
happening so that you are capable of
solving so many problems in a messy
complex World in which there's constant
novelty because of an emergent phenomena
and trying to give this ability to
machines has been
overwhelmingly uh difficult and one of
the hard hard problems we're actually
bumping up right into it now as we've
finally taken up the AGI project the
project of trying to create artificial
general
intelligence excellent um it may be
worth digging a little bit deeper into
that Exposition um because people might
be thinking well don't we just have a
module for relevance or salience then we
just kind of reborn and we know oh um I
should not fall off cliffs and I should
but actually what happened yesterday
might be quite irrelevant you have a
wonderful um explanation in your sort of
keynote paper explicating relevance
realization where you say that leads to
an infinite regress um perhaps you could
explain that uh argument so the magic
module not to be confused with
predictive processings reported problem
of the magic modulator so let's keep
those two distinct from each other but
the mag the magic module is well I have
a I have a relevance realization thing
in my head that just does it and then
that just and then I can just say well
how does it do it and the mistake people
can make is well Evolution made it and
that's right Evolution tells me how it
got here that's not telling me how it
functions Evolution tells tells me how
my eye got here and how my ear got here
and that's not telling me how my eye and
my ear function I'm trying to take
What's called the design stance how
could tell me what I need to do to give
that module the ability to realize
relevance you you all you've done is
said it has that ability but it faces
the problem of okay now it has to know
what to pay attention to and so on and
so forth now what you might say is well
Evolution totally prepared us for it the
problem with that is that doesn't work
it uh Evolution can only pick up on
things that are longterm invariant and
that make an ongoing
continuous um difference to your
reproductive uh status right and that's
not how relevance Works relevance is
really fast and changing if I say left
big toe it suddenly becomes relevant to
you and it wasn't relevant a minute ago
and what's the darwinian difference
there um and there's nothing that's
intrinsically relevant well my own life
is intrinsically relevant is it you'll
sacrifice your life for your kids well
my life and my kids but under all
circumstances you know what if you know
saving your kid means that 10 million
people oh well and so on and we get into
all these philosophical arguments
because we realize no no there isn't any
hard fast thing that is always relevant
relevance is not something for which we
can generate a scientific theory it's
not stable it's not intrinsic to the
phenomena and it there's nothing
other than being relevant there's
nothing that all the events or objects
or feelings have in common like what is
it that what do they all have that makes
them other than saying well they're
you'll give me synonyms they're
important to me or they help me solve my
problems yes that's exactly it but how
but how exactly perfect and it's it's so
nice to see how the um apparently
disperate strands of cognitive science
so gibsonian affordances for cognitive
science predictive proing processing and
act of inference aign at this path which
is that everything is dynamical
everything is about this Mutual
unfolding there is no rified static um
existence it's what's relevant to you
might not be relevant to me and there
are these Dynamic relationships which
govern that um it's yeah so that's
that's a that's a great place to start I
think let's now go into uh the solution
if there is such such a solution and
let's start with opponent processing so
this is a term that you use
frequently and to a Layman audience it's
not clear exactly what it means so what
what is opponent processing and how does
it help shed light on this complex
problem sure um and maybe along the way
I can point out how relevance
realization really gives some specific
teeth to claims of embodiment from for
EOG on uh because I I'd like the point
you made and maybe we don't have to do
it right now but I'd like to come back
to it how relevance realization is kind
of a glue that glues together predictive
processing and for ecogy in powerful way
and makes them all including itself
mutually stronger from that integration
uh but yeah the opponent processing so
let's just note something at many
different levels of analysis in your
biology you will find opponent
processing at work I'll take one that's
very easy to explain and people have a
ready experience of it uh so we are all
constantly mostly unconsciously although
it's affected by conscious factors we're
constantly recalibrating and adjusting I
dare I say it we're even evolving our
level of metabolic arousal I don't mean
just sexual arousal don't be Frey here I
mean arousal how much how much how sort
of activated are you how sort of
energized are you um and the problem is
there isn't there isn't some State you
homeostatic that you're looking for with
that because if there's a tiger in the
room I need to go to maximal right
arousal uh uh and if I'm going to sleep
I need to go to minimal arousal and I
can't just be sort of Canadian and keep
sort of average arousal at all times
because then I don't fall asleep and I
get killed by tigers and so it
constantly has to be like we're talking
about it has to constantly readjusting
so what what has evolved in your biology
is you're autonomic meaning
self-governing it's a self organizing
system like you said it's a dynamical
entity your autonomic nervous system and
what it does is it couples together two
subsystems that are have opposite biases
from each other your so your sympathetic
system is bias to I I'll speak
anthropomorphically just because it
speeds things up your sympathetic system
is biased to seeing as much of it can of
the world as threat or opportunity and
arousing you as much as it can and your
parasympathetic system is biased the
opposite way it's biased to seeing as
much of the world as secure safe A place
where you can rest and recover and then
these subsystems are not independent
from each other they're locked together
and they're they are ALS they're
continually trying to shut each other
off and they're constantly competing
that way but they're cooperatively
competing it's not adversarial they're
cooperatively competing and what happens
is the constant tradeoff between those
proc between those processes
constantly right in very Dynamic manner
constantly recalibrates your level of
arousal to the world and that's opponent
processing and what you find is you got
that you know there's other there
opponent processing between your focal
vision and your peripheral vision
there's opponent processing plausibly
between your left and right hemispheres
the number of these things like uh is
huge and I say at many different levels
of analysis um and so um I think Aon of
processing is a clue uh to how relevance
realization is actually undertaken by
your embodied uh cognition wonderful and
immediately to anyone interested in Act
of inference or um its manifestation in
continuous State spaces as predictive
processing it what we'll be screaming
out is this notion of an attractor set
or our homeostatic equilibrium which car
spoken about at length obviously and and
as has many other researchers but this
idea that what this we are we suffer um
but we also uh embody in a kind of
positive way this itinerancy we we never
we're never stuck in a single um mode we
we are endowed with the capacity to go
beyond our homeostasis and return back
to it but we're always in a sense being
drawn without ever residing ever without
ever having stopped at that homeostatic
set point um so let's now fold in active
inference to the picture what does it
provide relevance
realization um and the formulation of
relevance realization that couldn't be
done purely with for cognitive
science so I mean I'm going to talk
about it in terms of predictive
processing because that's the one that's
the formulation of it that lines up most
cleanly
uh with the theoretical integration uh
as you said there's there's clear
derivation relations between active
inference and predictive processing and
also between them and the basian uh math
but the basian math if we were to
actually strictly apply it would be
computationally intractable so we're
doing some approximation function so I'm
just going to take it that everybody
sort of knows that I'm playing fair with
this right I'm not I'm not trying to be
Dodge you here um and so um relevance
realization is grounded in uh the idea
of problem solving and problem solving
actually assumes a fundamental thing
which again is so obvious to us which is
the state you're in and the state you
want to be in are not the same state
that's the defining feature of a problem
if I'm in a state I want to be in I want
to be sitting in this chair I am I don't
have a problem um right and now what
that means is you're all you're you're
immediately into something very
interesting the organism is trying to
actually predict a possible state in the
world and prepare itself alter so it's
an agent it doesn't just behave it
Alters Its Behavior to alter the con the
states in the world right and so it is
trying to I would say predictively
prepare for the world it's trying to
predict the world but prepare itself for
that world but also prepare the world so
it's more likely to come out in the
prediction that it seeks right and so I
I put those two together together um and
I I talk about
anticipation um and so you're whenever
you're problem solving you're
anticipating a goal meeting that
prediction and preparation now for EOG
site doesn't directly talk about that as
as clear as it needs to it talks about
coupling and it talks about affordances
and I think there's a deep connection
between opponent processing optimal
gripping and affordances and maybe we
can explore that at some point uh but
typically one of the things where 40
kogai has some challenges is in more
distal relations uh to the environment
because it tends to rely primarily on
coupling and you know this is a
long-standing critique that one of my
colleagues Brian cwell Smith at the
University of Toronto because that is
where all knowledge is Flowing from um
right uh has made he said you know uh
you can be predictively coupled to
things that you're in direct cause of
contact with but you know uh um uh sorry
dynamically coupled not predictively
coupled my my apologies uh but you how
do you do things that are much more
distal and for me that that is key and
here's why
darus I think in I think when we
evaluate even
intuitively um so I'm not using that as
an authority I'm just showing how
readily this works for us um when we
evaluate an organism for its
intelligence we tend to to it in two
interlocking ways we do it in terms of I
think how how well does it zero in
unrelevant information how well does it
pay attention to what it needs we look
at an animal we go wow that's really
good notice how it's noting subtle
differences but we also evaluate the
intelligence of an organism and Michael
Levan talks about this with his
cognitive light cone idea is How Deeply
into the world they can anticipate and I
don't mean just spatial temporally I
also mean it modally possibility like
when I talk to my cat and I say you know
you know where's your toy the cat looks
at me I go oh well right I say to to my
puppy where's your ball and she goes
into the other room looks for the ball
finds it under the coach and brings it
all the way back to me I go wow you're
really smart right and so we get this
because we we know how just Moment by
moment that adaptive ability is built on
what how dist can we pursue goals we
tend to evaluate people wow you pursued
a long-term goal and you brought it
about so that's what's missing and I
think that's what's really afforded now
I want to make one more point and then
I'll I'll shut up so you can you can ask
me another question which is these two
issues anticipating more deeply and
remember I don't just mean spatial
temporally I mean Mally and relevance
realization are deeply interconnected
the more you anticipate the more the
problem of relevance realization goes up
exponentially and so these two things
right they I I would argue because
they're interlocking they have to be
solved together and I think that's why
we use both of them as evaluations of
the intelligence of an
organism okay I'd like to backrack to
that second
argument after this after what I say
here it um yeah it it strikes me that
what predictive processing can give
perhaps where fory cognitive science
doesn't but I'm happy to be schooled on
this um and I know verell and autop
paresis in some sense pre- shadowed um
and prefigured what I'm about to say is
that it kind of gives a ground to our
action and to our perception which is
that we have to have a model of the
world and a model of ourselves which is
not only descriptively viable but also
normatively viable yes in so far as it's
all like it's very important for me to
be able to predict the world but as you
said we aren't just at the behest of the
world's Dynamics we can change the world
according to our preferences exactly and
I think I think what predictive
processing gives us is although I
although to be fair I think Carl might
say that this is a bit of an overshoot
is a is a Telos is a fundamental
attractor set to which our perception
and action is is governed so I think
that's kind of the way that I see the
the added benefit of this convergence
between um predictive processing and um
relevance realization what I was also
going to say there is that it's
fantastic that you're mentioning this
kind of deep temporal modeling because
for my eyes that's really where a lot of
the the work is being done right now
which is that selfhood Consciousness
even perhaps space itself is Downstream
on the fact that we can Downstream on
the degree to which we can model the
slower Dynamics and the faster Dynamics
in a generative hierarchy so that's I
think that's I'm in complete agreement
with that I think that's an extension of
the argument I made uh yeah and so what
I wanted to pick up there is you said if
I heard correctly that the more the
deeper your temporal model the more you
can model slower fluctuations in the
environment the more critical relevance
realization becomes the higher the
stakes in some sense yes yes very much
I'm interested in unpicking that
argument because for my eyes there there
are plenty of things out there that
don't have deep temporal models so um I
a virus for example just be reacting to
very uh Crain features of the
environment but for them relevance
realization at least to my eyes appears
as critical as it would for a human it
it is it is and and so I think it's how
how can I put it I think it's always a
demanding problem I'm so I'm not I'm not
denying that even uh the uh the parium
uh has to uh do salience landscaping it
has to I'm going to use a word very
neutrally here I'm not conting anything
about Consciousness but it has to
recognize this molecule as food and that
molecule as poison and swim reliably
towards the one and away from the other
I'm not I so I think the problem is
always there as I was trying to indicate
as soon as you have problems as soon as
your goal states are distinct and I
think the space opens up very quickly
exponentially I just meant that it
exponentially gets worse
right this is why you see um across
species
hyperbolic discounting temporal
discounting because that's a that's a
huge relevance realization machine it's
about salience discounting right and the
point of that is is because as you open
into the future the number of
possibilities goes up exponentially and
so you need to have this attenuation
function so you don't get overwhelmed by
the possibilities as you extend your
cognition into the future that's why we
have hyperbolic discounting and we pay a
huge price for it it makes us
procrastinate it makes us difficult to
give to pursue our long-term goals so
there's even a trade-off relationship in
there but I won't get into it but that's
an example there's a good reason why we
must have something like temporal
discounting across species that's what
angsley showed is because the relevance
realization issue just it gets even
worse it starts out bad and gets even
worse right wonderful and yeah I mean a
lot of your work will come to
affordances now because a lot of your
work is centered on the notion of
affordances so affordances are the
possibilities for action fored actually
circular possibilities of action granted
by the environment I mean the fored was
a verb and then Gibson made um how much
has the predictive processing framework
supplemented your understanding of
affordances and perhaps the way that
what we perceive in the world is not
necessarily a feature list of objects
yeah but um they are fundamentally
affordances I see my glass of water as
grippable rather than being glass this
Dimension and I only ask that because as
I said as as conscious animate cognizers
we are blessed with the capacity to
change the world in accordance with our
priors which makes action really the
fundamental
currency for autop paresis for
self-organization so does it has
predictive processing ramped up the uh
importance that you give to Gibbs own in
affordances um I don't know if it ramps
up because I I always thought
uh I I literally learned this stuff from
John Kennedy uh LED Gibson's greatest
protos AG so very early on I was very
much uh impressed by this um and it it
occurred to me that relevance
realization um the realization of
relevance and I mean realization in both
senses actualizing a possibility and
becoming aware of it or at least
detecting it in some fashion um that it
it's a prototypical kind of affordance
the thing about affordances is they're
not found in the object or in the
organism the grip ability of the glass
is not in the glass can't be gripped by
a paramuseum and it's not in my uh you
know in my hand my hand can't grasp
Africa or the sun right it's it's in a
fitted relation between them and that's
exactly what relevance is it's a fitted
relationship between so I always before
I I came into a a deep dialogue with
predictive processing I already saw a
deep relationship between relevance
realization and affordances and I think
um part of my work has been to really
explore the Deep ontological
significance of that that you have a
category that sort of Falls outside this
was Gibson's intent too this is what 4
Cai is really talking about Falls
outside our our our belief that we have
a complete exhaustive dichotomy between
the subjective and the objective between
the inner world and the outer world and
so there's this other important I call
it the transcor this betweenness this
connectedness you see in adaptivity you
see in relevance but you also see it
like you said now what do what do I
think the predictive processing did I I
I it's if you'll allow me I want to talk
this just I want to talk back and forth
symmetrical not just linear so I think
what the predictive processing does is
emphasize the need to try and explain
rather than
just I don't want to be cruel so I'm
being a little bit overs simplistic I'm
doing that just speed sure but generally
it's like yeah but how do affordances
get actualized in the 4E column like
there's a lot of affordances all the
time and what I'm interested is when how
do those affordances become well Salient
and obvious to me so they become binding
on my sensory motor behavior and and
that was always something of uh you know
not that you know there's Redfield and
others who were doing some work on it
but typically they start to invoke
predictive process ing to try and
explain that mechanism of like okay
there's a there's a huge affordance
network but I'm not like how do I here
we go again how do I select and
actualize the ones that I'm actually G
to that actually go into my salience
landscaping and I think predictive
processing especially with the notion of
precision waiting yeah does a good job
of that now what I think relevance
realization helps to do the predictive
processing a bunch of other things but
one thing is predictive processing
basically there's subtlety to this and I
know there's lots of math but just to
keep going right that you know well what
attention is is the Precision waiting
it's this meta function and I think
that's a very good argument but there
but there's a conceptual analysis that's
been needed but it's like but what is
salience and one of the arguments I can
make is well what the Precision waiting
is doing is relevance realization and
relevance realization uh when relevance
realization re does a higher order
finding relevant of an affordance that
has been generated by lower order relev
realization that's when something
becomes Salient to us and so we can
actually give a conceptual explanation
that goes with the theoretical identity
claim in predictive processing the
Precision waiting is attention and what
it gives you is sence so they can they
can unpack each other I think what
another thing that happens
is relevance realization is deeply
connected to for Eide because relevance
is grounded I would argue in
autopolis um relevance relevance is
always relevant to an organism right and
so that means relevance realization
isn't called calculation it's how the
organism cares about some information
rather than all the other information
because it is constantly taking care of
itself there are literally and I mean
this physically things that matter to it
and things that it must import into
itself important things and some of
that's also information and so why that
if you if you can if if you can glue
for EOG sign predictive processing
together I think you can answer some of
the questions maybe even challenges that
some people in for eoi are making a
predictive processing and saying well
it's not really connected to embodiment
I think no no if you show a deep theore
theoretical integration of predictive
processing relevance realization and
then relevance realization and autois
then you've really strongly glue
predictive processing and 4 cogi
together so that's some of the that's
some of the import theoretical work that
could be done yeah absolutely I I would
love to jump into um the critiques that
c fory um cognitive research uh
cognition researchers have leveraged at
predictive processing but let's um let's
leave that for a second this is exactly
what I was talking about in terms of
Telos um which is that exactly this this
notion of care and and when I spoke to
ma alaras in an active inference
researcher um last week we kind of
actually ended up concluding this is
almost a hiigaran sense of care that we
on our existence can I can I just
interrupt there yeah right at hiigaran
sense of care was exactly what I was in
invoking and I right and I was deeply
influenced by dfus and the frame problem
got this from haiger right so the the
connection you just drew is very I I
that yeah I I explicitly argue for that
excellent so yeah I mean I personally
think um that the h hiigaran draus Merlo
Ponty lineage needs to be integrated
more into yes active inference and I'm
speaking to Dr marilin stendera Who has
done work on hyar and autoa so that will
be really that will be really fun in the
upcoming weeks but this is exactly what
I was talking about in terms of Telos
which is that taking a stance on your
own existence can be computationally
modeled as having these kind of high
Precision priors yes so our homeostatic
set point will be different from a
snakes and that actually gives a really
solid explication of why we act
differently in certain context than
snakes um and so that was my kind but
then that said I will have to make clear
that
Carl is himself although he has spoken
about existential imperative says that
there actually is no imperative all that
you're really saying is if a thing like
us is to persist over time this is what
it needs to do and it's just a it's just
cast as of uh minimization of free
energy so I think there's an interesting
question there that maybe you could have
a go out which is to what degree do you
see this as a genuine imperative um
versus just what things do to
self-organized over
time yeah and so I mean and and uh
Carl's no SLO so he's welcome I I I
sometimes don't like it when people who
you know are physicists or something
start commenting on philosophical uh
normative questions uh with an authority
they don't properly possess uh but I
know I mean Carl's a great theorist and
um and I know he's f philosophically
educated um I have not yet to talk to
him but I hope I do get to do so you can
do
itead so
um yeah I mean so I'm going to argue
later if I get a chance that what
relevance realization doing is strongly
analogous uh obviously a very different
time scale uh to what evolution does
about constantly uh uh redesigning the
adapted fitted of the of organisms to
the environment and allowing organisms
to fit their environments to them
because as you keep emphasizing and I
keep agreeing with it's not passive it's
not right the organism is shaping the
environment as the environment is
shaping the organism Niche construction
and all that sort of thing um and I
think that's all right and I and then
there again that's a very clear
connection to for EOG side again but
this deeper question I do want to do it
I want to pause and I want to slow down
because it it is a really important
question uh because it gets us beyond
what we might call scientific
explanations of how and into properly
but not useless philosophical reflection
of sort of why and why does this matter
to me because as you've mentioned I'm
deeply concerned with you know issues of
meaning in life this this this largely
metaphorical nebulous notion that humans
seek meaningful lives lives that are
worth living even given all of our
failures and our faults and flaws and
our foolishness and our frustration
right and pretty clear empirical
evidence that it's not
reducible uh to just subjective
well-being or pleasure and pretty good
conceptual philosophical argument
because it's that's where it's relevant
that it's not reducible to just living a
moral existence you could live a very
moral existence in which you're sort of
experiencing the pleasure of food and
other things um and and and you you know
certain stability in your environment
but you can be very very lonely you
could be very lonely um so and what what
that loneliness points to I'm just
making an intuitive gesture that's not a
tight argument I have tight arguments
but the the gesture is people are
seeking a kind of connectedness and now
you see where I'm getting to relevance
realization and what we're talking about
this Niche construction the fitted the
belonging togetherness this mutually
shaping like this is this I argue that
that's exactly the connectedness human
beings are they seeking the meaning in
life now you can then ask the question
and PE and I'm G to play with two turns
of phrase here to play with that I think
we clearly seek meaning in life uh and I
think the evidence for that is growing
and it it converges with the
psychological work on meaning in life
and on what Karen Allen calls
belongingness if you don't feel that you
belong you're in trouble and you're in
trouble across all these measures
cognitive emotional social Financial
blah like you're in trouble
physiologically you're in trouble um
that's why solitary confinement is such
a punishment right um
so is there a meaning of life to the
meaning in
life the meaning of life is that is
there some sort of
cosmic Destiny Cosmic order to which we
are ultimate which we are ultimately
trying to
find and here's the thing I don't think
I have enough evidence for
that I think that there's lots of
evidence for meaning in life and if I'm
right that it's relevant to realization
and if that's something very much like
Evolution right evolution is constantly
redesigning
adaptivity but there isn't a final thing
that evolution is aiming towards there
isn't a final form of life there isn't
some like what we're doing is like the
sculptor we're constantly refining and
then finally one day we will have the
final form of life
and um I think this is fundamentally
flawed and I think this matters
philosophically I don't think previous
forms of life were in some in any kind
of moral sense Superior to us so I don't
believe in any nostalgias some the
previous things that people found
important and relevant and sacred those
were the true ones and we just have to
get back there nope and I don't believe
the Utopia we are working towards the
final ultimate thing that we'll all
agree for all time time is the most
relevant most Salient I I don't believe
that how this works so I reject Mist I
reject Utopias the idea that there's a
t- Los can either mean there's a t- Los
to meaning in life which is it's like
Carl says it's necessary it's
constitutive necessary for living things
to have this but does that mean there's
any metaphysical necessity to their
being living things that's a different
question now here's my weak answer at
that one sorry long question but you
asked like this is like almost up there
with like God question right right I
note that I'm in a very difficult
situation I can't see any evidence for
and I'm not attacking God here as you
know I'm very respectful and even
appreciative of of religious Frameworks
and religious lives but I can't see any
evidence for that however if you were to
ask
me which is a better Universe one with
life in it and one without life in it
even if you couldn't exist in either one
I would say the one with life in it
there's some primordial judgment going
on there um that has some kind of
metaphysical import now it's weak I I I
admitted that ahead of time and so I'm
giving you a very I'm sorry very long
but Wishy Wash the answer I don't really
think I believe in anything like the
meaning of life but I do think there's a
metaphysical import to being connected
to reality we find reality being
connected to reality inherently valuable
for its own sake and we find worlds in
which things can realize reality better
worlds than ones that don't have that in
it that's my answer no it's a wonderful
answer and it um it's really helped me
and hopefully our audience clarify
exactly what I mean by an existential
imperative which is that the free energy
principle doesn't tell you
what you're here for no it tells you if
you're here what are you doing like
given your phenotype um and given your
culture and etc etc so that's a really
useful um sort of explanation of exactly
what I was going for there um and
actually it points to something I said
to Carl right at the end of our podcast
which at time of recording this came out
yesterday so people should definitely
check it out because he's for sure for
sure he's on top form which is I asked
him I I mentioned Thomas Nagel so Thomas
Nagel has this kind of very romantic
philosophical notion that life is death
is bad because life is fundamentally
good and it points to kind of your
thought experiment if we had two worlds
one with life and one without life I
think we would all intuitive intuitively
say the one with life is better whether
that has any metaphysical import as you
say is is up for grabs I was going to
I'm going to ask sort of um jumping on
the back of the initial thing you said
which was about connectedness um and
belongingness so if we take this from a
theoretical or computational stance in
active inference what this looks like to
me is we embody a model of the world
which um we can so we can make
fundamentally sound predictions about
how the world will unfold and how about
we will and how we will act to make that
world more um compatible with our
preferences now when that was formalized
initially in the active inference
literature
immediately a response to this came in
the form of What's called the dark room
problem so this is saw papers in 2011
2012 and and they've been rebutted in
multiple ways but the basic idea is why
don't humans just seek out dark rooms
where maybe they have access to food and
water but they don't really see C but in
a state where they don't go and explore
and they're not curious because what
you're seeing there is actually a
perfect coupling between your
predictions of the world and the world
and the way the world is unfolding to
your eyes so I was wondering whether you
had pondered the dark room problem and
where you see
exploration and epistemic affordances
coming into play here yeah I think that
the dark room problem I'm not I I I I'm
happy with all the other rebuttals um
and I don't and I don't know I don't
know I don't know them all so I may be
stepping on somebody else's toes so if I
am whoever you are I apologize yeah um I
think this is a you know a lockin
individualist model of cognition and how
we work and I think it is therefore the
presupposition well is that no um that's
actually I don't agree with that
presupposition that our cognition is
fundamentally individualistic in that
way I think we are you know we are
social social cultural mammals and let
me point to one thing you know yes
measure of G are very robustly
predictive but you know it's also really
pred a very powerful way of predicting
your behavior your attachment style this
is also very robust now that means think
about what that actually means and this
you know and this goes into the heart of
religious Traditions like agapic love
right when you have a child you have to
invert your relevance Arrow it's not how
that being is relevant to you you invert
everything around this is a goic love
and how it's different from erotic love
or FIA love you invert everything around
right and so that it's how am I relevant
to this being how am I relevant to this
being and how can I be relevant in a way
that turns it into a person turns it
into an intelligent rational
self-reflective relevance realizer
predictive processor meaning maker right
and so well first of all where are my
attachment relationships in the dark
room well there's other people in the
dark room so there's other people in the
dark room all the problems that you
thought you got away from by putting me
in a dark room return other people have
different goals than me they have
different needs they're going to move
around differently right we're GNA have
to decide about when and where and how
we gain access blah blah blah blah blah
all of that immediately unfolds secondly
and this is part of for E cogon I think
the evidence for extended cognition
distributed cognition that we evolve to
to work in groups and the collective
intelligence of that is actually our
superpower and other people are making
this argument um I think that's clear
you standard thing take the Wast and
selection task put it an individual
person Highly Educated highly
intelligent second year you know
psychology and a top tier University
from the 1960s on you put him in the
Wast and selection task and only 10% get
it right right you replace that same
task with four people who are allowed to
talk to each other and success rate goes
from 10% to 82% reliably why because we
do opponent processing between each
other right you have biases different
from mine and if we work in opponent
processing not adversarial but if I say
you're probably a good source for
correcting my bias and I'm probably a
good source for correcting yours we get
the best dynamical
self-correction possible and so when you
add in the fact of the reality and
there's actually evidence empirical and
formal for the power of collective
intelligence the reality of attachment
well then the dark room right becomes
filled with other people who are trying
to you know band together to solve
problems that they can't solve
individually and then to me everything
that the dark room thought it had as an
absurd like a reductio absurdum
disappears that would be my response
yeah I think eventually the dark room
just becomes the world once you start
adding the things you need event you
know eventually it becomes a
civilization yeah I love I love all this
stuff on distributive cognition I spent
the first um six months of this year
working at UCL on um experiment finding
experimental ground for what's called
social Baseline Theory social Baseline
theory is this idea that humans like to
study a human being in a lab by itself
is to study a human being at deficit a
human being actually want it's
physiological arousal to take one um one
factor is at its Baseline when it's with
other people and it will fluctuate
according to stuff like attachment style
or the Rel relationship that one has
with that person which is really
beautiful but inverts our kind of well
maybe not common sense but our in
institutionalized notion of what it is
to be a person which is kind of alone
yeah wonderful well I'm gonna take this
argument a little bit further if if you
let me um because this is something that
we spoke about a couple of months ago
and I think Mark might have a different
opinion so it would be cool to sort of
unpickle I have this um slightly fuzzy
wishy-washy idea that the notion that
okay so I always think about a climber
climbing a rock face or a climbing wall
and the climbing wall is a kind of
beautiful canonical example of an
affordance-based landscape it's Rich for
the affordances it's got the toe holes
the finger holes so in many ways what
the um rock in terms of active inference
what it allows the rock climber to do is
to self-evidence um or or find evidence
for its own model about itself as um a
successful rock climber yeah now that's
relatively well established in the
literature what isn't established is my
kind of again slightly wishy-washy idea
which is that the rock climber is
offering affordances to the wall and so
this this is why I about you know right
at the beginning of our conversation I
spoke about Mutual coupling so what
dynamical systems theory gives us what
um autop paresis gives us what act of
inference gives us is this idea that um
to exist is not to be this kind of
rified self that um takes a objective
stance on the world and actually what it
is is this really the fundamental unit
of analysis should be this Dynamic
Mutual coupling between agent and Arena
to use your terminology yeah do you
think it's an over I mean I've spoken to
Mark about this and he he uses he said
it's something like an overextension of
the term affordances to say that the
human being is offering affordances to
the climbing wall I know Mark isn't here
to defend himself so again I'm not going
to put what but and I will definitely
raise this with him again but just for
your own ears how does that argument s
down to you I like the argument then
yeah I don't want to speak you of Mark
I'll only speak to the propositions that
you spoke on his behalf and I'm very
happy to I I mean Mark and I work close
together Mark is one of the best people
I know Mark's a former student of mine
I'm very proud of Mark so um uh but um I
actually agree with you now that goes to
another connection I make in my work
that would probably be a little bit
stranger to the ears of many of your
listeners they might say oh I get the
why he wants to connect uh you know
processing to relevance realization and
the for coxide but now what you're doing
and this is where I do a lot of my what
I call my deeper ontological work and
this is where the hiigaran stuff really
comes to Bear is this is all the work I
do on on neoplatonism which may sound
like something very Arcane but again um
here's here's the proposal that once we
really profoundly accept affordances and
once we accept that they are
reciprocally realizing I agree with you
the forance not only discloses things
about me it discloses things about the
world and that's a way in which things
like heer's notion of Truth as ala as
the as an event as the disclosure rather
than a static property of our
propositions um I think that hang on now
as filler argues and I've been arguing
for a while and John rusen filler's book
is called neoplatonism piger in the
history of being relation is on iCal
ground that relationality is actually
the the ultimate nature of reality um
heiger is actually turning back towards
this because what does that give you
you've had if you have that and I think
this is a fair way to put it if you have
that althetic notion of affordance then
you are getting back to the neoplatonic
theory of knowing by Conformity knowing
by participation and the deeper argument
goes something like this um that if the
fundamental grammar of your cognition I
don't mean the content your content can
go wrong and all but if the fundamental
grammar the bottom up top down all all
this stuff we're talking about if it's
not picking up on something fundamental
about how reality is structured right
then you face a kind of profound
solipsism a profound kind of
skepticism um and I think that is
ultimately lead you into all kinds of
performative contradictions that I and I
agree with Whitehead they're as
devastating as propositional
contradiction there's a longer argument
there and I can point to please check
out some of my talks on on YouTube about
this longer argument like pix's uh
aspects of Truth where she said you know
all the things we use to deize this
right we had the analytic synthetic
distinction that is broken down under
philosophical criticism uh we had the
theory fact distinction that has broken
down we we had the the right the is a
that has broken down like think about
relevance in is or not well blah right
it's sort of both right right and so her
point is all the things that were used
to cleave and then what we tried to do
is we tried to make the logical world
the thing that sort of stuck the Two
Worlds together and that collapsed under
goal and other people and so we're back
to the idea that we either we either we
either go into the lock in cabinet in
which we're locked inside of our heads
we're somehow getting postcards sent to
us we think they might be from an
outside world that we think might be out
there and we're trying to build it from
the postcards and we're Doom that's
never going to get us there and so I
think if you have an althetic notion of
affordance you start to make the
argument that how reality is
realizing and how we are doing relevance
realization are fundamentally
participating in the same principles in
a profound way um and and I think yeah
that I I I I I have no doubt that M Mark
might not not uh want to do this I think
Mark would be I would agree with Mark
that this is not a direct derivation
from sort of classic Frisian
presentations of active inference and
predicted processing daisi and brain we
should settle on a name uh but uh um but
I think if you make the connections
through deeper into Gibson deeper into
fory Cai deeper into heiger you get back
to this notion that with the prevalent
notion of knowing that when we know
something what we're doing is
our structural functional organization
is identifying with the structural
functional organization of the thing and
we are we are both participating in that
same form that same principle that same
grammar and that has all kinds of
metaphysical and ontological
consequences even uh ethical
consequences it means talking about the
true the good and the Beautiful becomes
something very relevant to them yeah
yeah now this is this is exactly where I
wanted to to go and exactly aligns with
with the way I'm thinking about the free
energy principle at the moment which is
I have a skepticism between the internal
and the external distinction yes this is
something I spoke about with so a a
classic problem when one starts reading
active inference as I spoke about with
car is whether one would consider the um
the agent or the um internal Dynamics is
having having a model of the external
world or instantiating a model of the
extern
excellent excellent this comes back to
sort of cyber cybernetic formulations of
what it is to be a good regulator so col
Ashby and and all of that stuff from the
50s and 60s so I have an inherent
skepticism because I would I kind of
take the stance actually all that the
internal Dynamics are doing is
instantiating a particularized form of
the external Dynamics and this is very
easy once you take out the picture of a
hunzed ego just if you look at it in
terms of just the particle physics we're
just a instantiation of some um of the
the physics that defines everything else
but we just we just actually seem to
have a kind of complexified Mark of
blanket or Mark of blanket form of that
but there's nothing particularly
distinct about that and we'll come to
Consciousness because maybe there is um
and that's I guess is the big elephant
in the room here but it's funny that you
mention haiger because haiger to my to
my eyes um in my opinion and then
obviously draus and Merlo Ponte and the
phenomenologists followed haiger really
um he's the one who strikes at this um
established distinction between a
subject and an object yes so the
cartisian distinction and and then this
is where his kind of gripes with SRA
came in
now my question is is that yes if you
read haiger darine the ground of darine
is this kind of interrelational it alair
is the disclosure of Truth in an inter
interrelational relationship so to speak
but there still seems to be some kind of
subject who um you know the the hammerer
who is hammering away at the nail now
from the perspective of the hammerer
he's not some rified ego who is
objectifying the nail that all that is
really being witness there from the
level of Consciousness is the disclosure
of
activity but still we can give a
description of a hammerer and a nail so
to what degree in your thinking do you
completely eradicate the subject object
distinction um and is there anything
that you think predictive processing has
to say about that I think well oh the
second question was don't wor worry
about second
question I'm happy to think about it
with you uh I have put a lot of thought
into the first question yeah um and so I
mean I think filler is right in his book
that our subjective objective divide is
our version of the appearance reality
distinction and and it's just our
version in the ancient world they had a
different version so ours is an inout
metaphor how is the inner and the outer
connected um and the ancient world is
the problem of the one and the midi how
is the lower and the upper connected and
and it and and what what and once you
see that you realize that there's a
deeper structural problem that isn't
bound to the inner outer or the uh the
emergence and the emanation it's it's
this it's the connectivity issue and
what what what filler argues and there's
a lot of other people uh convergent on
this is like if you try if you if you go
with an Arista tilian metaphysics that
what's most real are substances in the
artian sense which are things that can
independently exist um then this becomes
a deep problem for you and that kind of
ontology I would argue and I can make
the argument drives you towards a
nominalistic um epistemology um and then
you get you know aam's version of it or
K's version of it where all of the
patterns and all the information are
just in the mind which means the mind is
radically other because it is the only
place that information intelligibility
actually exist and the world is
profoundly AB absurd in a deep deep way
and I think that leads you into to uh
well first of all it makes science
impossible and it leads you into all
kinds of existential and moral dilemmas
and if you then take a look at the logic
of trying to get you can't actually this
is what filler does very carefully you
can't actually get relations out of
properties that belong to the relata the
relations have to precede the relata in
a very important way so I think there's
a deep at a very deep level I do want to
call it into question I do want to
challenge that uh that go first of all
we it's historical it's cultural we we
pretend as if that is the only way in
which human beings are related to the
world like I said even in the west
that's not their problem in the ancient
world their problem is the problem of
the one and the many it's not the
problem of the in and now what does this
all ground in I think this grounds in
the common problem of the relationship
between appearance and reality and
here's where could now say something
that aligns with my previous argument
about
relationality see so and I'm going to
borrow a term from uh recore here the
hermeneutics of Suspicion the
hermeneutics of Suspicion is that app
and we've got it because of Freud and
nii and blah blah blah there's
historical reasons and those are
valuable critiques by the way but the
Hermon of Suspicion says appearances are
distorting they're deceptive they're
distractive right they're disruptive and
what we should do is always question
whether or not they are leading us into
reality now maral Ponte has a great
argument against that that he gets from
I maybe he doesn't get but it's it's in
Plato which is wait you're treating real
like red like you could just say you can
look at an isolated thing and say that's
real but real is a comparative term so
of course is illusion to say this is an
illusion is to say this is an illusion
in comparison in relation to something
that is more real and that thing is in
relation so on and so forth right and
what that means is first of all you have
to see that those judgments are
inherently relational and secondly you
have to call into question the her the
the the
independence of the hermeneutics of
Suspicion the hermeneutics of Suspicion
is actually parasitic on the
hermeneutics of beauty there right it
depends on there being things that we
agree on by saying that's where
appearance
discloses reality rather than distorting
it right and then as soon as you do that
that undercuts the Deep divide because
you ultimately make these divisions
between the one and the many or the
subject and the object by getting a
harmonic of Suspicion into the
appearance reality distinction that's at
least the argument I would make
interesting yeah I I like the I like the
suspicion of
Bess uh in in all of this um it it it
speaks to me and I think it speaks to
people who are interested in active
inference and the notion of sort of
philosophical vagueness as well um at
what point is something real is is
fundamentally a comparative term in the
web of things that could be considered
real um yeah that that that's right yeah
I I I I'm trying to do this without
invoking a binary but um you mentioned
earlier that 4E cognitive scientists do
have their critiques of active inference
um and and predictive processing and I I
will stick with active inference
actually for now and I will explain why
later um it's not that interesting so
this this is people like Tony Camaro or
Ed bags um who who are radical in
activists and what they're critiquing in
a sense is an internalist picture of yes
Act of inference so this is some again
I'm not putting words into people's
mouths but if you read yob how's um 2016
paper about self-
evidencing some of the language May to
some people imply that there is a
homunculus that has a representation or
picture of the world and this to the
ears of a uh inactivist is deeply
worrying I would love to as a fory
cognitive scientist um with obviously
vested interest in predicted processing
as well I'd love to just hear your take
on that debate
and um again without striking at
binaries and whether you think those
critiques are
legitimate well I mean depends what you
mean by legitimate I me you know there's
also the ones that Evan Thompson made
and I hold Evan very hard um I mean
they're legitimate in that they are they
they wellmade arguments in peer-
reviewed journals and so we we have no
right to be dismissive of them well if I
was to say if I was to say that let's
take as an axium of active inference
like this is just um this isn't the case
but let's just say for sake of argument
that you have some um internalist
representations of a statistical model
right so you are in a sense you're not
just embodying a model you actually have
a model so again it comes back to that
distinction we're talking about would a
inactivist critique of that internalism
be um be
justified
um so the reason why I'm hesitating is
this is landing on the swamp of what do
we mean by
representation uh which is I mean
so does the thermostat represent the
temperature in the environment and where
and everything I'm going to say is
controversial because of the swamp so I
want that understood please right I
would say no because what's needed is
right there there might be some cor
there there might be co-variation but at
what I think the critiques of the
co-variation model of representation
locks ultimately model that what did so
we had the idea that representations
have to be similar to what they
represent that's how they represent and
then you have all the problems with
similarity and Aristotle even could
bring that down um and then lock replac
it with the C- variation model to have a
representation is I have something in my
head that reliably co-varies with
something in the world and that's how it
represents it and then the problem with
the coar variations is they don't give
you um the specificity for example of
thought right so this is coar with a
bottle with a tool with a man-made
object like which is it those are not
the same things not those are not the
same ideas but the this is coar and
causally with all of that and you have
you have the problem then of aspectual
isation and and the the loan answer of
course is we get we get aspects by doing
representation but I agree with surl
that that's the wrong way around that
any representation is inherently
aspectual when I represent this as a
bottle I'm only picking up on some of
its properties in so far as they are
relevant to each other in so far as they
are relevant to me so representation
depends on as aspectual isation which
depends on relevance realization and
this is not what you do with relevance
realization you do do not represent all
the facts judge them to be irrelevant
and then zero in so it's ultimately
nonrepresentational so what I would say
is I I don't know that some level
there's something like
representations and but if if I agree
with many arguments that representations
are more than co-variation but there's
this kind of carness and aspect caring
and ASP specialization through them then
they depend on relevance realization
which ground in autopolis and is deeply
intertwined with predictive processing
that would be my argu that would be my
response Splendid and I guess I guess
what intuitively supports a more
representation inist picture is
consciousness um I think Consciousness
is become going to become a recurring
theme in this podcast um well it's the
holy rail right it is it is the Holy
Grail um and so I guess my question here
is is that if one was to adopt a
radically inactivist
view there's nothing in that picture
which um needs Consciousness so why
couldn't my Mutual coupling with the
world just happen with the lights off so
this is a argument I guess that's rooted
in Charmers um 1995 paper which is you
can give me the function but you can't
give me the why why are the lights on
and so I guess in in other words my
question too is yes that we may have
relevance realization um
preceding perception or preced or or or
grounding
perception yeah then why do we have
perception in the first
place so um again I'm gon to give a gist
of an argument that I've spoken about at
length elsewhere and I'm trying to get
published on and I presented at
conferences and so forth so um I don't
think you can separate the function and
the nature questions which is what
traumer hard problem uh relies on is it
yeah yeah you've given me the function
but you telling me nothing about the
nature I don't think function works
ontologically like that I think function
has to be plugged into the ontology and
I think as soon as we're talking about
the ontology of anything within a living
organism we're talking about something
functional so I think the questions have
to be answered interconnected so let's
go let's go back let's say that you give
me that um any cognitive agent has to be
do doing anticipatory relevance
realization or it's not going to be a
general Problem Solver and then when
it's doing that it has to be aspectual
ising its world
right right it's it's not react it's not
doing all of the all of this but this as
a bottle or the molecule as food the
molecule right and then if you then
start to pay attention to
let's look at the Continuum of
Consciousness uh let's look at the
possibility which I have experienced
that's not even the right sentence many
people have and this is Foreman's idea
of something like the pure Consciousness
event and the pure Consciousness event
doesn't
have well actually I need a distinction
here I'm going to claim it doesn't have
one type of qualia but it has another
type of qualia in it it doesn't have
adjectival qualia there's no red there's
no blue there's no cap there's no do
right you're not even conscious of
Consciousness you're just conscious yeah
right but what what it still has is it
still has the adverbial qualia it still
has a sense of
heess noun and the heess is profound
presence that's the language of the you
The nness
Eternity the the the integration right
the togetherness it's everything is one
so all the adverbial qualia are still
there and you still have Consciousness
that shows that the adjectival qualia
are not necessary to Consciousness now I
have other arguments to show they're
probably not sufficient because if I
give you sort of atomic blips of bless
and greenness and they're not bound
together and there's not a heess and a
nness so you can any way Orient on them
I don't think you have Consciousness
either right um so I'm not saying that
adav qualia don't exist I'm saying that
we've held consciousness Hostage to them
yeah and what I'm proposing to you is
that what Consciousness is doing is
these adverbial qualia which are just
right
salience which is just relevance
realization which is as far as we can
tell tied to the best evidence we have
it's all controversial about the
function of Consciousness it's tied up
with working memory and attention which
are both doing higher order relevance
realization we need to seem to need
Consciousness for situations of
complexity novelty or IL definedness
ones that are really demanding on
relevance realization so you can make a
pretty and there's a lot of convergence
actually on what the function of
Consciousness is relevance realization
and I think if you plug in relevance
realization you can at least get all the
adverbial qualia and that I think gives
you a lot of what Consciousness actually
is cool um yeah let's stay on adverbial
qualia because I I'd like to integrate
you've just said with a more active
inference account of Consciousness which
there are and and they they're also
diverse but one well I have to ask a
question before is does
Foreman um say that mindness so um
feeling that this experience is mine
does he is is that one of his verbal
qualia that persists in the pure
Consciousness event so that that's
another Thicket because the debate about
this is a raging debate Evan Thompson
actually has a good Anthology on this on
the self no self debate right right
and I think
it's I think it's
reasonable and complies with most of the
evidence which of course is self-report
after the fact which is problematic blah
blah blah blah I agree with all of that
I'm not dismissing that but that's what
we basically have to go on right now U
that the ego narrative sense of mind and
need and I goes away I whether or not
that is a complete loss
of the self
as as where relevance realization is
happening or something like that yeah um
that that I'm not I'm not convinced that
that second thing is the case okay I
think so if you would allow me and this
is a tortured distinction a distinction
between the ego and the self I think
these experiences very much the ego goes
away I'm very suspicious of the claim
that the self goes away because people
are readily able to recall these
experiences this is what Forman does
report and I would report to you and
seamlessly integrate them into their
autonoetic autobiographical memory there
isn't any weird dis jarring or where was
I during that yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
okay ex and the reason why I ask that is
because um a lot of self-modeling in
active inference is based on the work of
metzinger so Thomas metzinger is such a
wonderful addition to this conversation
so I had a wonderful conversation with
him not that long ago really I love on
my channel amazing I think he's I think
he's such an underrated and important
philosopher thisa totally agree yeah
yeah so he's got this notion of so he
makes a distinction between phenomenal
self modeling and an ontological self so
people intuitively even everyone
listening to this podcast even the way
we act on a day-to-day basis is in lie
of an ontological self so we can't help
but really think of ourselves as being
this Soul this cartisian soul but anyway
met invokes this notion of phenomenal
self modeling how the system appears to
itself and he's got this um minimal
phenomenal self which which has been
unpicked in other ways but he Norm he
speaks generally of presentness mindness
and
perspectival exactly what I've been
talking about y exactly this gets
fleshed out in some of the act of
inflence work people like yob howi um
Carl yob limanowski have used um
metzinger's work for several papers and
then on the other end of that we have
what KL turned an epistemic agent model
which is the self that s um the system
that sees itself as epistemic in the
sense that it can retrieve past memories
to inform future decisions and agentive
in the fact that it can conduct
allostatic action I.E um action to
retain some homeostatic equilibrium
given what it knows about the future so
me putting on a jumper before I go
outside because I know it's going to be
colder outside than it is inside the
reason why I invoke the minimal
phenomenal selfhood is because and Carl
actually outlines this in the podcast we
did together the Consciousness may be
Downstream in a sense on one a deep
temporal model and from that the sense
of agency and he has an argument from um
referring to dimensions um not in terms
of sort of millimeter size but in terms
of um the degree to which you have
embedded Markoff
blankets um that when we're distant from
our actuators what we end up doing is we
have to have a way of distinguishing
what's my action from what's your action
or from what the world how the world has
acted on us and in doing that we come up
with a self- other distinction but also
the notion of an agentive self the idea
that I can change the world in
accordance to my preferences as as I
mentioned beforehand so to sort of
paraphrase KL what that seems to be
suggesting is that Consciousness is
actually rooted in selfhood and I know
there's this whole argument in metzinger
about whether that's the case that's why
I ask whether mindness is also part of
these pure Consciousness events or
whether it's kind of a post talk
inference just wondering whether you had
any ideas about that notion um and
whether we can truly have Consciousness
without at Le the sense of
self right okay so
um uh let me try a few things first of
all um I don't think it's inevitable
that human beings model themselves as
Souls I think that's a western postc
cartisian uh way of and that's even and
and then the Soul as
a uh monatic single substance right I
can put it that way uh you don't that's
not even the case in uh the ancient
world of the West certainly not the case
in other parts of the world Etc so I I I
I hesitate that that's um the claim
that's part of how the Machinery must
unfold sure and then secondly um I I
worry about saying you know that that
that because it isn't a soul there isn't
self this is a weird notion of again of
a substance ontology being just
presupposed in an unquestioned manner I
mean look we've discovered most things
aren't substances this table which would
be a classic arisan substance is not a
substance it's it's a dynamical system
of atoms and quarks and blah and we
don't go oh well because tables aren't
substances they aren't real like that we
don't do that and so I like I I I I I I
just I I want to just note that I'm
worried that there's a substance sure
ontology creeping in here and leading to
certain conclusions now that idea about
uh uh this there's I can't remember the
name of the people uh and I apologize
for that there is a fairly recent Theory
Of Consciousness that trying to respond
to all the liit experiments and things
like that um arguing that well
Consciousness is sort of after the fact
but Consciousness is actually for the
future yeah conscious so the idea here
is consciousness is emerges out of the
evolution of episodic memory so the
function of Consciousness is to allow us
to create an episodic memory of
something we have already done H right
and the point about the episodic memory
is soon as you get into episodic memory
you get into perspectival knowing that's
what an episode is right you have a
perspective right on a situation what
you found salient relevant how your
actions and right and the arena coupled
or didn't couple the affect that all all
of that all of that that's so bound up
with Consciousness and and then and the
point that they make and I totally agree
with this is soon as you agree that
there are multiple kinds of knowing not
just propositional and procedural but
also perspectival and participatory you
get the argument that episodic memory
affords perspectival knowing which
allows you to problems that you can't
solve without perspect knowing you can
pick up on the world the world discloses
itself in ways that it is not otherwise
disclosable to you and then
Consciousness emerges as an
optimization on the formation of
episodic memory so it is optimally
transfer appropriate for the future
right and then you get it is a sense of
agency but it's not a billiard ball
agency yeah it's the it's this kind of
longitudinal agency and to tell you the
truth given the humean critiques that's
actually the kind of agency the self has
it has this kind of
longitudinal uh right agency around
episodes it doesn't have this I'm an
some sort of uncaused cause unmoved
mover Within Myself which I think is
both a ridiculous proposal ontologically
and an and an ethically
undes why would I want such a thing
right like it's completely arbitrary I I
think my life is being lived I'm trying
to change myself so that I am my
thoughts as determined by what is true
my action as determined by what is good
and my uh perception is determined by by
what is beautiful as I possibly can I
would like to lose all my freedom in
that sense um um and so I think if we
move to the right level of analysis and
Gallagher makes a convergence argument
about this that when we're talking about
agency and selfhood we're not talking at
that liit scale we're not talking at
where's the first movement of the
billiard ball chain we're talking more
about no no no how are we building this
longterm virtual engine that enhances
our predictive agency in the world yeah
absolutely and that and Gallagher's work
is very convergent with Thomas matzinger
of course and so this just for our
audience this these arguments and this
notion of the narrativized self is well
fleshed out in active inference
literature um so I could point you yeah
I would probably start with the the fris
and lonowski papers there are two
wonderful papers about self-construction
aactive inference and and then I have a
convergent argument coming out of Daniel
Daniel hudo who is also in the 4E right
the narrative practice hypotheses and he
argues that any mindsight ability any
ability to see in other people's into
other people's mental States you know
attributing beliefs and desires to them
uh
requires well for example if I'm going
to attribute a belief in desire I need
to know something about your character
yeah are you lying or not right I need
to know something about the context the
setting like what's going on in this
situation are you tired is that a small
child so you're not really lying when
you tell them at Christmas time that
there's a Santa Claus right uh right and
and I need to know what the conflict is
what the problem notice what I'm talking
about I need to know all the elements of
narrative right Daniel Judo points out
we practice narrative incessantly and
unlike many of the other things
including language which we scaffold for
children we scaffold narrative for our
our kids I had to sit through the
Teletubbies twice in which you have to
sit through these really impoverished
narratives because we're scaffolding
this up because narrative ability gives
us the right gives us the set of skills
the sets of states of mind with the
perspectives taking therein and the
traits of character that allow us to
pick up on other people's mental States
and I think that is also a function of
the S the function of selves is to make
us entally predictive to each other
right exactly exactly and there's
another there's another convergent
argument in Act of inference which is
that um only in the context of other
people like you would you ever come to
the inference that there is something
that is like to be you like
yeah yeah if you were cones with voty
that converges with the whole votan
approach to the development of
metacognition and self-awareness which I
think is right right right right and of
course um your colleague at um just
pointing people in different directions
your colleague at Toronto or former
colleague J Peterson um yeah has a whole
uh literature on literature and
narrative and he has a conversation with
car on his podcast which is um deeply
intriguing about these kind of
alignments of the free energy principle
and and narrative John I wanted to also
speak about flow States
um you've written about flow as yes the
sort of locus of implicit learning um as
you know I've just been writing up a
paper on Flow um from an active
inference perspective so I'd love to be
able to sort of see maybe where we align
where we don't align and and try and
sort of unpick that just as a for
warning my paper the paper that I've
written with my co-authors is not out
yet but it should be coming out soon um
so I want to I have not yet read your
paper because you you suggested waiting
uh yes the pap paper's gone through um
modifications as papers are want to
do it's in the final stages so you have
access to it so so please feel free to
read it I will read it then I will read
it I can give a I can give a very brief
overview so to not disadvantage you um
my the basic thesis of the basic
perspective that we take on the paper is
about self modeling underlow States so
that's the main thing that we're looking
at and the attenuation of an epistemic
agent model because what we're arguing
is that certain Precision weighting
mechanisms are lending its
are leading the organism to undertake
pragmatic action seeking out pragmatic
affordances um rather than engaging in
what Carl or other offers would call
epistemic
in now I think where we might have a
point of difference here is that I have
a section on Flow States and learning
and I think this is a really interesting
point because your paper speaks about
implicit learning whereas I'm and and
this and to to make it transparent this
is there are I've heard different
perspectives on this but my current
opinion is that in flow States what
you're getting is a reinforcement of the
skills that you actually um picked up
through epistemic work work so I have
the example of a violinist the violinist
must undergo a certain period of
exploration of epistemic foraging which
comes with this kind of selft talk this
real prominence of myself as a knowing
thinging yeah right and then what it
does is over time through learning you
get high Precision um over the beliefs
about that action in terms of the
technical detail and then that becomes
kind of the foundation on which you can
NE then go into do more epistemic work
and then that become and then that
expertise development is stepwise in a
sense I mean you can picture it either
way but critically and where we differ
is that I'm arguing that actually in the
moment of flow itself you're just
garnering more evidence for the
capacities and the policies that you
already
have so I'd like to start there and see
and see what you think of that
claim um so we as you point out uh for
our Aran herob benedi we argue um
something different um which is why
you're bringing it up uh we argue that
um um that learning is inevitably
occurring even in the flow situation and
so there's Improvement um and that's why
if the environment doesn't have the
capacity to renew uh its challenges on
you you will very quickly fall out of
the Flow State so the argument is well
why don't you just stay in the Flow
State well the argument is because
eventually you get a Mastery over the
environment um which means your skills
start to exceed the demands and so
phenomenologically when I'm in the Flow
State like in sparring or lecturing um
I'm finding tremendous amount of insight
and Innovation uh coming out
um now this is where it might get tricky
um because is procedural Innovation a
restructuring of especially uh is that a
restruct in of um uh your information
and therefore have new capacities in it
new emergent abilities or is it just a
reinforcement and I don't this we might
get into thesis's ship here which is
going be problematic uh
but the one of the defining
phenomenological features of the Flow
State and I'm uh I want to be clear I'm
not pinning you down on this but I do
think it's relevant evidence is ongoing
sense of Discovery there's a sense of
Discovery there there's a sense of
coming to know things you did not know
before and of course when the flow state
is in much more comprehensive expertise
not like with playing tennis or maybe
like just your optimal gripping on the
world people come to think they have
learned something deeply profound uh
about reality so I tend to think that
there's evidence for transformative
learning happening up and Beyond just
reinforcement learning
okay yeah I I I like the return to the
phenomena um you know draus has this
phrase which I will definitely use over
and over again in this podcast which is
when in doubt return to the phenomena um
the way that we have cast it is that
there's this idea in the literature
about a hyper prior that the world is
changing so that we have a prior that
the world is changing and that is
adaptive for us because we don't get
stuck in the same free energy Minima now
if that H PRI is always at Play ends up
happening Downstream on that is that my
inference about my own abilities
deteriorates over time and we and we we
experience that I guess I mean like if I
play tennis today and then I play tennis
in a week's time I'm probably going to
have less Fidelity in my own capacities
in a week's time than I do if I play
tomorrow having follow today yeah yeah
and so our argument is that the positive
affect that's part of the flow state is
Downstream on the surprise that's
generated when you actually violate that
hyper prior that the world is changing
because what you're getting evidence for
is that your policy still work in the
world that you would have beener you
would have thought didn't lend itself to
your policies working and there's this
idea um Casper hp's paper and his
co-authors in 2021 that affect in active
inference is about um basically your
model doing better than you thought it
would do um and and this actually comes
a lot into what Mark talks about in
terms of aerodynamics so I'm wondering
whe yeah well I don't know yeah yeah
yourself well see I I think that's right
I think and and and the problem of
course is you can get an infinite
regress so well I'll say well the mod
the the things here and you'll say well
there needs to be something a a hyper
prior behind that and then we can that's
what I mean about thesis is ship yeah
yeah yeah so again I would say well what
what are you getting better at and what
you're getting better at I would argue
is um not St like so
expertise is generally built around like
uh giving you a well like a specific
domain we can talk about um the
possibility of sort of meta expertise if
we want but what I mean by that is once
you've got expertise you've gotten
really good at within a certain domain
at formulating the problems you're
fronting as for you well- defined
problems uh that's one way in which an
expert is sort of reliably different
from a novice a novice goes in this is
to find problem the expert goes goes in
and say no it's this problem and this is
the right what you need to do this and
this and this and this and this okay so
we agree with that but I think what's
happening right and and maybe this is
the gray area between your position in
mind I think what's happening is we're
discovering new ways in which we can
turn well-defined problem sorry
ill-defined States into well-defined
problems we're going something like I
didn't realize I could adapt to that
situation but I can and and that sounds
similar uh but for me that's that's an
Insight experience uh and that's what
like it's an Insight flow because you're
you're you're getting an extension of
your cognitive capacity because you have
restructured what you take to be the
like your abil your your problem
formulation of the world that's
that's yeah I mean to supplement that I
I actually I I don't disagree um on that
note but the way I would formulate that
and this actually isn't the paper it's
in the paper in some sense but it's not
a fully fleshed out argument because it
wasn't hyper relevant I'm glad there's
another really quality paper on Flow
coming there not there's really there's
really nothing um when we published the
paper we were literally the only paper
talking about the cognitive processes
that work in flow I I yeah it's it's a
it's a bizarre one um there's very
little on skillful coping generally
within yeah Cog science but as I said I
think that's why I said there should be
more phenomenology active or cognitive
science convergence what what we kind of
mentioned in brief Is That Flow if we
take the sort of macro perspective on
what flow is it can also be this kind of
humming between the pragmatic and the
epistemic boundary yes so maybe when
you're realizing oh I can reframe this
um kind of uh perplexing problem as
actually something manageable what
you're doing there is maybe just
slightly exiting the flow doing some
epistemic foraging returning because
something I want to make really clear to
everyone listening as
well the when we talk about epistemic
action and pragmatic action in terms of
expected free energy or active inference
it's not like the agent goes I'm doing
pragmatic action right now and doing
right it's all part of the actual maths
right so if you looked at the maths it's
like firstly you can do a bit of both
right at the same time like that that's
a thing but it's also like the action
policies that we're talking about here
John and I these are not protracted
seven hours of just like pragmatic
action no no these have to be very
temporally thinn because the world is
volatile right the world is constantly
changing and so you have to be able to
not just pin all your hopes or put all
your eggs in one basket in terms of an
action
policy and so actually fundamentally our
Divergence might well be a semantic
thing which is that I'm very much about
the synchronic nature being in flow
right now and like I have for for I have
that boundary between pragmatic and
epistemic whereas if you take a kind of
more macro perspective as that flow
State as the conto unfolds you could be
humming at that boundary and doing
learning as well yeah I I I I really
look forward to your paper because I
think that sounds like actually a
powerful way in which the theories could
be integrated uh together um I'm also
interested in a question that's emerging
out of this dis well I I've already been
interested in the question but it
emerges out of what we're talking about
because I'm interested because I I think
there's there might be an additional
thing
um because there's you can flow in a in
a situation and it doesn't transfer it
doesn't transfer to other domains video
game addiction is the classic Model you
can flow in the game you can't flow in
the world so you get depressed in the
world you can flow in the game and so
you want to stay in the game more and
more and more uh that for that's very
different than how I flow in Tai Chan ta
Chan in fact other people pointed this
out in me the the the flow states that I
cultivate in taichan I can they are
cultivated in such a way that they
transfer broadly and deeply to many
other domains and I'm interested in the
this this this this sort of ritual
framework because what what you get is
this ritual and this philosophical
framework dosm and other e other
practices and ecology practices around
so that it broadens um like it transfers
in powerful ways and and I'm wondering
um what the differences are and also if
how does that show up is there a
phenomenological difference there I mean
so now really really really weakly
anecdotally right uh in terms of
phenomenological practice I do get a
sense of a difference when between when
I'm just flowing and when I'm flowing in
a ritual
context so if I enter into a violin Hall
and like let's say I'm an expert in
playing the violin and I see a crowd and
I see my violin and I see the whole
stage what I end up getting is this um
so habits are quite well codified within
active inference you get this kind of
contextual cue that like in layman's T
although this is we're saying this isn't
happening propositionally it's time for
me to play the violin and this can look
like Precision over beliefs about your
own action so what this is again not
something I've thought about necessarily
with any depth because this is just
something that you've brought up I'm I'm
wondering whether that contextual cue
what you're happening when you're doing
taichi and then maybe what you're doing
when you're lecturing is that your your
your system is seeing similarities in
that in the contexts and doing similar
Precision waiting in otherwi in in a
separate do in a separate domain yeah I
think that's right and I think what
philosophical Frameworks do is they
reverse engineer that they try to uh
find out what might be similar or maybe
even invariant across many contexts and
then build that back into the specific
context in which you are doing the
practice to exactly afford that transfer
appropriate processing I think that's
right I think there's something else
also going on with the queuing and this
goes into apter's meta motivational
theory we can be e we can be broadly
speaking we frame our arousal in two
different ways when we're in a telic
mode and we're working towards an some
where where where the reward is found in
the external goal then increased effort
is experienced as frustration and and
then and then increases too much I get
anxiety but I mean if I'm doing
something where the goal is the behavior
itself like making love or doing poetry
then the increased not infinitely
obviously but the increased arousal is
framed as positive as excitement right
right right right uh and so I think also
and so after talks about safety uh
safety framing right let's it's called
the first atelic Mode work and the um
the paratelic mode um um play and I
think ritual has to do with serious play
and I've got a whole argument about that
yeah but I think also what what you're
doing in the context is you're you're
trying to cue people into the play mode
uh because the play mode allows them to
model themselves their arousal as
positive rather than as negative and
that allows them and I think there's a
deep connection between this par AIC
Framing and chick sahi I think accurate
claim that flow is autotelic doing it
for its own sake right yeah yeah yeah
cool yeah I I like the notion of effort
here recognize that one of the
fundamental factors or fundamental
characteristics of flow is uh perceived
effortlessness yes even though you can
even though you can have sort of very uh
peripheral cues that you might be
expending a lot of metabolic energy
exactly right um and just for the given
this is the active inference institutes
podcast just for those interested in the
computational framing of that within
active inference Thomas par has got a
paper out this year on cognitive effort
and active inference so that gives a
kind of nice computational modeling
picture of that which actually leads me
to a much broader question because I
know we're we haven't got too much more
time which is I've noticed in myself to
be totally candid that I've started like
I I learned about flow and sixcess M
through you and and through other people
but mainly as a philosophical notion um
and now I'm viewing it as a
computational notion yes yeah do you
worry about that do you worry that if we
rely too much on comput not not just
computational models but maths physics
we in some ways reduce the phenomena in
a way that's detrimental not just
because it's not romantic or that it's
but like that we're missing something
fundament
well it depends I mean that's a really
important question we could do two hours
on just that question uh but if you
think that a leveled ontology is
actually the way ontology is um uh that
the level at which we do science is as
ontologically real as the quantum level
we discover when we're doing science and
I think you have to come to that
conclusion and I have extended Arguments
for that elsewhere then uh there's then
you can make a clean philosophical
distinction between explaining a way and
a reductive fashion and explaining that
actually enriches your appreciation for
the phenomena uh now if the
computational St the computational stuff
to my mind well let's say what the
argument we were just exploring um has
Merit then notice what we're saying
we're saying well what the computational
modeling actually does is actually shows
why this sometimes very obscure
philosophical framework is really
important yeah it's actually doing some
really important work and you can't get
rid of it you can't dispense with it and
and and and and that would mean that
kind of some of the stuff we're doing
where we're trying to commodify flow and
take it out of those those Frameworks
you know and do the thing we do and you
know sell books and right um it's
actually Mis misrepresenting the
phenomena in a in a in a way that we can
philosophically and scientifically
critique and say wait wait right this
phenomena has the power it has because
chick s mahai said it's an evolutionary
market for adaptivity and then well
making it adaptive is how broadly and
deeply is it transferring out of the
situation and then the philosophical
framework really matters to what it is
and how it functions and so if you if
you can make a distinction and you need
an ontological distinction to make this
distinction but if you can make a
distinction between explaining and
explaining away then then I think it's
possible to say no no when I do these
things and and to be fair to me Dar I
get a lot of people who you know from
various religious and spiritual
backgrounds and they come in and they
say thank you so much for your work I
now I much better
appreciate this this experience or that
experience or the Flow State or this
mystical State because you didn't try
and tell me it's nothing but you Tred to
say this is what it's doing and this is
why you like it and value it so much but
do you think your
work to kind of yeah to to look at that
personal vantage point do you think
you've managed to keep like because if I
without being sort of embarrassingly
lording people should watch Awakening
from the meaning crisis um not only for
the content but also just the way you
present it which is just so magical um
so thanks I mean it's it's really
inspired a lot of the way that I think
science should be done and philosophy
should be done what what is it about I
think you know anyone who watches that
recognizes there's something kind of
special going on on there the ideas are
living through you you're they're
breathing through you you're breathing
through them there's this really
beautiful cut pling again we'll come
back to that between you and the
ideas what what is it about that kind of
symphasis of the philosophy and the sort
of more hard cognitive science do you
think made that project so
successful I suppose it's a view of the
role of cognitive science what cognitive
science is doing
um I think what cognitive science does
is
it's well I'll try and do it sort of
narratively uh uh and I do this in the
series I think you know the even the
notion of Mind we've been invoking mind
and cognition is equivocal uh because it
means one thing to the neuroscientists
who's studying the brain and looking at
uh neurons and an iCal networks and
perhaps functional networks it means a
different thing to the artificial
intelligence person who's building
algorithms and
puristic um and doing reinforcement
learning and blah blah means a different
thing to the psychologists who's
studying human behavior with experiments
and running stats and they talk about
working memory they don't talk so much
right and it means a different thing to
the linguists and a different thing to
the cultural Anthropologist by the way I
include them because they were the
people that have been studying
distributed cognition and collective
intelligence they matter yeah um now if
you think about it on this analogy it's
like there're different countries
speaking different languages and here's
the thing that has great value
specialization has great value I'm not
dismissing that I am not dismissing that
but each one of these is talking about a
different level and here's what I think
I would State as a very plausible claim
I think it's unlikely that these levels
in reality the brain information
processing behavioral linguistic
sociocultural levels are independent
from each other I think they causal
influence and constrain each other so we
are missing something important about
the Mind by right not getting clear
about the relationship between these
levels we can be equivocating and we are
we have a fragmented notion if we don't
capture the relations of constraint and
causation between these different levels
of cognition and mind and so I think the
proper function of cognitive science is
to use philosophy's skills of creating
bridging discourses creating bridging
conceptual right uh vocabulary
theoretical grammar so that these
different disciplines can talk to each
other in reciprocally reconstructive
ways as a way of converging on the
causal and constraint relationships
between the levels rather than trying to
compete or say the bottom level is the
only real real level so that for me they
all live together they are doing and I'm
sorry to invoke it again they're doing
opponent processing between each other U
and that's how that's that's what that's
that's what inhabits me when I'm doing
cognitive science that Vision I call it
synoptic integration yeah it's well it's
wonderful to see um so so I mean like I
think we I that's the cognitive
scientist that I'm aspiring to be um I
think you've called it a big picture
cognitive scientist as well yes and one
of the things one of the and I felt very
lonely for a while you know I I was
doing relevance realization which is a
big picture and then to my great Delight
another big picture for EOD side down
the and then to my even greater
happiness another big picture came down
the road which is you know the
predictive processing framework and I
think they are more convergent than op
uh adversarial and I well you've heard
me arguing about how we can integrate
them together excellent yeah yeah I
would say maybe it's just bias active
inference or pric processing is a big
picture cognitive scientist from from
the physics and the maths all the way
what what we're trying to do to the
phenomena to what it is like to be a to
be a human being to have conversations
like this John it's um I it was you know
I can't say it was better than I
expected because I knew it was going to
be wonderful but um you're full of just
thrilling insights and speaking to you
listening to you is always such a
wonderful learning experience where that
happen happens in flow or without flow
um but I just wanted to thank you so
very much for I know you're extremely
busy um but for giving us your time
where can people find you what have you
got coming up um I'm sure people are
curious so the most immediate thing for
this conversation um is the talk I gave
at lien on the predicted processing
Symposium it's up on my channel I think
it's the second most recent video on my
channel on YouTube you can put in
yeah where I I I try to go into the nuts
and bolts of how you could integrate uh
predictive processing and relevance
realization Theory together so people
might find that and I've got a lot of
good feedback on that uh for being sort
of clear clear and and a good argument
um so I would recommend that when people
are interested in uh the the the the
broader implications of this um
Awakening for the meeting crisis and
then after Socrates also after Socrates
is where I take all of this in all of
this stuff and well how do you turn it
into practices in order to overcome
self-deception and enhance relevance
realization become more wise and
virtuous um and so they can take a look
there um the arguments around
neoplatonism um there are several videos
around that how I've tried to connect
neoplatonism to for eoai and relevance
realization of predicted processing as
as we saw in this podcast but in the
neoplatonism I'm working on my third big
series
um walking the philosophical Silk Road
which will be on Zen neoplatonism trying
to see if we can bring an integration an
opponent processing not an adversarial
one an oppon of processing between Zen
and neoplatonism to give us a rich
philosophical framework by which like
the philosophical road we could trade
ideas and move between worlds without um
having to descend into well tribalism
and other such things wonderful
wonderful
well again it was absolutely my pleasure
I apologize I've got a slight cold so if
I've been a little sniffly or nasal oh
no we can blame it on the we can blame
it on the London weather but um I'd love
to have you back on at some point um
your your work is is truly inspiring so
thank you so much John for me and The
Institute thank you darus I'm happy to
come back on and you know if it if it
turns out that you know Mark and I come
on together that would be thrilling as
well great we will definitely get that
sorted all right thank you thank you
thank you for watching this YouTube and
podcast series is by the Veri Foundation
which in addition to supporting my work
also offers courses practices workshops
and other projects dedicated to
responding to the meaning crisis if you
would like to support this work please
consider joining our patreon you can
find the link in the show notes
