lately The Internet's been swarming with
questions regarding today's youngest
generation is Jen Alpha doomed and
they're inclass Behavior I've had a
student throw chairs at me and shoes
because I asked them to get their math
book out but they didn't want to that's
right Jen Alpha along with their older
cohort Jen Z aren't currently on the
best of terms with the education system
bro imagine going to school bro I mean I
went for a few years but like that was
trash and from severe learning gaps
these kids they can't even answer
questions about themselves when I tell
you that these babies cannot read they
cannot write and they cannot comprehend
I'm not being funny I'm being dead
serious to a dangerous lack of
discipline come to my what come to my
iare what's going to happen I dare you
I've had enough of this this punishment
stuff is going to stop you're not going
to tell me what I'm going to do and not
do I am now the alpha educators are now
exiting the profession at a staggering
rate godamn but who is to blame teachers
what me teach English grammar to
students with Subway Surfers gameplay in
the background parents if you are not
ready to admit that there's a problem
here we cannot get anywhere near even
talking about the solutions or something
else a student today accidentally called
me me Alexa first we need to understand
how we got this far Generations a group
of people that come to Define an era in
time such as the post-war Baby Boom or
the rise of the Millennium as it stood
Jen Z was the youngest demographic born
after 1997 zalas though highly debated
stands somewhere between 2009 and 2010
babies then came Jen Alpha a group of
Tikes born after 2012
and like all new generations they Mark a
shift the young are now old what are
your thoughts on Millennials I mean it's
pretty fire I wish I got to go back and
meet some of my ancestors the trendy now
played out if you have a popsocket on
the back of your phone you should take
it off and throw it away or burn it
because popsockets are the skinny jeans
of phone accessories and the slang now
incomprehensible compared to the
groovies and sleigh of yester year what
is a with what what on Earth is I'm
sorry what and likely for good reason
stands for um it stands for a girl
your booty thick but as we struggle to
understand the rituals and practices of
these tiny seemingly alien life forms
madlit on God madl on God on God no cap
now we know that Riz is Jin Z for
someone who has Charisma Charisma the
rizzler is the is the stand standard
bearer of Riz it's the it's the most
charismatic person that you
know Jen Alpha and in turn some of gen Z
have been struggling to meet the
expectations so easily succeeded by
previous
generations oh my God your year starts
with 19 you're so
old Spell
necessary shut up yep according to the
current and former Educators sounding
the alarm Bells across social media the
kids most definitely are not all right
in fact it's seems the very fundamentals
of learning that were once so easily
molded into elastic young minds just
start sticking forward these days like
I'm not even trying to be funny but
these kids
are I'm going just say this I teach
seventh grade they are still performing
on the fourth grade
level and from reading
comprehension I could ask them who was
the main character of your story the
story that of four paragraph story we
just read can't tell you they don't know
they don't know it took
us four weeks four weeks to get through
how to answer a question in the complete
sentence to basic information like I
just had a session today where I asked
the student like what their date of
birth was the student had no idea when
their birthday was did not know what
year they were born what used to be
considered common knowledge for students
Isn't So automatic for kids and teens
today the first thing that really
shocked me was the fact that I had to
tell so many students to write their
name on their paper like and then when
they did they would only write their
first name no last name no date no
period they were in none of that but
whether you're from Gen X Y Z or a one
thing that should be common knowledge
among all of us is that region locked
shows on streaming services are annoying
if you've ever been told that friends is
on Netflix only to search for it and
come up with nothing but a suggestion to
watch Seinfeld instead you're not being
lied to friends is on Netflix just not
your Netflix but don't worry all you
have to do is sign up with our friends
at today's sponsor surf shark and with
the click of a button you're browsing
Netflix from Britain and have access to
every single one of the episodes of
friends from the one where it all began
to the last one and remember when
Netflix allegedly got rid of the office
a few years back well that's just what
they wanted you to think meanwhile it's
been keeping calm and carrying on over
the British Netflix this whole time but
if for some reason you wanted to subject
yourself to the British version of the
office which is essentially just the so
cringe it's almost hard to watch first
season of the American office but for a
whole TV show you'll ironically have to
leave the UK and come over and join us
here in Canada where we have the CBC gem
streaming service only available to
people in Canada unless you're using
surf shark which allows you to instantly
switch between servers in over 100
countries and regardless which country
you choose to browse from surf shark's
encrypted VPN tunnel allows you to
browse the web anonymously your internet
provider will only see that you're
accessing surf shark servers and the
website you're visiting will only see
that you're an unidentifiable surf shark
user so if you're looking to enjoy the
internet without the drama surf shark is
an amazing option and if you click the
link in the description and use promo
code spill te you can get three extra
months free while also being a key part
of our journey assisting our channel in
creating more of your favorite content
now let's get back to the big issue this
brings us to the first subject of who is
to blame the teachers are they just as
responsible as their students for their
ignorance well according to Educators
themselves no they aren't after all
they're just working with what they're
given which currently happens to be
student bodies with years of accumulated
gaps in knowledge and while teachers
have adapted to their students skill
sets by lowering their expectations and
adjusting their assignments we are
absolutely still writing essays or or
trying to it's just heavily modified
because they can't do it there's no
simple fix to this problem or the
Vicious Cycle it's created see Educators
might spend an entire school year
addressing the gaps in their classroom
from previous years only for the school
system to allow these children to
advance to the next grade despite being
completely unprepared prepared they just
keep passing them on passing them on
passing them on passing them on passing
them on passing them I can put as many
zos in this gra book as I want to they
going to move that child to the eth
grade next year and the biggest hurdle
teachers are now facing well that would
be the seemingly growing number of
students that can't read y'all the
literacy rates right now are insane kids
aren't reading they're not recognizing
letters they're not recognizing letter
sounds
this is going to go much deeper than we
think it's going to go and she's right
when it comes to reading issues well it
turns out having to wait for the movie
is just the tip of the iceberg that's
because illiteracy is the gateway to a
host of other problems including further
cognitive issues a heightened risk of
dropping out of school and criminal
activity according to a 2012 report in
the US Department of Justice but when it
comes to the opposed reading struggles
of today's students perhaps this isn't a
problem with teachers enter the second
subject of who is to blame the school
curriculum see for decades various
schools across the American education
system have been working with theories
for teaching reading that have already
been debunked by cognitive scientists
one of these theories is the three
queuing system which involves students
using context clues when they come
across an unfamiliar word like the
drawing it might appear under in a book
what makes you good readers cuz I look
at the pictures and I read it another
approach is the whole word system which
relies on repeatedly exposing children
to words until they know them by memory
from what I can see from my classrooms
and my experience with my band kids is
that they are learning words by sight
they're learning and memorizing what
those words look like and this works
until they come across words that they
haven't seen before a doio not a super
long word not a really complicated
combination of letters but because the
child had never seen that word before in
their life they had no concept of what
it looked like they could not have it
memorized in their Banks already and so
when they would try to reproduce it and
they could not phonetically spell it out
or they could not reproduce those
letters in the correct order by any
measure of degree of accuracy they were
literally making up shapes um or making
up words or making up symbols or writing
symbols that weren't even letters during
this time tried and tested systems like
phonics AKA good oldfashioned sounding
words fell to the Wayside now we have
over 50 years of research including a
panel conducted by the US Congress in
1999 that is proven that phonic is
absolutely necessary to literacy
learning recently American school boards
have begun embracing phonics again
however the after effects of the three
queuing and whole word systems are hard
to dispute as students that were guided
using these theories might be able to
read but often not very well in fact in
2023 it was reported that us reading and
math scores amongst 13-year-olds had
dropped to their lowest levels since the
1970s but then again a curriculum can
only account for so much and when it
comes to the root cause for the extent
of gen Alpha and Jen Z struggles well
according to Educators the call is
coming from inside the house which
brings us to the third subject of who is
to blame the parents for an attendance
question the other day I asked my
students what's one thing you believed
as a child for far too long kid Wan goes
that my parents loved and cared for me
why don't y'all know that y'all kids not
performing on that great level why y'all
don't know this honestly we have sat
down in meetings where parents are
crying and who is to blame for this
where are these kids getting this from
we got to do something and I love y'all
but it can't only be the teachers doing
it yes as the feedback from teachers
suggest Jen alphas and Jen Z's aversions
to education isn't innate it's learned
I'm talking to parents if you are not
ready to to admit that there's a problem
here we cannot get anywhere near even
talking about the solutions the
Assumption goes as follows parents who
are working long hours to make ends meet
in an inhospitable economy have let
screen time make up for their lack of
presence in their children's lives as
for the cost of this Limitless access to
technology well it hasn't exactly set
the youth up for Success these iPad kids
getting out of control
what what's going to
happen excessive electronic use by these
so-called iPad kids has altered their
development stunting their social skills
and academic performance according to
studies instead unrestricted Time online
has created students that can't operate
professionally in a classroom
environment Miss Chella you've been
working on your
meu what Your meu the problem that I
have with Mee in the class classroom and
at school is that kids are using it as a
way to be disrespectful to their
teachers without their teachers
understanding what it is they're doing
and to the fascination dismay and horror
of older Generations seem disconnected
from IRL learning a student today
accidentally called me Alexa after all
according to teachers it's not that
these kids aren't capable it's that they
don't care to be they don't care you
know they have their phones it fixes
things for them everybody around them is
in the same spot so they don't
understand how behind they are if
everybody around you is sucking at you
don't know that you're sucking at and it
turns out academics well they just don't
provide the same dopamine Rush as
watching a 6-second video hitting a like
button or getting a follow back and
while teachers have done their best to
capture their students low attention
spans through some Innovative
approaches 1 2 3
me thank you look at me look at me you
sometimes I do like memes on my slides
to like get their attention even using a
popular Tik Tok tactic that people have
dubbed as over stimulation videos or
sludge content targeted towards those
with dopamine receptors burnt to a crisp
what me teach English grammar to
students with Subway Surfers gameplay in
the background today the students
weren't on their phones distracted they
were listening to me and watching the
screen we tried Minecraft Paro in slime
making videos but Subway Surface came
out on top other Educators seem to have
lost hope it's going to get worse isn't
it an alleged teacher recently asked in
a now viral post on the teacher
subreddit expanding on the reasons for
their pessimism they explained they
teach 9 to 12 Ela and despite allowing
students to boost their grades with
revisions offering open book tests and
even even explicitly telling them what's
important to write down the kids have no
interest in their
education I became a teacher to help
build resiliency in our kids and show
them how to be problem solvers and
assets to our community at large the
user wrote but between the apathy the
lack of structure at home and the I'm
going to be my child's best friend play
it becomes extra challenging almost
every kid tells me they don't go to bed
until 1:00 a.m. but that they're in bed
by 9:00 and more than half show up in
their pajamas wrapped in fleece blankets
clutching their Starbucks Stanley but
leaving everything but their uncharged
laptops at home is this going to be our
new normal naturally testimonies from
Educators like this have sparked concern
online about parenting the teacher said
the one thing that all the kids have in
common is that they don't care if this
is true is this not the biggest problem
we're facing as a culture our kids don't
care about life should we not stop
everything we're doing and figure out
how to take better care of our kids but
apathy is one issue disrespect respect
is another having to teach and work with
you guys' children has been the most
traumatic experience of my life yes
another drawback of Limitless screen
time kids that can't regulate their
emotions impaired with parents who
seemingly don't see the issue well it's
a dynamic the internet can't help
speculating on here's what I think I
think the Millennials raising this
generation who were raised by Boomers
and Gen X themselves are trying to
overcorrect the way they were raised
they were probably very disciplined L
and hated it and vowed to never do the
same thing to their own kids it feels
like a lot of these parents are trying
to find an easy way out of parenting so
they handed their kids iPads to make
them shut up never implemented any rules
or guidance because they didn't know how
and blamed their socially inept child's
disrespectful behavior on teachers not
understanding and who does that leave to
discipline Jen Alpha and gen Z teachers
they're not going to hire you they're
not going to hire you because you can't
listen to anybody you can always just go
no you want to bet McDonald's does
doesn't just hire anybody they do no
don't
anyone
McDonald's has standards that you have
to meet if you can't even make it
through sixth grade they're not going to
hire you at McDonald's and unfortunately
when it comes to the constant talking
back I've had enough of
this this punishment stuff is going to
stop you're not going to tell me what
I'm going to do and not do I am now the
alpha bra how this
works I am the teacher the alpha takes
priority over the teacher the alpha
takes priority over everything do you
not know how that works the teacher is
telling the alpha to sit in his seat
right now and apathy these educators are
facing on a daily basis gen ZZ students
are completely unhinged I'm about to
show you a clip from Midway through a
students presentation I can't make this
up added a video to the slideshow click
epic link
here many have reached their Breaking
Point told you what to
doou I about to touch you godamn phone
even come to that it would even come to
it you do what you supposed to do don't
say anything else to
me don't you come cry I'm so surprised
well actually I'm not surprised by the
amount of support that are in the
comment for that teacher for someone to
be pushed to the point of yelling like
that in a professional setting like his
entire livelihood his money his dignity
was on the line and he threw it all out
the window that means something either
that guy is not very mentally stable
which I don't know him but from what
I've seen the fact that he's in that
classroom tells me that he was extremely
and utterly disrespected however
teachers aren't just facing disrespect
from their students they're also facing
rage while Most states don't track data
related to assaults on teachers since
the return to in-person learning in 2021
there's been numerous reports of
violence against Educators in the
American school system and the
perpetrators of these attacks they're
doting students yep according to claims
and Risk Management Services firm
Gallagher betet from September to May
2022 there's been a 5-year high in
assault related workers compensation
claims from about 2,000 schools in
different regions of the us we are
witnessing the highest levels of
frequency severity and complexity for
these kinds of assault claims when
compared to the last four complete
school calendar years Greg McKenna
public sector practice leader at
Gallagher bassette told the Wall Street
Journal in 2023 in fact the circumstance
ances have become so bad that new and
old teachers alike are leaving their
positions teachers of all ages are
quitting their job because of the
behavior of gen Alpha
students you
quit anybody I don't know who you people
think you are but you don't treat
anybody like this people are laughing
yeah I'm going to go I don't even care
if I don't get paid
today not funny
that's
all no way
start yeah do whatever you want to do I
don't care going to do it
anyway I'm walking I'm walking right out
the door I won't ever be back they're
tired of dealing with the violence
they're tired of dealing with the apathy
they're tired of dealing with parents
who are making excuses and fighting them
all the way through the process and what
appears to be a mass Exodus of Educators
is currently underway I quit teaching
gen Z but apparently J Alpha is just as
hard I've
had a
student throw chairs at
me and
shoes because I asked them to get their
math book out and turn to the page that
we were working on but they didn't want
want to 10 Lamar High School is
investigating the disturbing video that
shows a student punching a teacher in
the head today in this clip a student
gets in front of a teacher's face
demanding to get his phone seconds later
he punches the teacher in the face 20
years ago um you wouldn't hear the same
types of things that you hear in a
classroom today from students I've had
to deal with second graders throwing
chairs punching walls walking out of my
classroom at at the end of the day I
feel like I'm no longer a teacher I'm no
longer an educator I feel like I'm a
glorified babysitter it's like a five
alarm fire right now Becky Pringle
president of the National Education
Association told CNN on the current
teacher shortage affecting schools
across the US this is not new but like
everything else the pandemic made it
worse and that brings us to the fourth
and final subject of who is to blame an
issue that no teacher curriculum or
parent can fully address
covid-19 it was only 4 years ago that
schools began shutting their doors in
the face of the burgeoning pandemic
shortly after that remote learning took
over however it's only through hindsight
we can see the devastating consequences
this decision had when it came to gen
alphas and gen Z's formative Education
data from around the country is starting
to show that middle and high school
students are falling behind this week
Fairfax County Public Schools in
Virginia reported an 83% jump in middle
and high schoolers earning FS this year
compared to last year sometimes it it's
really hard to just be motivated to like
actually get on the zooms and to do the
work just because I feel like it doesn't
even matter it feels like we're not
really learning in person you could talk
to your teacher and it would be way more
easier to learn better National tests
exposed that during the pandemic over
two decades of progress in math and
reading were completely erased in
9-year-old school children and other age
groups have shown similar post-pandemic
declines if those numbers don't start
going back up what is at risk for this
generation everything unfortunately the
toll remote learning took on students
persists to this day and that means kids
are stuck playing a NeverEnding game of
catchup when it comes to making up those
Lost Years those kids are not where the
other kids were a couple of years ago
the gaps are widening those kids who
were behind are even more behind yep it
turns out a pandemic isn't something
kids can simply bounce back from
unaffected for children this pandemic is
going to have a very very long tale it's
not a light switch the way it may be for
you and me especially when it overlapped
key developmental phases the oldest gen
Alpha are what 13 so the oldest children
who went through the pandemic in gen
Alpha were 10 a lot of them were younger
their whole lives were upended of course
they're behind on reading of course
they're behind in social emotional
growth of course they are acting younger
than they are as for Gen Alpha and gen Z
screen time according to research
supported by the National Institutes of
Health and published in the journal
Pediatrics that too never recovered from
the pandemic and has instead remain high
since restrictions were lifted and when
it comes to the effects of excessive
screen time in children listed by Mayo
Clinic including behavior problems
delays in language and social skills
development violence and attention
problems it's not hard to connect this
to the issues that are currently
plaguing the student bodies of various
schools today in fact in 2022 over 80%
of us Public Schools reported that the
pandemic had negatively impacted student
behavior and social emotional
development on top of this growing
classroom sizes and a lack of support
means these students are missing the
extra attention they desperately need
the worst part as a teacher is seeing
these kids suffer and not being able to
give them what they need we can only do
so much we have 30 kids in a class all
with different needs and diagnosises and
we we can't keep up it's completely
unsustainable leaving members of the
notoriously underpaid understaffed and
undervalued profession to reconsider
whether their calling is worth it this
pandemic has exasperated and exposed so
many things that teachers are dealing
with with the lack of resource the lack
of support the lack of pay the
impossible expectations that we meet
because we care so much about our
students and it's mentally and
emotionally breaking us but is the fate
of today's students as dire as it seems
sure the Moun concern online and in the
media isn't exactly reassuring are we
looking at a generation that is never
going to recover certainly it's a it's a
generation of students that uh have
experienced something that none of us
have experienced before and these our
Future Leaders our future doctors our
future nurses our future please they
could put this country to Anarchy I'm
afraid of them but then again this isn't
the first time younger Generations have
become the subject of controversy
previous generations have also
separately carried the stigmas
associated with disrespect violence and
aimlessness with Gen X even earning the
title of the slacker generation as a
Washington Post article from 2014 on the
apparent apathy in Millennials stated
the problem with any claim regarding the
future attitudes and behaviors of
today's youth is that they are difficult
to predict and so the question isn't who
will destroy the world first fourth
graders or global warming but whether
gen Alpha and gen Z's negative qualities
are unique to their generation or simply
a byproduct of Youth you know the
historic Target for all that's wrong
with the world children are now tyrants
not the Servants of their households
they no longer rise when Elders enter
the room they contradict their parents
chatter before company gobble up
dainties at the table crossed their legs
and tyrannize their teachers this is
often misattributed to Socrates by the
way but this is actually a summary of
General complaints about the youth by
the ancient Greeks as written in a 1907
dissertation by a student Kenneth John
Freeman every generation thinks that the
new generation is completely unhinged
and that means there's still time for
Jen Alpha and gen Z to prove older
Generations wrong or at least find a way
to make use of their unique skill sets
I'm a teacher and I see growth gaps
everywhere some kids can't read some
kids can't write a sentence however I
believe every single student will be
successful especially if they choose
Marketing in this generation all because
of this video you should bu 50% off
Domino's Pizza because I'm new here and
I don't want to get fired yet so please
don't let this video flop all right like
I know we teach our kids to write in
like complete sentences and write
without using like PLS for pleas however
this commercial just proved all of us
wrong as for the gaps in their education
their violent outbursts and their
unrestricted screen time they have
attributed to everything from LAX
parenting to the school system and
pandemic that remains a cause for
concern however when it comes to whether
the young people of today are doomed
it's safe to say that's too early to
call the priorities of today's youth
just aren't the same like people are
like yo you're that kid from Tik Tok I'm
like I'm like yes sir I am like let me
cook Cuzo and while they're polarizing
interests attitudes and behaviors may
all just come down to a phase in
adolescence apparently there is a
generation Alpha yep you have to be like
what 10 9 years old 10 years old at most
that doesn't change the fact that
educators are currently shouldering this
burden all I know is that teachers are
human beings and a lot of times people
forget that while other factors
continually make their jobs more
difficult sure it may be easier to put a
kid in front of a screen but is it
really helping them in the long run are
you saying schools were just graduating
kids who didn't fundamentally know how
to read yeah it's happened all across
the country you know I love teaching and
I love watching the kids grow and learn
but if I can't do my job then what am I
doing
here godamn you can call it an old folks
complaining about Young Folks thing and
why are you de demonizing Millennial
parents why are you demonizing gen alpha
kids or you can step back and look at it
from our perspective and say gee I
wonder why there's so many people
talking about the same thing this is the
story of the students of today including
the challenges they present in the
classroom and potentially
Beyond
