ever since computers were invented
they've really just been glorified
calculators machines that execute the
exact instructions given to them by the
programmers but something incredible is
happening now computers have started
gaining the ability to learn and think
and communicate just like we do they can
do creative intellectual work that
previously only humans could do we call
this technology generative Ai and you
may have encountered it already through
products like GPT basically intelligence
is now available as a service kind of
like a giant brain floating in the sky
that anyone can talk to it's not perfect
but it is surprisingly capable and it is
improving at an exponential rate this is
a big deal it's going to affect just
about every person and Company on the
planet positively or negatively this
video is here to help you understand
what generative AI is all about in
Practical terms beyond the hype the
better you understand this technology as
a person team or company the better
equipped you will be to survive and
thrive in the age of AI so here's a
silly but useful mental model for this
you have Einstein in your basement in
fact everyone does and by Einstein I
really mean the combination of every
smart person who ever lived you can talk
to Einstein whenever you want he has
instant access to the sum of all human
knowledge and will answer anything you
want within seconds never running out of
patience he can also take on any role
you want a comedian poet doctor coach
and will be an expert within that field
he has has some humanlike limitations
though he can make mistakes he can jump
to conclusions he can misunderstand you
but the biggest limitation is actually
your imagination and your ability to
communicate effectively with them this
skill is known as prompt engineering and
in the age of AI this is as essential as
reading and writing most people vastly
underestimate what this Einstein in your
basement can do it's like going to the
real Einstein and asking him to proof
read a high school report or hiring a
world-class five-star chef and having
him chop onion the more you interact
with Einstein the more you will discover
surprising and Powerful ways for him to
help you or your company okay enough
fluffy metaphors let's clarify some
terms AI as you probably know stands for
artificial intelligence AI is not new
Fields like machine learning and
computer vision have been around for
decades whenever you see a YouTube
recommendation or a web search result or
whenever you get a credit card
transaction approved that's traditional
AI in action generative AI is AI that
generates new original content rather
than just finding or classifying
existing content that's the G in GPT for
example large language models or llms
are a type of generative AI that can
communicate using normal human language
chat GPT is a product by the company
open AI it started as an llm essentially
an advanced chatbot using a new
architecture called the Transformer
architecture which by the way is the T
in GPT it is so fluent at human language
that anyone can use it you don't need to
be an AI expert or programmer and that's
kind of what triggered the whole
Revolution so how does it actually work
well a large language model is an
artificial neural network basically a
bunch of numbers or or parameters
connected to each other similar to how
our brain is a bunch of neurons or brain
cells connected to each other neural
networks only deal with numbers you send
in numbers and depending on how the
parameters are set all the numbers come
out but any kind of content such as text
or images can be represented as numbers
so let's say I write dogs are when I
send that to a large language model that
gets converted to numbers processed by
the neural network and then the
resulting numbers are converted back
into text in this case the word animals
dogs are animals so yeah this is
basically a guest toex word machine the
interesting part is if we take that
output and combine it with the input and
send it through the model again then it
will continue adding new words that's
what's going on behind the scenes when
you type something in chat GPT in this
case for example it generated a whole
story and I can continue this
indefinitely by adding more prompts a
large language model may have billions
or even trillions of parameters that's
why they're called large so how are all
these numbers set well not through
manual programming that would be
impossible but through training just
like babies learning to speak a baby
isn't told how to speak she doesn't get
an instruction manual instead she
listens to people speaking around her
and when she's heard enough she starts
seeing the pattern she speaks a few
words at first to the Delight of her
parents and then later on full sentences
similarly during a training period the
language model is fed a mindboggling
amount of text to learn from Mostly from
internet sources it then plays guess the
next word with all of this over and over
again and the parameters are
automatically tweaked until it starts
getting really good at predicting the
next word this is called back
propagation which is a fancy term for oh
I guessed wrong I better change
something however to become truly useful
a model also needs to undergo human
training this is called reinforcement
learning with human feedback and it
involves thousands of hours of humans
painstakingly testing and evaluating
output from the model and giving
feedback kind of like training a a dog
with a clicker to reinforce good
behavior that's why a model like GPT
won't tell you how to rob a bank it
knows very well how to rob a bank but
through human training it has learned
that it shouldn't help people commit
crimes when training is done the model
is mostly Frozen other than some fine
tuning that can happen later that's what
the P stands for in GPT pre-trained
although in the future we will probably
have models that can learn continuously
rather than just uh during training and
fine-tuning now although chat GPT kind
of got the ball rolling GPT isn't the
only model out there in fact new models
are sprouting like mushrooms they vary a
lot in terms of speed capability and
cost some can be downloaded and run
locally others are only online some are
free or open source others are
commercial products some are super easy
to use While others require complicated
technical setup some are specialized for
certain use cases others are more
General and can be used for almost
anything and some are baked into
products in the form of co-pilots or or
chat windows it's it's the Wild West
just keep in mind that you generally get
what you pay for so with a free model
you may just be getting a smart high
school student in your basement rather
than Einstein the difference between for
example GPT 3.5 and gp4 is
massive note that there are different
types of generative AI models that
generate different types of content
textto text models like gpc4 take text
as input and generate text as output the
text can be natural language but it can
also be structured information like code
Json or HTML I use this a lot myself to
generate code when programming uh it
saves an incredible amount of time and I
also learn a lot from the code it
generates text to image models will
generate images describe what you want
and an image gets generated for you you
can even pick a style image to image
models can do things like transforming
or combining images and we have image to
text models which describe the contents
of a given image and speech to text
models create voice transcriptions which
is useful for things like uh meeting
notes text to audio models they generate
music or sounds from a prompt for
example here is some sound generated
from The Prompt people talking in a
busy okay guys enough stop now thank you
and there are even text to video models
that generate videos from a prompt
sooner or later we'll have infinite
movie series that autogenerate the next
episode tailored to your tastes as
you're watching kind of scary if you
think about it one Trend now is
multimodal AI products meaning they
combine different models into one
product so you can work with text images
audio Etc without switching tools the
chat GPT mobile app is a good example of
this just for fun I took a photo of this
room and I asked where I could hide
stuff I kind of like that it mentioned
the stove but warned that that it could
get hot there when I have things to
figure out such as the contents of this
video I like to take walks using chat
GPT as as a sounding board I start by
saying always respond with the word okay
unless I ask you for something that way
it'll just listen and not interrupt
after I finish dumping my thoughts I ask
for feedback we have some discussion and
then I ask it to summarize and text
afterwards I really recommend trying
this it's it's a really useful way to
use tools like this turns out Einstein
isn't stuck in the basement after all
you can take him out for a walk
initially language models were just word
predictors statistical machines with
limited practical use but as they became
larger and were trained on more data
they started gaining emergent
capabilities unexpect capabilities that
surprised even the developers of the
technology they could role playay write
poetry write highquality code discuss
company strategy provide legal and
medical advice coach teach basically
creative and intellectual things that
only humans could do previously it turns
out that when a model has seen enough
text and images it starts to see
patterns and understand higher level
Concepts just like a baby learning to
understand the world let's take a simple
example I'll give gp4 this little
drawing that involves a string a pair of
scissors an egg a pot and a fire what
will happen if I use the scissors the
model has most likely not been trained
on this exact scenario yet it gave a
pretty good answer which demonstrates a
basic understanding of the nature of
scissors eggs gravity and heat when gp4
was released I started using it as a
coding assistant and I was blown away
when prompted effectively it was a
better programmer than anyone I've
worked with same with article writing
product design Workshop planning and
just about anything I used it for
the main bottleneck was my prompt
engineering skills so I decided to make
a career shift and focus entirely on
learning and teaching how to make this
technology useful hence this video now
let's take a step back and look at the
implications for 300,000 years or so we
homosapiens have been the most
intelligent species on Earth depending
of course on how you define intelligence
but the thing is our intellectual
capabilities aren't really improving
that much our brains are about the same
size same weight as they've been for
thousands of years computers on the
other hand have been around for only 80
years or so and now with generative AI
they are suddenly capable of speaking
human languages fluently and carrying
out an increasing number of intellectual
creative tasks that previously only
humans could do so we are right here at
the Crossing Point where AI is better at
some things and humans are better at
some things but ai's capabilities are
improving at an exponential rate while
ours aren't we don't know how long that
exponential Improvement will continue or
if it will level off at some point but
we're definitely entering a new world
order now this isn't the first re
Revolution we've experienced we tamed
fire we learned how to do agriculture we
invented the printing press steam power
Telegraph these were all revolutionary
changes but they took decades or
centuries to become widespread in the AI
Revolution new technology spreads
worldwide almost instantly dealing with
this rate of change is a huge challenge
for both individuals and
companies I've noticed that people and
companies tend to fall into different
kind of mindset categories when it comes
to AI on one side we have denial the
belief that AI cannot do my job or we
don't have time to look into this
technology this is a dangerous place to
be a common saying is AI might not take
your job but people using AI will and
this is true for both individuals and
companies on the other side of the scale
we have panic and despair the belief
that AI is going to take my job no
matter what AI is going to make my
company go bankrupt neither of these
mindsets are helpful so I propose a
middle ground a balanced positive
mindset AI is going to make me my team
my company insanely productive
personally with this mindset I feel like
I've gained superpowers I can go from
idea to result in so much shorter time I
can focus more on what I want to achieve
and less on the grunt work of building
things and I'm learning a lot faster too
it's like having an awesome Mentor with
me at all times this mindset not only
feels good but it also equips you for
the future makes you less likely to lose
your job or your company and more likely
to thrive in the age of AI despite all
the
uncertainty so one important question is
is human role X needed in the age of AI
for example are doctors needed
developers lawyers CEOs uh whatever so
this question becomes more and more
relevant as the AI capabilities improve
well some jobs will disappear for sure
but for most roles I think we humans are
still needed someone with domain
knowledge still needs to decide what to
ask the AI how to formulate The Prompt
what context needs to be provided and
how to evaluate the result AI models
aren't perfect they can be absolutely
brilliant sometimes but sometimes also
terribly stupid they can sometimes
hallucinate and provide bogus
information in a very convincing way so
when should you trust AI response when
should you double check or do the work
yourself what about legal compliance
data security what information can we
send to an AI model and where is that
data stored a human expert is needed to
make these judgment calls and compensate
for the weaknesses of the AI model so I
recommend thinking of AI as your
colleague a genius but also an oddball
with some personal quirks that you need
to learn to work with you need to
recognize when your Genius colleague is
drunk as a doctor my AI colleague can
help diagnose rare diseases that I
didn't even know existed as a lawyer my
AI colleague could do legal research and
review contracts allowing me to spend
more time with my client or as a teacher
my AI colleague could grade tests help
generate course content provide
individual support to students Etc and
if you're not sure how I can help you
just ask it I work as X how can you help
me overall I find that that the
combination of human plus AI That's
where the magic lies it's important to
distinguish between the models and the
products that build on top of them as a
user you don't normally interact with
the model directly instead you interact
with a product website or a mobile app
which in turn talks to the model behind
the scenes products provide a user
interface and add capabilities and data
that aren't part of the model itself for
example the chat GPT product keeps track
of your message history while the GPT 4
model itself doesn't have any message
history as a developer you can use these
models to build your own AI powered
products and features for example let's
say you have an e-learning site you
could add a chat bot to answer questions
about the courses or as a recruitment
company you might build AI powered tools
to help evaluate candidates in both
these cases your users interact with
your product and then your product
interacts with the model this is done
via apis or application programming
interfaces which allow your code to talk
to the model so here's a simple example
of using open AI API to talk to GPT not
a lot of code needed and here's another
example of the automatic candidate
evaluation thing I talked about it takes
a job description and a bunch of CVS in
a folder and evaluates each candidate
automatically and incidentally the code
itself is mostly AI written as a product
developer you can use AI models kind of
like an external brain to insert
intelligence into your product very
powerful in order to use generative AI
effectively you need to get good at
prompt engineering or prompt design as I
prefer to call it this skill is needed
both as a user and as a product
developer because in both cases you need
to be able to craft effective prompts
that produce useful results from an AI
model here's an example let's say I want
help planning a workshop this prompt is
unlikely to give useful results because
no matter how smart the AI is if it
doesn't know the context of my workshop
it can only give fague high level
recommendations the second prompt is
better now I provided some context this
is normally done iteratively write a
prompt look at the result add a
follow-up prompt to provide more
information or edit the original prompt
and rinse and repeat until you get a
good result in this third approach I ask
it to interview me so instead of me
providing a bunch of context up front
I'm basically saying what do you need to
know in order order to help me and then
it will propose a workshop agenda after
I often combine these two I provide a
bit of context and then I tell it to ask
me if it needs any more information
these are just some examples of prompt
engineering techniques so overall the
better you get at prompt engineering the
faster and better results you will get
from AI there are plenty of courses
books videos articles to help you learn
this but the most important thing is is
to practice and Learn by doing a nice
side effect is that you will become
better at communicating in general since
prompt engineering is really all about
Clarity and effective
communication I think the next Frontier
for generative AI is autonomous agents
with tools these are AI powerered
software entities that run on their own
rather than just sitting around waiting
for you to prompt them all the time so
you go down to Einstein in your basement
and do what a good good leader would do
for a team you give him a high level
Mission and the tools needed to
accomplish it and then open the door and
let him out to run his own show without
micromanagement the tools could be
things like access to the internet
access to money ability to send and
receive messages order pizza or whatever
for this prompt engineering becomes even
more important because your autonomous
tool wielding agent can do a lot of good
or a lot of harm depending on how well
you craft that mission
statement all right let's wrap it up
here are the key things I hope you will
remember from this video generative AI
is a super useful tool that can help
both you your team and your company in a
big way the better you understand it the
more likely it is to be an opportunity
rather than a threat generative AI is
more powerful than you think the biggest
limitation is not the technology but
your imagination like what can I do and
your prompt engineering skills how do I
do it prompt engineeringdesign is a
crucial skill like all new skills just
accept that you will kind of suck at at
first but you'll improve over time with
deliberate practice so my best tip is
experiment make this part of your
day-to-day life and the Learning Happens
automatically hope this video was
helpful thanks for watching
