I'm really delighted and and Overjoyed
actually to be talking to my friend and
uh colleague and fellow thinker in the
psychoanalytic vein Daniel Cho Danny Cho
uh and I'm going to talk to him today
about his his new book genius after
psychoanalysis and
this is a it's an amazing book I think
first of all and and hopefully our
conversation over the next however long
will shed some light on the book and
make it make some of his thesis clear
because I think there are multiple ideas
that he's working out in this book and
uh and give you a sense of of why just
how exciting it is I think so good to
see you Danny uh and great to talk to
you and for my first question I guess is
uh
when i' I've read this book twice so my
sense when I read it both times is that
you're trying to democratize the idea of
genius and I guess my question for you
is is that a
correct uh inference from what you
thought you were doing when you wrote
the book so maybe you can use that as an
occasion to kind of talk about what you
thought what your main driving thing
behind the book was and if I'm totally
off Bas that's that's fine okay so that
well first of all Todd thank you so much
for interviewing me and thank you for to
you and Hillary for all the work you did
to get the thing published uh it's not
uh an understatement to say that it
wouldn't have seen the light of day
hadn't been for your intervention um but
I would say it's interesting that you
say it that way because I think that in
some ways I'm trying to make genius more
accessible but in other ways I think it
is in some way is less accessible
because I link genius to
sublimation and while that means that
genius is something that we all have the
materials for the basic components for
in so far as sublimations related to the
drive and that's something that's just
constitutive of human beings as
such sublimation is a particular
formation of the drive and one that
Freud thinks is actually quite rare and
exceptional when it does occur it's not
something that is a structural part of
the uh of the drive um it's a it's a
certain kind of orientation toward the
drive then so in that sense I think that
in some ways genius is something that's
less accessible so I think that it's
it's very clear to me that all of our
Notions of Genius as like
IQ uh Savant you know technology gurus
all of that stuff that's all way off the
mark That's so it's very so so I am
right to think that your book is very
anti- biologist in its sense right like
you're you're trying to De
biologizing as like uh you know your
performance on aptitude tests and
neuroscientists are busy at work or some
neuroscientists are busy at work trying
to find where in the brain it is you
know what parts of the brain develop
into what makes someone genius you know
back in the old days they thought it was
like the size of the brain and things
like that now they think it's you know
where the MRI shows it none of that is
what I'm saying genius is that's way off
the mark but yeah so it's not a bi bi
biological or a
um I would even say not even a
psychological
category it's it's it it's instead a
certain relationship that one has to
one's own drive right like that's that
that's basically your yes your claim I
found that was just I have to say I
found it completely there's few books I
read where I'm I have a little quarrels
here and there but about about genius
like I just was it's one of those few
times where I was just completely
convinced you know like I just feel like
you hit on something where you really
got at the I've i' for one thing I've
never liked it when people use the word
like I'm F like cuz I always think like
okay what you're saying is this person
is sort of out of the
bounds of like normal human subjectivity
and so they're they're sort of
exceptional and you are saying they're
exceptional but what you're saying is
they're not outside the bounds of normal
human subjectivity in fact this is like
a uh uh well especially if you're
talking about sublimation it's it's it's
a vicissitude of normal human
subjectivity even According to Freud
right yeah I think maybe actually one
way so this is not in the book but
you're you're talk about it made me
think one way to think about it
is sublimation is maybe the truth of the
drive and what we normally engage in
according to the Pleasure Principle so
that's like the the major operating
principle that Freud thinks normal human
beings typically relate to the drive in
some ways the Pleasure Principle is
already a defensive mechanism to
sublimation it's a way to try to
re-engage the drive into
normal uh capitalistic uh consumerist
comprehensible terms terms that we can
manage you know I can manage this idea
of the Pleasure Principle right I can I
can try to limit my exposure to things
that stimulate me and I can spend time
you know
expending stimuli that are accruing
inside my
body
sublimation is sort of like what is what
is left over after you give up the
Pleasure Principle well it's interesting
because the way that you even talk about
the genius's relationship to the
Pleasure Principle I think fits into
that right because you make this
distinction between end I think you
these are neologisms of you I think
right between end pleasure at least they
create a red squiggly line for me when I
write my on my summary of your book like
end pleasure and for pleasure right like
the I know Freud said for loo I I know
that word is a Freudian word yeah these
are actually Freudian terms yeah oh so
even end pleasure and and loo is a is a
Freudian term yeah okay yeah um
so as as a single obviously so but it's
interesting does has anyone else before
you made those into made end pleasure
one word in English or because I've
never seen
that uh no I I don't think so I didn't I
didn't intentionally do it to try to
create neologisms but uh it yeah it I
just did it to try to avoid hyphenated
words but I think right no I like that I
sorry I I didn't mean to get sidetracked
on this because my my point is the way
that what you're saying is this this
like the genius's reval like revolution
of the Pleasure Principle is tied to
this like most people invested in the
Pleasure Principle are invested in the
end pleasure that results right and the
genius is is is content almost or or or
or or accept is finds gratification in
the for pleasure right like that's
correct that's yeah yeah yeah so one of
the you know so one of the basic ways
people understand Freud is that like he
had like a certain operating idea of
what the drive was and what the psyche
was and then 19 uh um 20 came around and
he wrote beyond the Pleasure Principle
and he revolutionized his his Drive
Theory
and I guess when I see so end pleasure
and for pleasure are are terms that he
introduces in the three essays on the
history is uh three essays on the theory
of sexuality which is like uh what 1905
I think 1905 right uh and my claim is
actually that there is an an
extraordinary continuity between 1905
and 1920 through this figure of for
pleasure because if you examine what he
describes by for pleasure that turns out
to be the death Drive In 1920 at least
as far as I see it so what Freud says is
that there's two kinds of pleasure one
is uh so if you look at people who have
sex uh they they they do all these
things for the end goal of orgasm but
Freud says along the way they engage in
all these what he calls Preparatory acts
you know things as simple as like
looking at each other saying things to
each other dressing in certain kinds of
clothes and those things in themselves
are pleasurable right but at the same
time they increase the tensions in the
body that makes end pleasure much more
intense so you're left with this
contradictory idea of something being
economically uh uh productive which in
Freud's normal Theory would be
considered pain yet it's experienced as
pleasure and that to me seems to be the
key to understanding sort of what is
going on with when people become genius
or when people experience genius it also
is key to understanding what happens in
the Death Drive Right some some kind and
so he actually warns in uh three essays
that uh we should not engage too much in
those Preparatory Acts or else they have
a the the ability to usurp the end
pleasure you know and it maybe a you
know maybe a perverts and such like that
are people who have traded in uh for
pleasure for in pleasure
and I think that again that's sort of
like the death drive right the death
drive has this troubling presence that
it can usurp you know it can usurp the
direction of the drive uh away from
pleasure towards this other kind of
pleasure in pain or this kind of thing
beyond the Pleasure Principle right I
mean and then it's interesting what you
just said because in in beyond the
Pleasure Principle toward the I think in
the last paragraph he says it seems that
it turns out I think you might even
quote this it turns out that the
Pleasure Principle serve ultimately
serves the Death Drive Right which is
which would would would support I mean
that is a change it seems to me like I
think you're right that there is this
continuity that I I and others tend to
minimize maybe um but I think that's a
point of a change because in three
essays he thinks that's a danger and by
beyond the plge principle he thinks like
that's just probably the way it is right
yeah uh actually even Freud himself I
think doesn't recognize that there's
this continuity you know for pleasure is
a term that he basically
drops it only reappears mostly like in
his writing on the joke Aesthetics you
know he talks about their sort of a for
pleasure to the aesthetic product that
sort of draws you in but by and large
it's a term that he doesn't really
utilize very much so I think it's
something there that he he found maybe
too extreme or too something dangerous
even yeah that's that's really
interesting do so does um that that
actually there a good pivot point
because I I really wanted I mean one of
the main things I want to talk to you
about is about Leonardo because he's
your main I think that's your jumping
off point for the whole book right is is
Leonardo and the Contemporary I don't
think this critique is still the
critique right but the the Contemporary
critique of him for abandoning his I
mean the claim was you say he abandoned
his artistic genius and got dabbled in
science and and
your your idea is that Freud um Freud
sees that no actually this dabbling in
science was an extension that was the
genius and if he wasn't a genius he
would have kept making beautiful
paintings such a fascinating way to
think of it because I think I've always
succumbed to the I I was never convinced
by Freud until I read your book that
this is true I always thought oh it's
too bad he kind of turned away he
probably could have had a couple more
great painting in him uh so I I guess
like that is is that artistic genius and
then that g that like that for you is
really tied to for pleasure right like
that's one of the points that you're
making about about Leonardo right yeah
yeah so with
Leonardo and right that my so the whole
idea for the book came from when I was
reading Leonardo D
Vinci in that book he calls uh Leonardo
a universal
genius and you know no one really reads
that book as a theory of Genius but I
kind of thought to myself you know if if
if if Leonardo is a genius According to
Freud what kind of theory of of Genius
is involved in in what's going on in
Leonardo you know a book that's you know
famous for all kinds of sorts of errors
and uh well isn't it interesting that's
the thing it's most famous for it's most
famous I think most people who know of
Freud's reading of Leonardo know that he
mistranslates
this term for vulture right and then
that that causes the whole
that seen the mother so it's like
Freud's own it's like a for them it's
like a for the critics of Freud it's
like a a complete sticy for the way in
which he imposes the edus complex on
everything I think yeah yeah he's sort
of more a reflection of Freud than it is
of Leonardo yeah you know it also tries
to explain a lot of Leonardo through his
uh you know through his latent
homosexuality and you know there's a lot
of people who have take exception to
that and so there's a lot of reasons not
to read the book but I thought myself
you know why not read the book to see if
it's true that he's a genius what makes
him a
genius um and so there is this idea that
uh in in
Leonardo Leonardo da Vinci uh is engaged
in a project to complete a certain
artwork and yet he engages in these
other side Ventures that art at first
intended to further his understanding of
his ability to create a a an accurate or
a you know a a a realistic painting you
know color theory light Theory he's
trying to understand how all of these
things interact so he can actually cre
produce this this artwork then all of a
sudden at some point those those side
Ventures become the ventures
themselves he he rarely comes back to
the painting to to the lament of all of
his colleagues who think that his his
duty in the world is to be making making
paintings and I think that that failure
to complete that failure to reach an end
goal the failure to to to achieve end
pleasure all of those things are are the
signs of of Genius are the locations of
Genius right and those are that's where
you find him uh producing in the for
pleasure like all these Preparatory
studies he's engaged in in science
eventually then he just abandons art all
together just to achieve just to engage
in this scientific speculation one of
the one of the drawings that I I discuss
in the book is that quation for a
hemisected man and woman which has all
these bizarre these bizarre depictions
of the you know it's got like a penis
with two two you know uh tubes in it and
uh and a breast that's connected to the
uterus and you know all these bizarre
abnormalities and I think it's naive to
say that Leonard just didn't know the
anatomy of the body I mean this guy was
like in in you know in involved in
actual dissections and so he knew the
body very well but what was going on
what was going on in that in that
drawing I think are sort of all of those
all of those excesses those side studies
those things that really are not
connected to any kind of angle any kind
of usability any kind of utility and I
think that's those excesses are are the
expression of Genius yeah that's really
really good I think and I I you know
just you you use the term the duty like
his his colleague said you're betraying
the duty of genius and it made me think
of so I don't know you I don't know if
you know this book or not but this this
writer Ray monk wrote a biography it's a
great it's probably the best
philosophical biography ever written of
lvic wienstein and and the subtitle is
the D the duty of genius and I it made
me think like what his like I think you
would you say I guess my question it is
like the
incompletion of Leonardo's project
that's the duty of Genius whereas the
colleagues that wanted him to like paint
a bunch more paintings in the style of
Leonardo like that would be the Betrayal
of the duty of genius and then it made
me think like isn't it odd that vien
Stein published one work in his life and
left all of this stuff unpublished too
you know like even the great
philosophical investigations the great
work of the later vicenin is a posist
work and so I wonder is there something
to that is there something to like this
kind of not completing it like I that
seems to me to fit into your theory
right yeah I I think that's that's
exactly the point I think uh to add
another philosophical pair so this is
something I never it's not in the book
but something I thought about when I was
thinking about these ideas the long time
ago this is like back in graduate school
is like it's also the difference between
Walter Benjamin and Theodore oorno yeah
you know Walter Benjamin we have what we
have of Benjamin are basically all of
these fragments you know these these
non-published these these uh um stray
thoughts you know adorno famously
thought he was wasting his time on
theology sholom thought he was wasting
his time on Marxism you know and I think
that you know oppos that you have adoro
who is like a professional philosopher
you know he he he wrote Toms he wrote
essays he wrote you know he was
productive so I think like absolutely I
think there is something about genius
that is not
utilitarian uh that's you know I think
that's also why I I I hesitate to say
that I democratize uh genius because
there so many of us would just hesitate
to want to have that I think it's more
of an ethic right it's like something to
actually hold true to because I think a
lot of us would shun you know at that
kind of
a lot of us pathologize our inability to
complete things yeah I mean I it's
interesting I mean yeah that's a i
that's such a great that really is
helpful for me the adorno Benyamin thing
you know when when I don't know it's
about 15 years ago their correspondence
got published and I was reading a review
of it and it said and and because benam
means all of his corresponden to dno is
like uh I need some money Teddy can you
can and Ador is writing these long
philosophical letters
and somebody reviews it he goes there's
only one philosopher here and he meant
adorno but and and that's and as you say
that's probably true right but but no
one I think who's really thinking about
it thinks who's the Thinker you're more
drawn to it's I mean a okay there's like
adorno people that are but most of us
feel like benyamine is far more
compelling thinker but I have students
that are like they we read on the
concept of history and they're like what
should I read by him I really want to
dig into a lot of things I'm like
well I mean there's a couple of things
but it's not you're going to be
disappointed and and I think like the
fact that did he have the final thing
finished and then the Nazis took it I
mean I think like even that question
kind of testifies to the genius
Dimension right like the the yeah I
think it's such a great example by you
maybe uh maybe one way to say it is like
uh yeah there's only one philosopher in
those letters but there's also only one
genius in those one genius yeah yeah
yeah I mean it's it's if some of the
some of some
of and that's not to say that these side
Ventures are are uninteresting right I
think that what's Most Fascinating in in
Leonardo are these bizarre drawings of
the of the body um and I think that what
Leonardo was trying to do as far as I
think what I think Freud thought
Leonardo was was trying to do was he's
he's using investigation not to
accumulate knowledge to sort of plug up
all the holes in art you know like I
don't know if this is when you're in
graduate school but like in education
you know they always talk about you do a
literature review and then you find the
you find the Gap in the literature and
then you your study fills that Gap yeah
and I think that like one mode of
inquiry is that kind of University
discourse plugging in all the holes in
our know
and I think what what Leonardo is trying
to do in those to put it in leanian
terms he's trying to put a form to the
lack in knowledge as such like this is
in the book I I equate this with uh in
computer science they use this term null
which doesn't mean zero it just means
like there's a lack of data in a certain
spot in the memory of the computer and
that puts up this null
value you can make Excel spreadsheets do
this right example you know like uh and
uh and um and I think that what Leonardo
does in investigation and in research in
his inquiries is he uses he produces
objects that that articulate the null of
knowledge not necessarily plug in the
zero values of our knowledge and I think
that a lot of times when you read Walter
Benjamin's fragments they have that kind
of sensibility to them where they kind
of leave you asking questions not really
figuring something
out yeah I also what don't you think too
that like I was just thinking of the
this is on the philosophy of history or
on the concept of history and um the way
and this to me is an indication of his
genius is that he is able to see and and
in like the Paul clay painting Angelus
not noas like like the I don't know if
you've ever seen the painting but like
Benjamin's account of the painting is
amazing and then you look at the
painting you're like uh that's it like
it's it's not so it's very disappointing
and I think like that's that to me
speaks to this side Venture thing you're
talking about right like he goes to this
thing that's on the side and he yet he's
able to see something that probably
isn't even there for most people but it
is I think I think precisely the genius
locates something that's not there
because it's not there it's it's like in
literal terms not there right it's the
actual void of the thing right it's the
it's the uh it's the uh the as the the
the uh the lack in the object that the
the genius is able to articulate into a
form yeah which I then produces this
kind of you know thoughts that go that
go beyond the limit yeah that's really
good and I so you mentioned you just
mentioned Lon and and I I thought it was
really interesting so I think you think
you're more or you've said to me I'm
more Freudian than I am leanian right um
I think I'm a leanian Freudian than I am
a Freudian leanian right right right but
but in this book it's really interesting
the way you put those two into
relationship right and I I wonder if you
could just say something about that like
what for you because I and it's it's
interesting because it's really the Lan
of semar 7 I think that's the the the
important F in here I mean I when I when
I read this book I was thinking it's too
B and she was of course the original
editor of it was Mari Rudy and then I
thought it's too bad Mari isn't still
alive because I think like a lot of the
things you say about art and sublimation
and and especially the rest between Frey
and Lan I think really it's it's not
surprising that that she was initially
interested in this book because it it
seems to resonate with her her thinking
quite a bit um
but I think she also had this sense of
like that that it's and I I wonder if
you think about this think is true that
for you it's the Lan of seminar 7
precisely because of this formulation of
dosing and
sublimation that's really the valuable
part of him and then like that it's it's
and he kind of goes away from that right
I mean for sure and and and maybe but
that's what you want to hold on to I
think yeah so I know I know
there's among leanians and I've heard
you say this quite a bit of these
different periodizations laon I guess
I'm not as invested in those
periodizations I find things valuable in
Leon throughout you know like I'm I'm a
big seminar 11 guy you know but I'm also
a big seminar 7 guy it's also not a
mistake that in my graduate school
education with Ken Reinhardt those were
the two seminars that we really like dug
into yeah in my in in the in the the the
seminar that I took with with with uh
with with Ken so those are very
formative in my understanding of of Lan
but it is true that sublimation is dealt
with most I think most explicitly and
probably the most thoroughly in seminar
7 for sure and it's in relation to the
object whereas when you when you read
Freud SU is always in relation to the
drive yeah the aim of the drive not
necessarily to the object of the drive
and in fact he even says you know uh you
know it's the uh ancient people you know
who really cared about the no uh the
ancient people who cared about the drive
and the aim and and it's really modern
people who care about the object and are
and so in that sense you quote that
that's a footnote from uh the three
theories three essay theories yeah three
essays and I think that so for me Lon I
think supplements Freud's theory of
sublimation by investigating the drive
in relation to the object and I'm not
sure that's quite at the Forefront of
lon's Mind there in in that seminar
because I know the object is just
something that's very Central to his
thinking all the way throughout yeah um
but yeah certainly there's a there's a
there's something in semr 7 that that
deals directly with sublimation in the
way that I don't find in a lot of the
other seminars and in Freud too right
like you think that like laon adds
something for you to Freud's theory and
that is precisely I mean it's
interesting to me how I this was really
good and I haven't even seen our our
mutual friend I rick Bo I I think he I
mean he's a clearly talks about doding
in every kind of permutation but I'm not
sure that he's said this that maybe he
has but the way that you say it's this
point of non meaning within the object
right like I think that's really that
seemed to me really um like something
that that gives us a way
to understand like what Lon can
contribute especially in seminar 7 to
understanding not just genius but
sublimation as well and also the drive
right like that that the drive like
what's important for the drive is is
precisely this point of non meaning not
the symbolic world of meaning right yeah
so I so actually just before I answer
that question uh just to say a few words
about Mario Rudy because she was so
Central to the book uh she was you know
the first editor that really took me
seriously and uh uh I owe a lot to to
Mari and I know I know that seminar 7
and uh and creativity is very important
to her to her and her work and I only
had uh short interactions with her uh at
the time when the book was going through
review and that was one of the points
that she emphasized with me that that
that Drew her to the book was this idea
you know in in her words she was saying
that you know I'm kind of like
rehabilitating old-fashioned terms which
is sort of like she kind of sees herself
doing that she told me you know like
that these old humanist terms that we
kind of feel like they have nothing to
do with now you know genius creativity
art and things like that and how she was
sort of like rehabilitating she sort of
saw the project that sort of doing that
so yeah uh um she was very Central to to
uh to the to the final form of the book
um as far as that about my reading of
dasing that really comes from paying
attention to the to the Freudian aspect
of lon's theory of sublimation as he
articulates it through the project of
scientific psychology that uh that Freud
tries to work through and in there you
get this IDE to be clear Danny that's
that's where that's where that's where
KH gets doding from right for he get
yeah yeah yes and where he gets that
from is this articulation Freud has of
the object the other people other
familiar objects break down into two
pieces one that's a familiar part that
we understand we comprehend it we relate
it back to our experience and there's
always some other thing you know Freud
Freud just lowercase T there's just some
other thing about the uh about the
object that escapes are our ability to
know it fully and that sort of you know
that sort of you know goes on to other
kinds of things in that book yeah but uh
but Lon elevates that real idea to the
thing with a capital T you know there is
this object and the way so the way I I
always understand it within those terms
which is to say that I understand doing
to be this aspect of objects that do not
comport to our experience es that cannot
be related back to us so I guess it's a
very Freudian understanding of dasing
I'm not sure other leanians see it the
same way other leanians see it more like
like destructively and you know like uh
it's the thing that explodes I'm I'm
very much for the symbolic order in in
in the in the book you know it's but
every symbolic order has this null value
Incorporated within it and the point
isn't to explode it you know in you know
exit the symbolic order in some weird
you know some weird non non myal way
right yeah yeah but the point is is to
is to is to hold it in place I think
yeah yeah I I really like that I think
again I think that really aligns with
how Rick views ding it's interesting to
me that I just want to talk about this
capitalization for a minute because it's
kind of funny um so you do not Capital
when you refer to the thing you do not
unlike most people that and this kind of
is proof that you're more on the
Freudian side than the leanian side you
do not capitalize the thing and but
what's interesting about that is you
could argue one could argue this is just
lon's mistake right because every noun
in German is capitalized right so so you
can't like it's like when people
translating heiger capitalized being I'm
like okay maybe but you don't like
there's no there's there's no textual
warrant for that because you'd also have
to capitalize house and car and
everything else if if heiger ever wrote
the word car I'm not sure he ever wrote
the word car in his life but um all
those nouns right and so I think that I
just find that a little interesting kind
of parenthesis that your book does not I
don't think it ever does capitalize
except unless you're quoting laon yeah
capitalize so I don't I tend to not
correct other
people's sentences so probably good
policy right yeah but but I do think I
it does kind of I just want to focus on
that because it it speaks to your point
I think that it's this point within
symbolization of the of the null or the
not right you I think you you say not
not not with a K but just no o um it's
within and not this kind of huge
explosive kind of bet and I think that
what what you're what I think a lot of
leanian like celebration of seminar 7 is
this kind of Bai influenced blow
everything up you know encounter with
Dustin like he even has that chapter
remember I think it's on sad where he
says that there's always the possibility
of blowing everything up and starting
over again right and that's and he think
and he even theorizes Death Drive kind
of in that like his theory of Death
Drive in seminar 7 is a little wacky I
think right like so so so so I do think
I really like the way you turn that
emphasis to the to the small T right to
as this point within the symbolization
yeah I guess it's my my reading or
understanding you know maybe it's safe
to say that fusting has a capacity for
that kind of explosive deteriorating
kind of reading yeah um and maybe you
know uh maybe that's true in in actual
reality but I'm more interested in the
quotidian aspect of the of the of
dusting you know there's a I use a
couple of examples from Bruce Fink there
of like of of his failure to relate to
his patience which he and these are not
scandalist these are Bruce writes
about this himself yeah but it's it's a
mistake to think that we can always
approach other people in very familiar
terms you know you know like uh oh Todd
you're a you know you're a leftist like
I am so you definitely feel this way
about that you know me and I think that
we have this tendency to to literate
this otherness within the other uh to
turn a deaf ear to it and I think that
what genius does is is create objects
that somehow articulate that thing you
know the the the example from laon is is
is macaroni you know there's a he it's a
it's a it's a nothing surrounded
by pasta right right right and I think
that you don't you don't you don't get M
you don't get pasta by just exploding
that nothing into nothing right so I
think it's I need the material do yeah
it it uh it it it it what it makes us do
is makes us pay attention to what is
maybe you know in religious terms sacred
about the other thing by by putting some
kind of form on it you know that the
example I use in the book is my
experience at the Grand Canyon you know
like there's like three kinds of
reactions to the Grand Canyon you can
have one is you go there and you go a
big hole in the ground that was my dad's
my Dad's reaction to Grand Canyon and
then there's the the other the snoody
the snoody reaction like I experienced
something spiritual at the Grand Canyon
that these other uh RV driving campers
just don't get you know they're buying
their souvenirs they don't they're not
you know in tune with the nature of the
thing and then I think the third is is
where you give up that you give up that
even that position where you you get to
what is remarkable about about the Grand
Canyon is precisely that it is a void
that there is some kind of otherness to
it that prevents me from finding some
kind of self-satisfaction some kind of
completion to myself my own you know my
own leftist green Tendencies fine
completion you know that there's
something resistant even to that which
makes the Grand Canyon itself and then I
think that that may be what Kant is
calling the sublime you know or you know
that sort of relationship to something
that you kind of can't reincorporate
into
yourself yeah I really like the way you
link that to D ding I think that's
really important although I would say
there's a fourth reaction to the Grand
Canyon which would be falling in which
would be why that's why I've never gone
because that's what I terrified I I
don't fall to my death um so so I want a
couple I want to bring up a couple other
uh your own personal examples because I
found them really compelling so one of
them is I I I too work I work crossword
puzzles compulsively right uh and I
thought what you said about the
crossword puzzle is a really
interesting explanation both of genius
and of the drive I think it's a really
great example actually um can you just
talk about that a little bit like what
maybe what Drew you to it as an example
like your your example is that the
crossword puzzle it it like we we need a
certain level of frustration that if a
crossword puzzle is too easy we toss it
out if it's too hard we toss it out
right so there's a certain has to have a
certain and it's interesting because the
times I I don't know if you know this
but the times like Monday Tuesday they
get increasingly difficult Monday
Tuesday Wednesday yeah and so Jennifer
friedlander and I used to always say
like it's it sucks because Wednesday is
too easy and then Thursday is this weird
thing where they it there's like two
letters that each box or it's all kind
of It's Always a weird thing but then
Friday's too hard so we were always we
always felt like there there was never a
perfect thing uh since then i' I've I
don't know her status but that was about
10 years ago I i' I now now I only find
this is going to be interesting because
I I think I'm a little different on you
about this so that'll so now I like
crosswords that are actually too hard
for me like I like I like ones I if I
can solve like one in
I don't know four that's pretty that's
pretty good and so I also like to I
don't know if you ever play these games
like cin Matrix or like movie grid where
they have like actors you got to line
them up with certain movies again like I
can get maybe one in 10 right like and
then that's very few but your point
is uh I need more success than that to
stay interested right like so I'm a
little curious about that question and
first of all tell me why the crossword
puzzle why it it compelled you and then
and
then I don't have any explanation for
why it compelled me it probably was just
the example that came to my mind through
free association when I was trying to
think about this relationship between
for pleasure and end pleasure yeah I
think I I think that I'm not I'm not I'm
not the as my kids would say I'm not
glazing you to say that I think we can
articulate genius here in these terms
like you you are a genius and I am not
because I need success you know I and it
and it and many times if it was just too
hard that paper just went into the
recycling bin you know um but I think
that where where I I I I sense a note of
Genius in the way you're describing it
because I think in the way you're
describing your relationship to the uh
the word the cross word puzzle you're
more you're more drawn on to the failure
yeah what what keeps you going isn't the
success that you get right it's actually
that you can't succeed at it and it and
it leads to these more drawn out periods
of suspension and and and those are the
parts where you know you start to like
think about maybe what are all the
different possibilities you know like in
education there's such an emphasis on
trying to make kids feel
successful in in in their studies you
know that's what all retention
graduation all of that is tied to how
successful they feel in the classroom
and so there's always this kind of
downward pressure to to make things not
as difficult and I think that's the
exact opposite I think what what what
what keeps people coming back to class
is that they didn't quite get it there's
something there that that that's under
their skin that they don't you know I
think maybe professors and teachers
don't try hard enough to get under the
skin of their of their students but once
you get under the skin of the students
it does really it's not really the
success and the knowledge that you
impart to them that keeps them going
it's when you when they sense you have a
question that when they sense it's
really alive this kind of theorizing and
thinking and that they can kind of
engage in it and I think that's sort of
like what's going on in the crossword
puzzle yeah so for ordinary people like
me you you have two experiences of
crossword puzzles either they're too
difficult or they're too easy in any
case you don't want to go on with them
the other thing that I think crossw word
puzzles illustrate too is that for Freud
the pleasure comes to the drive through
the finding of an object not through
having an object yeah and and once you
solve a crossw word puzzle you don't
like hold on to it and like you put it
in a recycling bin yeah yeah no you do
right yeah yeah so it's always the
finding and if and if and if according
to the Pleasure Principle if there's
ever too much difficulty in finding then
then it becomes a source of unpleasure
and you avoid it whereas sublimation
that UNF finding that failure to find is
what starts to draw you into it because
that produces for pleasure yeah it's God
that's so I just think what you just
said is so smart but let me just try to
Riff Off it a little bit and ask another
question but
um so so it it is isn't this why I mean
the crossroad puzz is such a great
example because you would never you
wouldn't even show your like if I if I
solve a really hard one I don't show
Hillary and go oh look what I did she
doesn't care at all right like it's not
it's completely about whereas I think
you would agree with me like with a book
it's a little kind of cheating right
because there is of course the like a
lot of for pleasure in the TR in the
work on the book right and the work but
then the problem is that you get all
this end play like the book comes to you
you and then you a lot of people you
send it out to them and so or they they
buy it and they they write you and
they're like wow you know maybe after we
talk you know a thousand people will
read your book and they'll write you and
you'll you'll be like bombarded and
that'll be great but in a way that kind
of is cheating on the the for pleasure
right like it's a way to kind of it's a
it's a that's not like that's not what
the genius is is up to and I think
that's really interesting for what what
the implications of that are right yeah
actually it kind of made me think about
how genius could be articulated maybe in
two kinds maybe like lowercase G and
uppercase G or genius as an experience
versus genius as a subjectivity because
like one of my guiding lights throughout
writing the book was that I'm not a
genius so I could always just relate to
myself negatively to like work out the
examples right like like how do I feel
about this okay this is not very
pleasurable like I I agree with you that
writing the book is writing a book I
don't know how it is for someone like
you who writes more books than me but
like it's full of a lot of unpleasure
sure you know there's just a lot of like
frustration tension trying to the
feeling that you're at the edge of
saying something but you don't quite
know what it is you're trying to get at
and then but my experience with the book
is that is that the time between so when
I turned it into the publisher I felt a
tremendous sense of relief yeah like in
in the classic Freudian sense of the
tension releasing pleasure princi pure
pleasure yeah pleasure Pure Pleasure
Principle so not really in the accolades
but just in the completion of the
project right and I think that that made
me think like okay so that's clear
indication I'm not a genius because I
think that a genius would have just keep
prolonging this they would have just
literally abandoned the project when
they got close to completion and started
a new one you know we know we probably
know people who are like that uh and so
I think that but where I think that this
idea of of the uh of the completion um
started to touch on genius for me was
like when we
procrastinate aren't we aren't we
precisely trying to avoid end pleasure
when we procrastinate and so maybe
there's an experience of Genius in the
lowercase G for all of us right like we
there like when we people who
procrastinate or when we uh when we you
know enjoy failing at something versus
succeeding at something when we a side
topic brings us and then I think there
are people who that defines them as
subjects you know like a Walter Benjamin
Leonard D Vinci th those are I would say
to some extent even Freud because in
Freud's writings he's never conclusive
he's always and he's always revising
right like like the project is never
done because he's always putting he's
always challenging his own his own
earlier right I mean
Freud he's so happy to end the book with
you know we don't have it all worked out
you know psychology you know is just
it's just not there yet you know who
really knows if something will happen in
the future and change you know all of
our minds you know or you know he
publishes a case study like Dora which
is complete
failure why we know a failure is because
he tells it's a failure isn't that true
of every case study right like isn't
that is that the greatest thing about
like people I love it when critics of
Freud are like all of his cases are
failures he P but that's how that's the
greatness of him that he published he
doesn't publish the successes because
those would be uninteresting right like
he publishes the
failures yeah he uh it's funny because
the critics say that it he's a these are
failures as if they've discovered
something Freud Freud himself is telling
you here's a case study that's
interesting because it didn't work out
yeah yeah that's so great it's such a
great point I I want to end with the
with with the thing that I find really
you know you've said like I'm not a
genius a and but then you made this
distinction between genius small Big G
and little G um the whole last third of
the book really is about or maybe maybe
less than that but is about this idea of
like a I don't know politics of Genius
ethics of Genius right like how does is
there a possibility for a group of
geniuses right and I think obviously
you're you think yes and you think that
that there's a sort of political
possibility in that right like like just
because that that that that the one
might say even that you think the lack
and I think this the lack of genius has
derailed politics till now right like
because it's so invested in you know end
pleasure really like Po so many
political projects are I think probably
that what unites the left and the right
in you know like my my my son asked me
one time you know like why why you know
why is cons you know why is liberal in
Europe mean the exact opposite and I
said well because in in in Europe but
there's an actual Socialist Party you
know there's actually they don't they
don't think socialism is a bad word so
and then my so Henry said to me he's
like so so actually in America then we
just have like two ver versions of a
capitalist party and I was like yeah you
yeah you you got it exactly we don't
have a true left here but I think what
to the extent that we have a left I
think what unites it with a right is
that we're both and they're both
invested in this idea of end pleasure
yeah uh and I think that you know it's a
it's a pol it's a politics of non-
geniuses I think when it comes to
mainstream politics uh we're trying to
we're too busy trying to articulate why
it all fails you know and I think that
even in order to succeed right in order
to succeed I mean that seems like isn't
that your critique of the Contemporary
political I mean even it's it's a kind
of critique of Marx I mean you don't
mention him but I think it is right like
like markx articulates a vision of
ultimate success and you're I mean
really you're it's a politics of like no
it's like like there is a like it's the
striving it's the failure it's that
right like that's that's for you I think
it's a politics of the process or
politics of the of the failure I think
you know there's no doubt that we
experience failure on some kind of
symbolic level it's inherent to the
structure of the symbolic and I think
that people on the right want to tell
people those failures are because of
this particular group of
people uh and and I think that when we
name the IM
as the reason why everything fails in
America we obliterate what's actually
most other about the Immigrant the the
dting we we claim to know it all about
them and I don't and I don't think that
takes a genius to act that way to act
like you know it all you know and I
think that even on the left you know
when we you know we we narrow it down to
1% of the population but you know
there's still sort of this sense of like
it's those damn CEOs and those damn
billionaires that robbed all of our
pleasure and if we can just eliminate
those people we'll have it all working
per perfectly yeah that's really good I
I really like the way you form what's
the opposition between the know-it-all
and then the cynic is that right is that
am I getting the other one right well
there's the uh there's just the
anti-intellectual then there is the
know-it-all and then there's the genius
yeah I I really like that way of
dividing things up and I think that that
figure of the know- itall and I think
it's interesting because you can even be
a leftist know it all when you're when
you're when you're like tolerant and
like don't want to offend anyone I mean
that's kind of the no and all position
right like it's odd way but I think
according to your theory it does that
does kind of capture that I think yeah
so I think I guess what I would say is
like there there needs to be an element
of Genius in in politics so the the last
third of the book is is a reflection on
group psychology because there are
particular mentions of of terminology
that that appears in group psychology
that appear in Freud's theory of genius
that's sort of what brought me to that
idea but I do think group psychology is
the great unfinished project of Freud's
you know I think that's sort of where
there's so much fruit to be born from
from investigating and and thinking
through uh Freud's preliminary ideas of
you mean just the book just the groupy
ology analysis of ego is that yeah the
book yeah so the the book is like
19330 is it 1929 1930 29 maybe yeah yeah
I think that's to me that's like the
great the great unfinished project yeah
I mean it's interesting because he was
thinking about I mean civilization is
discontents as 1930 future of Illusion
is just before that so he's thinking
about like it seems like he's obsessing
about groups yes at this time right
monotheism yeah right and he just can't
it's like what he can't I mean one could
say I think I'm not sure if this is
totally right but one could say that Lon
kind of picks up this group aspect of
Freud's thought as he introduces like
the importance of the symbolic order
importance of the big other and he's
really like that that he kind of picks
up the Baton more or less success I
don't know about the success of it but
it seems like that's at least one thing
that people like about Lan is that he he
does take up precisely this aspect of
Frey that you say Freud never fully
works out yeah for me in the book it's
seminar 10 that becomes like pretty
prominent because yeah he's he has this
line in there where well I don't know
exactly what the line is but this idea
that we're all objects a and that's sort
of that's that's the universality for
all of us is that we're all objects a
and so I think in fact that's how you
end the book isn't it like we're it's
like a group of objects a right like
yeah if we all throw our throw our lot
into this idea that we're all objects a
you know this this that we are all the
the not the the the the null of the
symbolic it's it's subjectivity itself I
think that that may be an element of you
know I know we both don't like that film
uh um Oppenheimer maybe you you more
totally than I but uh it's utopian in
the sense that it shows the form of how
great work happens Collective work
happens even if it's the destruction of
the world you know and I just sometimes
I imagine if we got all the great
leanian thinkers and we put them in some
small town in New Mexico and forc them
to think about group psychology we would
come up with like the most fantastic
version of uh of group politics uh you
know that would would uh would
revolutionize the world it's like that's
pretty great man that's I love that idea
I mean that's a very I know you you you
were very indebted to Frederick Jameson
that's something Frederick Jameson would
say I think try to try to a another
person who just dearly departed um that
that that you're you're redeeming even
the thing that you don't like by saying
look there is this utopian potential in
even that right like that I think that's
really good yeah but I think I just
thank you so much for talking with me I
thought this is incredibly Illuminating
for me about the book and I hope for
other people and uh I just I can't
really recommend it highly enough I just
I I it's one of the few books I've read
I mean obviously I've read Hegel and Lon
more than once but it's one of the few
books I've read twice and I I I I have
to say I got even more out of it the
second time so well thank you so much
Todd that's a lot okay take care
