I'm Tim Ventura and we're joined today
by Brigadier General Jeffrey Weiss
currently serving in the department of
the Air Force as Regional Affairs
director in international Affairs for
the air and space forces Brigadier
General Weise has civilian experience as
a systems engineer and has military
experience including wartime operational
US Air Force and Joint headquarters
staff and command leadership positions
in Homeland air defense air and missile
defense theater Air Battle management
Commander control nuclear deterrence and
information influence operations he's
commanded at the wing group and Squadron
levels holds four master's degrees in
Military and aeronautical study areas
including an MS in National Security
strategy from the national War College
his articles have appeared in air and
space Power journal and Joint Force
quarterly and his book the new Art of
War the origins Theory and future of
conflict is something that we will be
discussing today so I want to start out
with a disclaimer the views expressed by
Brigadier General Weiss in this
interview are his personal opinions only
and do not represent the views or
policies of the United States government
or military so Jeffrey Welcome Back
Sir Tim thank you I appreciate the
opportunity to be back with you thanks
for having me on your podcast and in
particular uh to discuss this important
topic today oh absolutely and you know I
I want to thank thank you for your
remarkable career of service and I think
with the topics that we're discussing
especially what's going on in
international Affairs right now people
need to keep in mind everything that
yourself and so many other members of
our military services as well as the US
government are doing to help keep us
safe so thank you so much for that thank
you uh you're welcome my pleasure So
today we're talking about the war in
Ukraine and hopefully taking some
lessons from your book the new Art of
War I'm going to put links in the
YouTube show notes for that I have read
this a few times now I think it is
absolutely remarkable book but I know
you have been following the headlines
closely as I think we all have and I
wanted to start out by asking for your
thoughts and opinions on the recent
escalation of hostilities that we're
seeing in Ukraine right now sure sure
thank Tim uh so regarding the escalation
I mean escalation can mean different
things to different people but I think
uh what we see is we see this uptick in
in activity right maybe in intensity Etc
with respect to in particular the War uh
with between Russia and Ukraine um and
so regarding that conflict I think we're
at an important inflection point right
now in the war I think there's a sense
on both sides as we uh as we approach
three years uh of this War uh of
weariness a tremendous resource
expenditure in in terms of people uh
absolutely horrific casualty numbers
related to this War uh and and frankly
uh and unfortunately without much
significance in terms of moving toward a
decision for either side uh you'll
recall uh potentially the Korean War for
example where very little was
accomplished uh after the first year or
so of that war as both sides were
essentially fighting to establish gains
on the battlefield that could be L later
leveraged at the bargaining table to
gain a favorable negotiating position so
uh though there are no really serious
negotiations happening currently you
kind of get that sense with Russia
Ukraine that each side's attempting to
gain that Advantage
um and and that is appearing to us as
escalation at this point so whether in
the case of Ukraine as as we're looking
at more strikes into Russia and if you
look at Russia in terms of the
introduction of foreign troops uh and
new weapons to the conflict
what the rhetoric is getting more
Extreme as well as I think the saber
adling uh Ukraine's former military
commander-in-chief Valerie zusy recently
said that the direct involvement of
Russia's autocratic allies in its war on
Ukraine means that World War II has
started and last week Vladimir Putin was
quoted as saying the war is going global
so I wanted to ask if they're correct is
This World War
III that's a great question certainly
from Ukraine's perspective they want the
world behind them right uh against
Russia and against Putin's enablers uh
which we've seen in the form of China
we've seen in the form of North Korea uh
Iran bellarus uh and so forth uh and in
my book I Echo uh what most great
theorists have said in emphasizing the
importance of alliances so for a weaker
State like
Ukraine particularly one without a
nuclear deterrent um they have to form
an alliances to remain viable uh when
confronted by a strong conventional or a
nuclear armed opponent uh even Russia uh
I would say once Mighty Russia is
turning to strange bedfellows to keep
its its Gambit in Ukraine alive and
hence the support from outliers like
Iran and North Korea uh so we see this
posturing around the world but the
question is is This World War II well of
course that designation conjures all
sorts of of nuclear Armageddon and Globe
spanning battles um however I'd like to
make two two points first of all when we
consider this question uh first of all
this is the largest conflict in Europe
since World War II and when you look at
the number of countries involved there
are more countries involved in terms of
support in some cases direct uh we look
at North Korea Etc others indirect um
there are more countries involved here
over 50 um than were in all of World War
I for for example uh actively engaged
we're also seeing significant Global and
economic uh political effects from this
war and we see it occurring in all
domains we see it on land on the surface
and under the water in the air and
cyberspace and space so it truly is a
global war in that aspect and the second
point I want to make is that we we can
make no mistake that a miscalculation
here uh or error on the part of either
side could cause this conflict to
escalate uh and widen so I think this is
a world war in the sense uh that it's
Global in scale uh there's so many
countries involved there's so much
effect around the world however is it
World War III I think um it's certainly
possible should more great Powers become
involved uh directly in this war if the
US and NATO if China gets drawn in ETC
that that we could characterize this as
a World War I okay well and thank you
for helping clarify that and I think in
some ways that's reassuring because I
think what you're indicating is it
hasn't completely spiraled out of
control um you know sometimes there is
so much drama in the news headlines
right and uh the ICBM story was one
where you know at first they said oh
Russia launched an ICBM and I noticed
that they walked that back a fair amount
to irbm and they started kind of
couching some of those initial reports
so uh now when I read the quote by Putin
last week I immediately thought of your
book the new Art of War again I'm going
to put links in the YouTube show notes
for that you have filled that with
Timeless quotes lessons and strategy
from the world's leading military and
political leaders for me this has been a
mustre recommendation because it
provides a foundational framework for
military and geopolitical theory and I
wanted to ask if any specific examples
come to mind from your studies and from
the book that are relevant to today's
situation well absolutely there's a lot
that's relevant in there I I published a
number of uh short articles on LinkedIn
Etc uh looking at the Russia Ukraine war
Afghanistan withdrawal and others so
there's all sorts of things we can pull
out of the book quotes and Concepts and
we'll talk about some of some of these
today uh certainly getting back to your
original note about launching icbms this
is very concerning of course because any
time of major nuclear power launches in
ICBM uh in particular if they they
haven't announced it ahead of time
that's of great concern because is this
some kind of preemptive strike Etc so
that that's certainly concerning and and
definitely escalatory uh one of the
things I do talk about in my book is the
power and the purpose of of rhetoric and
messaging and Putin and Russia do this
very well um Putin wants to keep the the
West at arms length so he rattles his
nuclear saber and speaks of global Wars
one quote I think that's very appropo uh
comes from Rasmus of roddam who's a 16th
century Dutch priest uh and philosopher
who warned us that quote War breeds war
from a small War a greater is born from
one two the plague of War breaking out
in one place affects neighbors as well
so we have to be very wary of this war
exceeding the its current bounds and
drawing in the major Powers as I
mentioned uh a moment ago in terms of
like this escalating to truly a World
War II another concept from my book that
I want to direct your viewers to study
is the war viscosity algorithm uh
located in chapter chapter 4 on page 274
because this algorithm
illustrates how both sides are making
decisions in this conflict they're
navigating this algorithm making
decisions regarding the cont the conduct
and the and the form that this war is
taking so they're constantly assessing
their will to fight their capacity to
fight and the context in which they find
themselves and and capacity and context
are changing daily and they're having
impact on will what will that impact be
uh will it be enough to change to drive
a change to the form of the war or
perhaps it could uh drive an end to this
conflict uh if there's significant
political change for example uh the US
election or something were to happen to
zalinsky or Putin uh that's when we
would see this conflict move either
toward a military decision uh on the
battlefield or potentially a settlement
ah okay well only a few days after Putin
said the war is going global Simon
tisdall wrote In The Guardian that
Russia has been engaged in a shadow war
against the West for some time using
sabotage arson deniable cyber attacks
and both passive and aggressive forms of
covert hybrid and cognitive Warfare and
he indicated this has been going on for
several years now so when I read that it
did kind of give me pause and these are
all forms of warfare that you discussed
in your book right right so there's a
lot of terminology thrown out there
hybrid and cognitive Shadow but one of
the things I talk a lot about a lot in
my book is that is that somebody coins
another adjective and another form of
War all of these are characterized in
the book and they're simplified so we
don't have to uh sort through and say
well now we're to the 27th different
form of War for example yeah so we so
what are we talking about when we hear
terms like hybrid and Shadow I think in
common parlament today uh we're we're
talking some people call this Ray Zone
conflict uh this is something that Russ
is expert in they actually have a word
for it it's called masarova which
literally means little masquerade in a
sense deception uh strategically in my
book I describe these sorts of
activities that we're talking about here
as activities short uh in Warfare but
are short of actual combat and these are
actions they fall within what I call the
third essential Act of strategy which is
the implementation portion of strategy
so uh think of ways and means to
accomplish ends and they're but in this
case they're employed to achieve wartime
political aims uh where combat is not
one of the ways and means so that so we
think of this uh deception the use of
misinformation all these other sorts of
of tactics uh sinet uses a similar uh
paradigm what they call assassins mace
uh in the book I talk about four zones
of what is called the peace War
dialectic where you have true peace
competition conflict and War uh so here
we're talking about uh activities that
are that are on the borderline between
competition and conflict uh where
they're not where they're engage where
there's not combat engaged now where
they're part of the actual war in
Ukraine they're absolutely part of of
that war uh furthermore in my book I
talk about inviscus form of War so
you'll you'll understand the the
property of viscosity in which all forms
of War can be characterized as either
viscous or inviscus based on uh what I
call the dark criteria directness
acceleration restriction concentration
and cohesion so you think of uh viscus
being uh these these uh regular uh Army
uh Air Force Navy Etc units in conflict
with each other where they're very
direct they're very concentrated Etc and
very restricted but acts of sabotage
non-attributable cyber cyber attacks
misinformation those sorts of things we
would characteriz as being inviscus
which is much less direct much more
agile not concentrated not restricted so
in this case we're seeing exactly what
we would expect in in the sense of a uh
a country uh like Russia who's who's
normally considered strong but
potentially facing Ukraine and and
United Western United States trying to
uh hold us uh at risk without initiating
direct
conflict well let me go back to
alliances for a moment um Ukraine's
former military commander Valerie zy
again said that Ukraine is no longer
facing only Russia and this was part of
his commentary about World War III or at
least his belief in that area he' said
that the Kremlin has been using
mercenaries from Nepal India North Korea
and I've read that recently Yaman is
involved in an effort to avoid fullscale
Russian troop mobilization and I think
that we're all aware of Iranian drones
which are being widely used in Russian
air strikes so Western nations are
already united through NATO so I I'm
wondering if we are starting to see
Russia build a a firm alliance with
opposing
Nations yeah to my point earlier about
alliances being so important uh and
without question this is occurring both
sides are feeling the pressure to remain
in the fight uh and to establish an
upper hand position from which to
dictate the terms of any any potential
future armist I think the elephant in
the room here really Tim is that there
appears to be no realistic strategy or
what what people today are are calling a
theory of victory for Ukraine to defeat
nuclear armed Russia decisively so the
best Ukraine can hope for is to last
long enough that that Russia gives out
on of its own weariness or there's a
political upheaval of some kind uh for
Russia and Putin there's a belief that
they can they can still win by wearing
down Ukraine and and also uh wearing
down the West's uh support for Ukraine
uh if you'll recall in my book you win
Wars by defeating the other side's will
to fight uh and destroying capacity is
one way to do this but it's also
important to attack the psychological
pillars that under that underg the will
and among these are things like morale
leadership uh experience uh and and
motivation those sorts of things so each
side in the war certainly attempting to
remain in the fight long enough to
collapse the other side's will to fight
and that entails bringing in Mercenaries
other countries additional capacity in
some cases prisons uh uh prisoners uh uh
more advanced weapons and so forth to to
maintain that pressure uh to get to the
point where that will just collapses and
of course we haven't gotten there yet
yeah now one of the big unknowns here
seems to be China back in October the
Council on Foreign Relations wrote that
Russia and China are strengthening their
alliance with a notable focus on Ukraine
but China seems to be supporting Russia
while promoting itself as a peace broker
so it seems like they are trying to take
at least a somewhat neutral stance in
this which could be a very good thing I
suppose um if Russia gets into a direct
conflict with NATO would you anticipate
China deciding to take a side in this or
do you see them trying to remain
neutral I think neutrality is probably a
little too strong uh to to call what
China's doing they certainly want to uh
enhance their stature in the world they
want to uh they're doing more uh in
terms of trying to make themselves
respectable in in in the traditional
World Order while at the same time
trying to to revise it with them at the
top of the food chain so I think the
most important thing to think about with
China is they're going to do what's in
their best interest no matter what and I
definitely do not believe it is in their
best interest nor do I think they see it
in their best interest to get be drawn
into a conflict in Europe uh against
NATO they have enough concerns uh in
their own backyard I would also say that
despite that they the sense that they
have cozied up to some degree with
Russia uh these are very strange bed
fellows with a long history of of
cultural and political animosity and I
don't think that's going to change
anytime soon and I don't think that
China necessarily thinks it's an
existential problem for them if Russia
is weakened uh and if Russian Russia is
embroiled with NATO uh so I do not think
that should NATO uh become involved in
the Russia Ukraine war that China will
directly participate uh nor do I think
that China wants this necessarily to
occur because of the global uh economic
ramifications which could certainly
undermine their uh stability within
China however I would say that China is
poised to to exploit the situation to
the greatest extent possible and if and
if there were a direct confrontation
between NATO and Russia they would uh
certainly want to exploit that to
Regional advantage and particularly they
may want to make a move against Taiwan
and this truly would be an explosive
situation that could lead to what anyone
could justifiably call a World War III
um that said I don't think uh that that
direct confrontation between NATO Russia
Andor China is likely again due to the
power of nuclear deterrence uh between
all but we can't rule it out again
mistakes can happen but I would say
nuclear deterrence is still is still
deterring the the great powers from
confronting each other directly well let
me turn to this topic of nuclear weapons
and nuclear deterrence last week Russia
launched a new Hypersonic ballistic
missile into Ukraine now it was armed
with conventional explosives but it is
reportedly capable of delivering 3 to
six nuclear warheads simultaneously as
part of myr to Independent targets uh
Putin also changed Russia's nuclear
Doctrine to say that quote unquote any
attack by a non-nuclear power supported
by a nuclear power would be considered a
joint attack and I believe he also wrote
that any Attack by One member of a
military block would be considered an
attack by the entire Alliance so for me
that was very very concerning I wanted
to ask in your opinion how close are we
to nuclear war right now
well he well Putin wants to reign in any
possibility that the West uh may take
advantage of the situation uh with some
members of NATO Andor uh allies becoming
more provocative and we're certainly
towing a very very thin line there when
we're talking about some of the advanced
weapons being used uh I think Putin's
statements may appear and they they
justifiably appear provocative but I
think when you look through the lens of
theor theory and history makes
absolutely perfect sense and it's
something that Russia's been doing from
the beginning of the war a preponderance
of their conventional military Powers
tied up in Ukraine that doesn't leave
them much capacity for for conventional
deterrent so that leaves only nuclear
deterrent so this is why Russia is
rattling the nuclear saber saber uh and
this is essentially their Ace and the
Hole uh to protect themselves while
they're tied up in Ukraine Putin does
not want NATO uh or the US to think that
Russia's weakness is an invitation to
exploitation
uh and I think that Putin wants to Halt
the gradual escalation what he sees of
high-end Western Weaponry into Ukraine
and particularly these weapons that are
that could potentially Target a
strategic sight deeper within Russia so
uh at the same time I think Russia
doesn't want to for the reasons I
specified earlier uh be draw be drawn
into a direct conflict with NATO so
they're so they're Towing um they're
playing a delicate game here uh with
escalatory rhetoric that's designed to
deter while at the same time making it
uh uh making sure that a conflict
between NATO doesn't occur so I would
say the rhetoric makes it appear that
we're closer to nuclear war but in
reality I think nothing substantive has
changed provided provided to a
conditions exist I I'll throw them in
number one uh provided NATO does not
directly get involved in the war against
Russia with troops uh and and equipment
in other words actively participating
with with with NATO or US forces against
Russia will change that equation uh and
also the other side of that and I think
this is speaks to Putin's comment
specifically uh if Ukraine uh employs
weapons uh that can directly threaten
either Russia's strategic forces uh and
or create an existential dilemma for
Moscow then I could see that also
changing the equation uh so we have to
pay close attention in particular to
that second one um because because Putin
certainly kind of speaking his way into
a box and and and if he finds it where
he can't maintain his credibility
without acting uh that would be
something that could be dangerous and so
in that sense uh we could be closer to a
potential nuclear
confrontation well thank you again for
clarifying and providing the context I
think that's incredibly helpful and in
many ways reassuring so I wanted to go
back and look at history a bit the
immediate comparison that came to mind
for me was the Missile Crisis uh Reuters
reported that Russia has started making
nuclear resistant mobile bomb shelters I
have read that the city of Leningrad is
converting uh sellers into bomb shelters
and Germany is planning to convert
public buildings into bomb shelters as
well now you know again at first when
you read those headlines at face value
it's like okay the end is nigh this is
really really bad but then when I paused
and thought about it I thought you know
this reminds me so much of the fear that
existed and that that existential
anxiety during the Cuban Missile Crisis
can we draw any comparisons between
today's saber rattling and what happened
back
then we we certainly can I don't I don't
want to make it appear as though there
isn't gra the potential for grave danger
with this again go back to arasmith of
Roder Dam's quote uh there is a
potential for for widening and
escalation and mistakes to occur now
that being said when we're looking at
the Cuban Missile Crisis I don't think
we're anywhere near uh approaching the
level of n nuclear brinksmanship that we
saw there uh because Russia is not
attempting to position nuclear weapons
for example you know on the US's
doorstep in the Western Hemisphere that
would certainly uh be be a lot more
provocative however we got to we can't
just look at this from the US's
standpoint we have to look at it from
Europe's standpoint as well and and
nuclear weapons are very much on
Europeans uh doorstep there so so
neither neither Russia nor Europe nor
anyone else wants to to open the
Pandora's box of of a nuclear exchange
um but but the building of the bomb
shelters I think signals very clearly on
both sides that that they that they want
to be seen as serious that they are
ready to do this uh in the event that
the other side uh steps across the line
and that's very important to deterrence
that's something that again you know we
can get scared at this sort of thing but
we we need to understand the way
deterrence Works uh there are two
essential components one is you have to
have the capability uh and clearly both
sides have the capability to to go
nuclear and to escalate uh but more than
that it requires the opponent to be
convinced that you have the will to
respond and that's based on credibility
so what you're seeing with these
movements is that both sides are
enhancing The credibility regarding
their will to to respond should this be
escalated so it's it's a it's a matter
of of deterrent posturing uh it can it
can be frightening but that's what
deterrence is about right to frighten
the other side from taking action that
that might otherwise um be detrimental
to both of them well so one of the
things that you mentioned a moment ago
was um not seeing a clear path to
Victory I guess in Ukraine I I wanted to
ask about political off-ramps in terms
of continued escalation uh is do you
foresee any ways you know I I I have
read about something called a golden
path to retreat or something along those
lines I'm misquoting that but the idea
being that you know you give your
adversary regardless of who that is you
know a way to preserve their honor and
exit the battlefield without having to
escalate things do you think that there
is a way that we could reach that with
Russia that is the that is the really
doll question Sim uh and it's one that
undoubtedly the new Trump Administration
will be grappling with immediately uh
Theory and history tells us the
deescalation in essence exiting the war
viscosity algorithm requires one of two
things either a decision forced
militarily or the mutual agreement
between opposing sides um uh to cease
hostilities so I think a decision forced
militarily for the reasons I highlighted
earlier is is unlikely at this point as
certainly in the near term and certainly
not as imposed by Ukraine on Russia so
then the question becomes on what
grounds so how can we get to this golden
path or this political off-ramp uh and
and I think I think there could be a
brokered humanitarian pause or something
of that nature um uh an agreement to
deescalate um to mitigate human
suffering for example but a longer term
solution I think will be required to to
Really solve this problem and it's fair
to say that uh Russia will not want to
seed any of the territory in Ukraine
that it's taken uh and and so unless
essentially unless Ukraine could be
convinced uh to allow Russia to keep its
territory we're at an impass which
essentially explains why we've been in
this war as long as we have so even if
Ukraine could be convinced let's say
they they were uh Say by president-elect
Trump uh coming in to negotiate uh and
to allow Russia to hold hold its gains
Russia would still not give up its
design
on Ukraine and would probably not accept
any deal that wouldn't also guarantee
that Ukraine would not join any
alliances and not accept any significant
uh troops even in a peacekeeping role on
Ukrainian soil uh and I think Putin
would say were any of these things to
happen he would immediately resume
hostilities so I think it's a very
thorny issue um and this is why we're
still at this three years hence with
with almost no again almost no
significant change is uh in the last
couple years um and it's going to be
very interesting to keep an eye on it in
the in the coming months absolutely
Jeffrey let me thank you so much for
your time today again thank you for your
tremendous career of service and thank
you for helping elucidate this issue and
just share the context with us about you
know why this is happening where it's
going and some of the factors that are
involved with this I want to remind
everybody to look in the YouTube show
notes once again for the link to buy the
new Art of War that is an absolutely
remarkable book you have put so much
into it and it is an absolutely amazing
read uh let me close by asking what do
you see happening in the near future in
the Ukraine conflict and then what are
your goals uh for the coming 2025
year thanks so much Tim I really the
opportunity to be on your p on your
podcast again um and I I'll be looking
at along with you um very intently at
what's going to happen here in the near
term I think uh uh first of all I think
you're going to see uh some some
overtures by by the current incoming us
Administration uh to try to to find an
Avenue that to to a political off-ramp
of some kind certainly uh
president-elect Trump has said that's
one of his main goals and and and Putin
has has said he's willing to work with
Trump Etc but there's there's the
Europeans to consider there's the
Ukrainian the position to consider Etc
and a lot of blood has been spilled so
you're not going to uh just wipe that
away and and sign some some peace treaty
without both sides as you said feeling
like they're getting something out of
this uh and that so so that's what's
going to happen I think you're going to
see some attempt but again for the
reason uh that I mentioned um in the
Wild Card of of European sensibilities
Etc I think it's going to be uh very
difficult to to find common ground in
the near term and I so I think unlikely
that this is is going to come to an end
uh anytime soon uh regarding myself uh
I'm definitely going to be working to uh
help our allies and partners gain the
capability and the confidence that they
need to stand uh together with us and
our other allies that have similar um
views on on values and and democracy and
and peace and security and human rights
and those sorts of things so from my
position in the department with
International Affairs we'll continue to
push that in the air and space domain s
and uh and hopefully we will uh will be
successful in deterring Russia or China
or any other actors out there Iran Etc
from uh from attempting to to take
advantage of any situation or us or our
allies around the world so that that's
what I'm looking forward to doing and uh
and I'll certainly be getting after that
in
2025 thank you again so much for your
time today
sir thank you Tim appreciate it
