this episode is brought to you by ground
news hi welcome to another episode of
Cold
Fusion Google is everywhere the company
is just a part of daily life when you
want a quick answer to something you
just use Google without a second thought
but what if there was a world where it
wasn't just Google in that position but
a whole host of other players that
vision is what the Department of Justice
in the US wants to see now Google has
suffered a major legal blow after a US
judge ruled it had acted illegally to
Main contain a monopoly and stifle
competition while generating huge
profits the US attorney general
described the ruling as quote an
historic win for the American people in
August of 2024 in an event called the
biggest antitrust ruling of the century
the doj has called Google a monopoly in
the online search Market but since that
ruling things have progressed now the
doj are looking out ways to break up
Google on September 6th 2024 a hearing
was held to determine the plan for
forward but in yet further escalation
the doj is launching another antitrust
case against Google in the coming days
but in all of this there are still some
questions here is this the beginning of
the end for Google's era of online
dominance do the government's actions
actually help the average internet user
or is there a bit more to the story
might the Department of Justice be a bit
heavy-handed on Google we'll have a fair
look at both sides also stay tuned for
the story of the Monopoly man all of
that and more coming right
up you are watching to Fusion
TV so it's well known that Google
dominates online search they make up
about 90% of the search Market which has
served them well Google makes over $75
billion yearly from search that's more
than the GDP of countries like Kuwait
Morocco Slovakia and Oman but recently
this dominance has come into question in
the landmark 286 page ruling of Google
versus the United States the doj thinks
that Google has gotten to this position
due to unfair practices in other words
the violation of antitrust laws so it's
probably good to have some definitions
before we go further according to the
doj antitrust behavior is quote
anti-competitive conduct that deprives
American consumers taxpayers and workers
of the benefits of competition end quote
and part of this is a Monopoly Monopoly
status isn't legally defined and it
depends where you look but at 50 to 60%
market share you're teetering on the
edge and such a company may endure
scrutiny at 70 to 75% you're most
definitely a monopoly but the thing is
the triggering of antitrust action also
depends on the company's Behavior but
90% market share is definitely going to
attract Regulators in any functioning
government
I read through some of the case document
and there's a lot but there's two main
things I want to cover Google charging
higher prices because there's no
competition and paying to keep the
competition away and remember that these
are not my opinions just the facts from
the case an interesting note in the
paper was that apparently in 2020 Google
conducted a study to see what would
happen to their bottom line if it quote
were to significantly reduce the quality
of its search product end quot the
conclusion was that even if the company
made search bad the revenue from search
would still be fine on this the judge
wrote quote the fact that Google can
make product changes without concern
that its users might go elsewhere is
something only a firm with Monopoly
power could do okay so let's dig
deeper the case CES that since there's
no other game in town for search
advertising advertisers had no choice
but Google in order to reach more people
Google could then increase prices the
other problem according to the ruling
was that prices were raised
incrementally to blend in with normal
Market fluctuations and this was to
reduce the likelihood of advertisers
noticing incremental price changes led
to consistent Revenue growth without
significant complaints from advertisers
Google went as far as to do internal
studies to show that advertisers did
indeed not notice and just thought that
the price hikes were just part of the
overall Market the doj also cites that
Google tuned their mechanism for
determining ad costs quote Google adjust
the parameters of the auction function
how advertisers bid for adspace in order
to improve long-term Revenue this work
has resulted in products which add
several billion dollars in incremental
Revenue annually end
quote and this next point is pretty
interesting the ruling goes on to say
that when Google grew concerned about
meeting its Revenue targets a code
yellow was called basically it was an
instruction to get all hands on deck to
subtly raise Advertiser pricing without
too many noticing the company knew they
could do this yet again from more
internal studies showing that
advertisers would pay more than they
currently were without leaving the judge
stated quote the trial evidence firmly
establishes Google's Monopoly power and
has enabled Google to increase text ad
prices without any meaningful
competitive
constraint I know what some of you would
be saying well who cares about
advertisers getting fleeced all
advertisers do is track you and follow
you around on the off chance that you'll
buy something that you've previously
been Googling and there is an argument
to be made there but there's a second
order consequence if advertisers have to
pay higher cost to Google they can then
turn around and pass some of that cost
onto you the
consumer Google has been paying Apple
and Samsung billions of dollars annually
to install Google as the default search
engine on their smartphones and web
browsers quote in return for exclusive
and non-exclusive default placements
Google pays Apple $20 billion in 2022
end quote this is apparently quote
almost double the payment Google made in
2020 which at the time was 17.5% of
Apple's operating profit so why would
Google do this well consumers tend to
buy more things on their phone and for
iPhones quote Google receives almost 95%
of General search queries end quote and
with billions of iPhones out there
that's a lot of ads which means a lot of
Revenue the doj didn't like that quote
Google's distribution agreements
foreclose a substantial portion of the
general search Services market and
impairs Rivals opportunities to compete
end quote the doj thinks that it's
actually the Monopoly on the phone
browsing Market that enabled Google to
consistently raise the prices of online
advertising without consequences as we
discussed earlier it turns out that back
in the days of Steve Jobs and for a
little bit after that Apple was looking
to make their own search engine but they
had a search Project in the works when
Steve Jobs was in charge over there they
were looking at search because he had
such an ax to grind with Eric Schmidt
because they launched Android and he
kicked Eric Schmidt off the board and
there was a lot of hand ringing there I
think apple is and i' I've heard this
from folks around Apple I believe
Apple's going to launch their own search
engine and compete heads up with Google
but now Google has Apple in golden
handcuffs with a$ 20 billion yearly deal
in the contract apple is basically not
allowed to innovate on any of their own
search
engines the judge also scolds Google for
destroying and hiding evidence they
allege that Google trained employees to
not leave a paper trail or quote bad
evidence behind quote any company that
puts the owners on its employees to
identify and preserve relevant evidence
does so at its own Peril Google avoided
sanctions in this case it may not be so
lucky in the next
one entrepreneur and angel investor
David Friedberg gives an interesting
Viewpoint in his View the ruling is more
anti- suuccess than it is anti-consumer
I'll also say it just feels like the
tenor of all of this is anti- success
and not anti-competition and anything
that's kind of successful or big is
automatically deemed to be a monopoly
and I think we really have to kind of
understand how are consumers and the
market for competition being affected by
having all these things together and
that's what should really be focused on
and studied not just the fact that
something is big and successful
Jason kakanis another angel investor
states that Google does not in fact have
a monopoly on the ads business meta
Amazon and Tik Tok are also huge players
they do have a massive Monopoly in
search that's absolutely true and the
justice department I think is um well
within their rights to to take a deep
dive on that they don't have it in ads
if you look at the competition for
Google in advertising you got meta Tik
Tok and Amazon which have very very
significant advertising businesses and
then like a bunch of new players um
which are referred to basically as the
shopping cart networks that's Uber
instacart door Dash Etc and so when you
look at this it really does rhyme with
what happened with Microsoft they're two
decades late on this the the search
Monopoly has been squeezed for every
dollar and to build every subcomponent
of Google's Monopoly at the time of the
antitrust ruling Google argued that its
distribution deals are common in the
business World they equated paying for
search engine default privileges on
phones to be the same as if a food
manufacturer pays to promote products at
ey level in a grocery store aisle the
way Google sees it if you don't like
Google you can switch the default engine
on your device but people don't switch
says Google because they prefer Google
Google has also stated that they're
going to appeal the decision of them
being a monopoly on the flip side when
it comes to the default status of Google
and iPhones Apple themselves aren't a
fan of Bing Eddie Q Apple's senior vice
president said quote I don't believe
there's a price in the world that
Microsoft could offer us to set Bing as
the default in Safari over Google they
offered to give us Bing for free they
could give us the whole company end
quote but also take that with a grain of
salt because it might be in Apple's best
interest to defend Google it's actually
written in that 20 billion contract with
Google part of the contract obligates
both Google and apple to defend this
agreement quote in response to
regulatory actions I.E doj antitrust
lawsuits just like this one okay okay so
that's the ruling but it doesn't leave
you satisfied what does this all mean
and what happens next and what about the
calls to break up
Google Justice Department officials are
discussing their options including
breaking up Google so that their Chrome
browser could be sold as a separate
company same with Google's Android
smartphone operating system other
options may include even separating
YouTube from Google Department of
Justice is considering breaking up
Google after winning an antitrust case
against the search giant just last week
a hearing is said for early September
you know maybe um forcing Google to
divest the Android operating system and
the Chrome browser those are two of the
suggestions that we had heard from
people with knowledge of this case even
if you don't actually get a breakup it
can divert resources Talent money uh
Capital towards fighting these antitrust
battles and make a company miss out on
Innovation that led to what a l decade
at Microsoft so that is the worry here
for Google as well but the idea of a
breakup has been raised that the doj is
going to ask the judge to consider but
there's a possibility that Google could
even break itself up the last time
something similar happened was back in
1982 When AT&amp;T broke itself up and this
was to dispel the antitrust pressure
from the government Google has the
opportunity to do something really
interesting here which is get ahead of
the curve and break itself up before the
political system forces that onto it the
big categories would be search
advertising and YouTube and I think that
would have two big economic benefits for
shareholders one is you unlock value by
deong glomera second once you break up
the company into these pieces there's
less places for employees who aren't
doing anything to hide you know for all
this bureaucracy to hide I mean look
Google is famous for employees who don't
do anything right the guys sitting on
the roof suting themselves all day if
you break up the company into three or
four smaller companies right there's
just way less room for people to
the doj could also Force Google to make
its advertising knowledge available to
its Rivals but the most likely scenario
is mandating that Google abandoned the
deals with apple that made its search
engine the default option and the same
goes for the deal with Android
manufacturers too law professor Spencer
Weber Waller agrees quote there are no
fines or monetary penalties in these
types of cases but the court will have
to decide whether Google should be
broken up in some way more likely it
will order Google to eliminate the
exclusive contracts exclusive contracts
and Licensing restrictions that have
reinforced its Monopoly position for
years end
quote now to the latest updates on
September 6th 2024 in Washington a
hearing was held by the doj the result
of the hearing was that Google was going
to be given an outline in December as to
what they should do to restore
competition in the market the
prosecution hasn't finalized the details
of the recommendation but justice
department attorney David delist said
that it should be sweeping the
recommendations may include what we just
covered but interestingly the doj is
specifically looking at the intersection
of artificial intelligence and Google's
plans during the hearing there was lots
of talk about Google's Gemini and what
else Google had up their sleeve
meanwhile Google said that they were
concerned that the doj will hamstring
their efforts in the next generation of
search
technology Google's Attorney John smed
line said at the hearing that the
company requires an in-depth proposal
from the US government prosecutors he
said that they need to know the details
as soon as possible could also turn out
that Google could reach out to Microsoft
and open AI to come to their aid in
regards to convincing the government
that AI search isn't going to be
dominated by Google after this around
next August there'll be another hearing
where the judge will give his opinion in
the meantime the Department of Justice
and Google will begin the discovery
process to argue the respective cases
and if all of that isn't enough Google
has even more to worry about the company
is under fire at the moment a second
case by the doj will be shining a
critical light on Google's online
advertising business specifically in the
second trial the court will want to know
does Google have a monopoly in the
online ad industry did they achieve this
Monopoly through anti-competitive
Behavior Google is heading back to the
courtroom next week the tech giant
clashing with the Department of Justice
again back in court again openings start
on Monday and this is just on the heels
a month after Google suffered this
defeat in another federal court but
here's what this case is about it's
really different from from the search
case what the Department of Justice in
17 states are saying is that there are
three advertising technology markets
where Google is also an illegal
monopolist and mind you these markets
are defined by the doj and this is
something that the doj and the states
have to prove up they say these markets
are the networks that Google owns where
advertisers buy space they say that
Google controls 80% of that market also
the servers that Publishers use to sell
space for ad advertisements doj says 91%
ownership by Google there and also the
exchange where the parties meet to make
these deals Google may have to fight
tooth and nail to keep the status
quo you all know Firefox right the web
browser well that's made by a company
called Mozilla the weird thing is that
over 83% of mozilla's Revenue is made up
from Google payments the total number of
Firefox users continues to plummet and
yet Google keeps paying them that sounds
a bit weird you might be asking why
would Google pay to keep their
competitor alive the payment started
back in 2005 when Google liked what the
guys at Mozilla were doing with Firefox
but now critics state that Mozilla keeps
Firefox on life support just so that
Google can say that the Chrome browser
doesn't have a monopoly in the world of
web browsers if the doj orders Google to
stop their deals with other parties
Mozilla could end up losing 83% of their
revenue
overnight interestingly this this ruling
draws from a 25-year-old antitrust case
with Microsoft as per CNBC quote a
federal judge determined in 1999 that
Microsoft had illegally used the market
power of its Windows operating system to
box out rival browsers namely Netscape
Navigator a settlement in 2001 forced
the software giant to stop
disadvantaging competitors in its PC
deals end quote after the legal trouble
Microsoft would take a step back from
the emerging internet industry creating
room for new startups like Google to
thrive so this ruling isn't the end of
Google overnight it's just the door to
open a pathway for a reduction in their
dominance foundationally antitrust
regulation is underpinned by the idea
that competition is good for everyone
the market the companies themselves but
especially for the average consumer the
argument is if Google has no competition
there's a possibility that they could
just stop caring altogether
there's already online murmurs that
Google search is indeed getting worse
from the search relevancy dropping to
SEO keyword stuffing polluting results
to too many ads and poor generative AI
implementation there's a point to be
made that all of this legal scrutiny
could at the very least keep Google on
their toes to improve their user
experience but regardless This legal
trouble for Google is the biggest in
decades nraam law school Professor Roger
Alfred who served in the doj's antitrust
division has the defining comment on the
matter quote not since Microsoft lost in
the 1990s have we seen a case of this
magnitude as for the future if and when
Google is forced to let go of its
exclusivity contracts at first it's not
going to be that exciting for Android
and iPhone users if they prefer Google
on their phones they'll stick with it
though it would open the door up for
things to be shaken up for example Apple
would now be free to create their own
search engine newer players like
perplexity could gain a footo
who
knows so I'll ask you as a viewer what
are your thoughts on the US government
going after Google like this opinions
are really split here some say Google
deserves to be broken up others say that
Google is the best product out there so
no wonder they dominate others still
think that America should avoid turning
into the EU regulating Innovation into
Oblivion others like chath think that
Google is actually a great company
overall because they're in a unique
position to innovate a point pretty much
counter to what the government is argued
here the breaking up of Google is great
for competition and for startups but
let's not forget Google is an incredible
company that has created enormous
amounts of good they have done way more
good than bad way more like three four
five orders of magnitude more good than
bad and to break a company like that I
think would be a really bad outcome I
want to just underline what chov said
real quick being big can be very good in
the sense that it can drive an ability
to invest in Innovation that is not
possible without the scale and the
significant cash flow that's being
generated by being that
big for those of you who stuck around
let me show you something here's a
classic troll move for some comic relief
a man dressed as Mr Moneybags himself
was repeatedly pictured terrorizing
Google the images surfaced online during
multiple Google hearings in 2017 and
2018 the Monopoly man in question is Ian
madria
the aim of his stunt was to draw
attention to the need for antitrust
action against Google and now it seems
like he finally got his
wish digesting the news today is more
complicated than ever to make sense of
that's exactly where today's sponsor
ground news comes in ground news is a
website and app developed by a former
NASA engineer she was determined to give
readers an easy datadriven objective way
to read the news using this story of yel
suing Google as an example their bias
distribution chart shows me the
political leanings of the news outlets
and I can get a summary of how the
issues are being framed the left focuses
on Google rigging the results in their
favor disadvantaging players like Yelp
they also give more weight to yelp's CEO
who states that Google has an ecosystem
of control meanwhile the right
underscores the broader implications and
States Google's counterarguments
highlighting past FTC dismissals and
pending appeals scrolling down I can
compare every single article on the
topic with convenient tags showing me
context about the source like how
factual it is and who owns it I also
love their blind spot feed this shows
you stories that are underreported by
one side of the political Spectrum for
example if you're on the left you
probably miss the story of Amazon Alexis
refusing to give reasons as to why users
should vote for Trump but doing so when
asked for reasons to vote for Kamala
Harris ground news is a fantastic tool
for getting International views sifting
through misinformation and identifying
media bias they provide all the tools
you need to be a critical thinker today
I'm offering 40% off the advantage
subscription this comes with a feature
called my news bias so you can even
check out how your news viewing habits
change over time go to ground. news/
coldfusion to get started so that's
what's going on with Google and these
antitrust lawsuits thanks for watching
if you did like it feel free to
subscribe to Cold Fusion all right so my
name is toogo and you've been watching
cold fusion and I'll catch you again
soon for the next episode cheers guys
have a good one
cold fusion it's new thinking
