the reason that democracy is failing is
because we have very significant levels
of inequality that mean that there's a
kind of governing class who make a lot
of the decisions run a lot of the
corporations and you don't really
understand many of the problems that
affect most people's lives and most
people feel I would say very powerless I
think this kind of narrow view of human
beings the economics profession pushes
and this narrow view of society
generates policy suggestions that are
just wrong and quite frankly unsuitable
for the world in which we live the
governments have got to stop listening
to economists and they've got to start
listening to climate change people do
you agree with that philosophy it's
always super to talk to someone you
don't absolutely agree with on every
subject but who is at the same time
unbelievably open and kind enough to
have a good debate so it's safe to say
my chat with Grace blakley was
definitely a spirited one and we thought
it was a good time to revisit as cop 29
is currently underway in aaban Grace
makes a compelling point that dealing
with climate change shouldn't continue
to be parked at the feet of individuals
but of Institutions and businesses no
amount of tote bags are going to save
the planet and I was definitely cool
with that she also discusses why the
idea of stakeholder capitalism is almost
certainly  and why Community
wealth building and long-term investment
might be credible alternative Solutions
also very cool with that but we did have
a bit of a ding-dong about tax uh but
you can skip that bit if you want check
it
out hello and welcome to Business
Without  I am Andy ay and
alongside me is the fabulous piver hi
Andy lovely and today we are joined by
Grace Blakeley have iced that right H
you have yes yes yes Grace is an
economics and politics commentator
columnist journalist and author she is a
writer for the Tribune a panelist on
talk TV and was previously the economics
commentator of the news Statesman very
good well not a bad list uh so how we
doing Grace welcome to the podcast I am
all good thank you so much for having me
it's good to be here no problem um so we
always start with a very simple question
which is uh what's keeping you up at
night Grace God what isn't keeping me up
at night at the moment I mean I've just
come back from quite a long holiday so I
feel like I've kind of stepped away from
all of the chaos and had a bit of a
relax but there is ready to get back
into it exactly I think there's just the
perennial worry of you can't really
Escape it of just What's happen
happening to the climate um I mean
there's news every day I think um from
various different parts of the world
just of very strange and unprecedented
weather events and things is getting a
lot warmer and all that sort of stuff so
I think that is in the back of my mind
this kind of urgent thing that's always
you know always there really and I think
it is for a lot of people of my
generation actually and younger is there
anything that will make people do
anything about it it's hard really
because you know I think a big problem
with the way we talk about climate
change is it all comes down to kind of
individual actions and individual
responsibilities and that that's
actually a narrative that the big fossil
fuel companies worked to push you know
they would BP created the idea of the
the carbon footprint to say oh please
don't regulate us just make sure people
you know buy tote bags and don't use
plastic straws and all that sort of
stuff whereas actually you know if you
really want to tackle climate change
you've got to just change the whole
structure of the economy how we generate
electricity how we get around how we
produce things so it requires like a
really big structural shift in the way
that the economy Works basically rather
than just people trying to be nice and
so the green New Deal yeah exactly
what's the green New Deal well the green
New Deal the US it actually came out of
the UK so yeah the initial version of it
came out after the financial crisis
which was this whole idea from you know
a bunch of economists and politicians
got together and said we need a a
stimulus package post crisis that's
going to actually solve these climate
problems then it went over to the US
where it was picked up by the squad you
know Alexandri kak cotz Etc um and then
kind of came back here uh but now it's
been it's been kind of squashed I think
in in the labor Manifesto unfortunately
it's
basically all your all your kind of
power should be renewable green like you
should stop the  with with um coal
mines and getting oil out of the North
Sea and all that stuff should be we
should be planning to get rid of it yeah
and it's also things like you know
retrofitting housing stock so that it's
much more environmentally friendly
um you know investing in different forms
of transportation like uh yeah renewable
energy all that of stuff I mean if you
take the house one having having looked
at it recently it's um you know it's
it's it's a chicken and an egg situation
you know I went to an expert on it and
and I mean they immediately started
telling me they were just sort of you
know warning me how much it was going to
cost this much going to like put
insulation basically you've got you've
got to use the um uh heat exchanges but
then you've got to actually completely
rebuild your house because it only works
if you've got underfloor heating with
piping which is you know major so I mean
he quick examination suggested it might
cost 60 to 100,000 pounds to sort my
house out which was more than we were
going to spend on an extension yeah you
I mean this obviously would have to be
something that would you'd be supported
by the government and the whole idea of
it as part of this stimulus package
which is what the green New Deal is
supposed to be about is that you know
this is classic Keynesian economics is
that you are investing in infrastructure
that's going to last for a long time and
support you know sustainability as well
growth and you're creating jobs now in
the context in in which they're needed
it's a little bit more challenging
suggest now given that we've got these
high levels of inflation the whole idea
was to do it immediately after at first
the financial crisis then the pandemic
when the economy needed a bit of a boost
arguably it still does now but you have
got these inflationary pressures some of
which by the way do come from the
problems associated with climate change
it's becoming increasingly difficult for
us to feed ourselves in the environment
in which we've created and that's why a
big part of why food prices have gone up
so much actually so yeah it is a bit of
a chicken and egg problem in the sense
we need to spend money in order to fix
some of these problems otherwise
everything's going to get more expensive
is it POS of an issue that we've got a
government where a lot of the government
is both insulated from the problems that
a lot of the rest of us have to deal
with and also has vested interest on why
the government insulated from because
you've got people like richy sunak who
really wouldn't
notice yeah you know it's like his this
is a man who we discovered last year
never used a credit card I mean what I'm
trying to say is we've got a lot of
people in government who live very
different lives to the rest of us you
know you've got nadam zahari with his
stables and his heating his horses and
you know you've got lots of lots of them
seem to have very different rarified
lives to us and you wonder how much they
understand what the rest of us are
living with even if they didn't you know
you've still got the problem of kind of
political donations and the influence
that some of these big companies who
have a vested interest and these issues
not getting solved have over the
conservative party and I'm thinking
particularly of um landlords and
property developers and also some fossil
fuel companies who you know have often
quite clearly and I've had conversations
actually with MPS about how some of
these interests have actually stood in
the way of things like solving the
housing crisis I mean I I I'm just on a
basic level I'm like we're talking about
borrowing more money than I could even
calculate so we can retrofit everyone's
houses I don't I don't think that's easy
for any government to go and do
just because I have a big house which by
the way would cost me a fortune to heat
you know cuz it's relative you know you
got a big  house the bill is
pretty  big right now so I don't
know if that's connected to the fact
that it might be my frustration is
actually the same thing is that the the
the shortterm is and that we live in
whatever government we put it no one is
and I can't get my head around we've
discussed I cannot get my head around
why someone doesn't come forward and say
this is what I'm going to do this is my
20-year plan to get Britain and it's
going to get worse by the way it's
almost you know thata got lucky with
Forkland and I know you hate her but
it's like you know at least it's like
that you get the two terms and you got
to get lucky well I mean thater was the
last person to really fundamentally
transform our economy I think she did it
in a really bad way but you know it was
a big shift as you say and that is
really the scale of the change that we
need again right now but nobody talks
like that nobody comes out and says
right here's my 20-year plan you're
going to have to vote me in three times
and it's going to get really  for 10
years bit like you know what it only
happens like when South Korea goes
through a war or Germany goes through a
war and they're starting from nothing do
they get to rebuild properly we you the
problem with Britain winning the second
world war inverted commas and all these
things that was we quickly got to the
second you always but but we you know
the problem with being the Victor is we
didn't really ever rebuild anything well
actually I would kind of disagree with
that because I was going to say the last
time that we borrowed a substantial
amount of money like huge huge sums of
money much the public debt GDP ratio is
much larger than it was you know even
after the financial crisis was World War
II
and what do we do after that we didn't
Implement austerity we had you know the
creation of the NHS we had a massive
program of social house building funded
by the American Marshall Plan I mean we
a little bit but like ultimately over
the long run we've had this huge
austerity was enormous after the second
world war we had this we had this huge
stock of debt and we invested a huge
amount in social house building in the
NHS and the creation of Public Services
in education in infrastructure and
because the economy was growing partly
because of that invest we were able to
recoup over the long run but surely this
all comes down to right you're saying
why can't we look at things on a longer
scale and you know everybody always says
is does nobody think of the children
thing you know but it comes down to the
fact that human beings right are just a
little bit too selfish really like we
all think of oh my God it's going to be
terrible for my you know I don't have
kids but it' be terrible for my nieces
it'll be terrible for the Next
Generation but I'm okay so I don't know
I mean I feel like we're encouraged to
think of ourselves and human beings and
our society more broadly as selfish but
actually you know that kind of thinking
almost creates the problem itself
because if you think oh everyone's
selfish I've just got to look after
myself you're less likely to kind of get
involved in political campaigning or say
join a a movement that's kind of pushing
for change because like oh screw it none
of this matters I'm just little old
me difference blah blah blah no exactly
I think if we actually changed the
narrative there and thought we broadly
all want the same things you know we
want to be able to live happy healthy
fulfilled lives where we're not working
all the time where we can afford the
basics where our children are going to
be better off than than we are um and
you know there are ways that we can work
together to make that happen are you an
economist at heart is that what you
trained as I I don't think of myself as
an economist as at heart um I I think of
myself as in the vein of kind of of
socialists as um a a CR critic of the
whole idea of economics and of political
economy and obviously to do that you
have to be versed in a lot of the
mainstream Theory and stuff but when I
look at the way that most economists
describe their profession the way that
they think about and talk about the
economy I see it as really alien because
and the biggest thing for me is that we
have this idea of Economics is
completely divorced from politics right
so you can construct a very nice model
that's very you know mathematically
elegant and you can predict people's
behavior and you can say right and these
assumptions mean that the corporate tax
rate needs to be x% um without ever
really considering the wider political
variables that are going to feed into
that so you know people say right we
need to have lower corporate tax rates
because otherwise all the corporations
will leave and no one actually thinks
about the political climate that you
know determines whether or not that is
the case right like what other laws and
regulations do we have surrounding
corporation tax to determine whether or
not that's true so I see myself as kind
of political Economist really looking at
the interaction between those two things
how does economics affect politics how
does politics affect economics which I
think gives you a much more holistic
view yeah I think it's a nice way of
putting it do you ever heard of someone
Steve Kean yeah I know Steve he's a
great guy yeah yeah because he he came
on and he just said the governments have
got have got to stop listening to
economists and they've got to start
listening to climate change people do
you agree with that philosophy I
definitely agree that the government
needs to stop listening to economists um
you know yeah I know a lot of economists
and there are lots of great economists
who you know I agree with who are
progressive um and like argue for
policies that I broadly agree with but
even then I think this kind of narrow
view of human beings that the economics
profession pushes and this narrow view
of society which is that everything can
be broken down into micronit
transactions needs exactly and you know
you can it's all about maximizing
people's utility subject to their
constrict it's all it's just silly and
it doesn't capture the complexity of Our
Lives obiously it's not supposed to but
it also generates like policy
suggestions and they say it's neutral no
policy suggestions come out of it but
they know that it does that are just
wrong and and quite frankly unsuitable
for the world in which we live so if
we're trying to summarize I mean can you
summarize your sort of the point that
you're trying to make in terms of how
governments should should change their
approach what what what what what do
what is it that they should do
differently we should think more long
term but I'd love that but no one's
doing it because they voted in every
four years and I mean other than I
always joked whether we could have a
sort of um what is it when they all
press the buzzer and the chairs turn
around it's like you almost need yeah
the oh I just wanted a government where
you basically you get in and until you
get 80% of people hitting the buzzer
you're in you know you know what that is
not far from what I think actually
because I think for me like the biggest
challenge that we Face even before all
of these economic problems is actually
democracy isn't really working um
support for democracy is quite low and
actually it's you know democracy in a
lot of parts of the world is retreating
this is after we were told you know end
of the fall of the Berlin Wall democracy
and capitalism are here won
exactly totally and now it seems like
the legitimacy of our uh political
economic system is on Decline and people
are blaming the Democratic element of it
Without Really seeing the economic side
of it and for me the reason that
democracy is failing is because we have
this H these very significant levels of
inequality that mean that there's a kind
of governing class larly largely
speaking who make a lot of the decisions
run a lot of the corporations and who
don't really understand as you were
saying many of the problems that affect
most people's lives and most people feel
I would say very powerless I think
that's what brexit was about trp I think
that's what trumpism is about I think
people see that they are being governed
without really feeling like they they
have a say in how that governing process
is taking place and it's not good enough
just to say vote in different
politicians every four years firstly
because you don't have a say over who
you're voting for but secondly because
there are all sorts of sources of
decision- making in government that
completely insulated from democratic
accountability look at the decision to
raise interest rates today you know the
bank of England is inverted Comm an
independent organization whose sole
remit is to Target inflation but
actually that's a very political
decision that the bank of England has
just taken to raise interest rates it
affects the distribution of income and
it's not a democratic decision democracy
to me you know it's it's it's it's
there's some problems like there was a
problem because of international travel
and the way the world internationally
works now that we're no longer dealing
with a national system so a billionaire
can live anywhere he doesn't need to pay
tax and then you're like oh all of the
money is in these thousand people they
own they have 70% of the money and
they're the people who don't pay any tax
so there's just some as a tax person
there's some basic problems now of the
fluidity of movement of people but I
think we you know again we torque
ourselves into a bit of a corner on this
issue because this has been the
narrative for a really long time and
this was a narrative that um a lot of
people on the right really worked to
push it which what was the narrative
that you can't tax the rich you can't
tax corporations because they'll just
leave and actually we do have you know
especially as an economy as as large as
we are and also you know potentially
working with other wealthy economies as
we were supposed to do through the oecd
through the very nerdy base erosion and
profit shifting that sort of thing that
never really came to anything but no we
do have some power to be able to raise
tax rates and um also clamp down on tax
avoidance and evasion and to you know at
least monitor if not regulate the flows
of U of capital like across our borders
we just choose not to you know we choose
not to invest in tackling tax avoidance
and evasion I want to solve some of
these problems because here is the thing
a lot of anger is created I think
towards wealth if if so you're someone
in the UK and you earn a million pounds
a year and you built a business and you
employ 10 people  hate you and
yet you're putting half a million quid
into the system you probably privately
educate your K Kids you probably use
private healthcare why are they the
problem now for me why are they the
problem is everyone's angry with the
billionaires everyone's angry with the
people not if you are living in I've got
you know I've got to be clear on this if
someone is resident they live in this
country they go on holidays but this is
their home and there's lots of very
wealthy people who choose to do that
because they love this country and
that's where they want to be or that's
where their family is you pay a lot of
tax internationally you're at number 15
in the world of how much tax you pay
it's only Japan and places that P I mean
it really depends because we know that
we lose huge uge amounts of money from
tax avoidance so obviously if you look
at it in terms of the statistics you
were to say if someone were to earn this
much money and they were to pay all
their tax they would pay a high rate of
tax but we know that we lose tons of
money tax avoidance if you are
full-blown UK citizen tax avoidance is
quite hard I have to say you could you
can be a fraudster that's what we're
talking about you can be a I mean it
seems to happen I don't think it is it's
quite easy Rec have one member of the
cabinet have to
resign because of it I mean you'd have
to tell me exactly what what what they
do don't he did he again it was
International that was International if
you're talking about if you got if
you've got International if you are
Foreigner much more complicated if
you're set up a shell company
in bollock it's laws against that
movement of assets abroad it's really
difficult to do create trusts and then
you can't anymore you can take benal
ownership no you can't the only trust
you can do is every seven years you can
put 325,000 into a trust for your kids
and that trust you know that's that's it
these days it is really hard in this
country to to to avoid tax whether the
rate is high enough but 50% seems to be
about the point internationally that
people start saying  this for a game
of soldiers so there seems to be a sort
of limit once you start going above that
people think well I won't it will
demotivate me I don't mind losing half
but if you have internation okay so if
you are a foreigner and you've entered
the UK if you've got if you are able to
move and live between different
countries completely different kettle of
fish but if I'm sitting someone opposite
someone it doesn't matter if they got a
100 million if they live all of their
life in here they're  they're
going to pay full tax I am very annoyed
that I don't have the statistic off the
top of my head right now I should have
looked up before I think the last time I
checked it was something like 27 billion
a year lost in avoidance and evasion but
don't quote me on that I think that was
from Richard Murphy who's written a very
good book about tax avoidance but you
know avoidance is not illegal well
exactly that's the point I was making
about but avoidance is just arranging
your Affairs that you in a right way and
there aren't that many ways around it I
sit in front of people every day who are
like what can I do there must be
something and I'm like not much I mean
you could do this and that might
arranging the tax system in such a way
that it's quite difficult to do that
because you know if we're losing that
amount of money sorry we have it's now
ille it's now basically even though it's
basically made avoidance was legal and
it was about arranging your yeah sounds
but avoidance is avoidance is you uh you
might become a partner soon yeah a full
partner and therefore someone could
argue that you're going to get a lower
tax rate because you can offset more of
your expenses or something you know
avoidance is there are a whole set of
rules they are incredibly complicated
there are a million pages of tax law we
have probably the most complicated and
some of the most aggressive tax law in
the world it's incredibly well out we
could probably simplify quite a lot
bring we can't come in a world where we
say avoidance is illegal evasion is
illegal well I mean we know that but we
can rearrange the tax system such that
avoidance doesn't happen as much or
doesn't happen in such an inefficient
way yeah I mean I I struggled if you're
a full UK person there's so few ways you
can hide I mean there really few ways
dividend so you could pay 38.1% rather
than 45% if you arrange your stuff
through a company but has all these
other impacts that mean your tax goes up
so I you know I just the reason I stand
up for this argument is because I think
there is a narrative around avoidance
that these people are all bad people
avoidance is literally getting tax
advice which you should get and that's a
very big industry like you know as you
know yeah but but we got a Million worth
it yeah but yet even how you're putting
that is cynical you're putting it in a
way of oh it's wrong to get tax advised
 I'm not saying it's wrong to how
you're saying it has got this taste of
like oh it's wrong I'm not saying I
would never I find it so boring when
people speak about big political issues
in terms of like individual
responsibility because ultimately you
know we know that people will make the
system work for them the question is how
do we design the system so that in
trying to make the system work for them
we actually make it work for work for
more people yeah it's never going to
work for everyone but we need a system
that works for more of the population as
a whole you know and this may be a
difference you're right between let's
say a middle class person with you know
a million pound home and a good job and
a billionaire and I think we often
forget as you say the difference between
a millionaire or billionaire a great
stat that I like to to tell people is it
would take you 12 days to count the
numbers to a million to count the
numbers to a billion would take you 32
years that's the difference of the scale
between a million and billion and um you
know there are a lot of people with it's
astonishing amounts of money money that
should be taxed who are you know
avoiding tax in Panama and the cay a lot
of actually a lot of places that are
British overseas territories or crown
dependencies or whatever oh yeah we
definitely we definitely have a pass to
play you've got to understand those
rules those all every time you see that
it's because there was an ability to do
it historically I mean look you
definitely it's definitely too
complicated tax I mean on enforcement I
you know the revenue are just like on it
I mean they're writing letters to people
left right and Center they use
psychologists they they bully they I
mean it's crazy what the some of the
 because I know what you mean like
in the sense that it's quite easy to go
after someone who I don't know has like
got a small business and maybe is
arranging their tax lot of money here
it's it's hard to go after you if people
who who we actually want to go after it
is it seems like they're either less
aggressive or they just don't know or
maybe these guys are so lawyered up that
it just becomes so difficult to even
engage with hmrc well but but but we're
back to your point that democracy is a
bit  right now and people like
China are laughing at us and rightly so
because they've got 100 200-year plan
and they're off on it and I mean at
least the Japanese have a longer term
plan I think they seem to run their
society in a much sort of longer term
and but you know ultimately we're
sitting here with our like three-year
plan wondering why we're going to lose a
threee plan I me well we got a year plan
at the moment the current electoral
cycle then we got a twoe plan was your
was your proposal go back to the 16th
century in the divine right of kings and
democracy you you you know it's back to
the thing of the benevolent dictator
might be you know it's like I was
reading about sham Mount I've never
really read because oh my God no no I'm
not advocating him I mean the guy killed
millions and millions of people but it's
fascinating reading the Legacy St the
other day you know wait wait wait wait
let me make my point cuz it's come from
the rested History Podcast cuz they
started talking about the cultur re
podcast anyway so I read the Wikipedia
and I'm like I can't get my head around
this guy and you go to the legacy of
chair Mount and it's incredibly divided
but he was amazing for women he he
raised the light he did all these
incredible things for their society but
he did all heard on the cultural
revolution that's the one that's one I
just listen to it's scary but no I mean
you're right like when you have this
form of basically centralized planning
that they had in the USSR in China to an
extent and other places there were a lot
of achievements around you know housing
and women's rights currently China is
advancing in an impressive rate exactly
but there were also big drawbacks a lot
of people had to die to make it work and
also it's kind of unfeasible really I
think to suggest moving back to that
level of centralization and Bureau
ization in the kind of complex modern
society that we live in today like I
really think that the ideas that we have
around democracy which is that it's slow
nothing gets done it gets taken over by
ve vested interests um I think they're
they're wrong and they're outdated
because there are ways that you can
organize a society to make it more
democratic that don't all just hinge on
electoral politics it's things like you
know worker engagement in the
organizations in which they work for
it's things like you know Community
engagement um there's a lot of really
interesting stuff going on at the moment
at just local coun explain that a bit
more what do you what do you think would
would help so talk yeah one thing that I
really think everyone should look into
at the moment is something called the
Preston model and this is based on the
idea of community wealth building um and
this would have actually been a really
interesting way to respond to some of
these questions around you know places
that have been in a vertical M Left
Behind the idea is that there are anchor
institutions in an area like the council
the NHS uh universities that they can't
move they have a certain procurement
budget um and the way that they spend
that budget can either make or break
that Community they can Outsource
everything to capita and all the money
gets sucked out and goes to shareholders
in London or they can say we're going to
procure these services from a
Cooperative um or from a local business
um and you know use that Collective
power and that spatial planning
basically these organizations have to
try and boost local community they did
this in Preston it was an amazing
success the labor Council there who's
run by Matthew Brown he's written a book
about it has just you know come on heaps
and Bounds from this very deprived area
to actually really um you know
maintaining a lot of value in the
community they're thinking about doing
things like again setting up their own
cooperatives setting up local local
development banks that sort of thing um
and they're engaging people in that
process the whole way through and as a
result they've done really well in
elections they've got really high
approval ratings like this is something
you know and I mean I wonder who the
leaders were in Preston they clearly
weren't the slow Council but you know
you know that's the thing local makes
sense again as long as you got good
people running the business what do you
think is B ship uh in business or in
your industry and why so I think in
general my answer to this question this
might be controversial there's this
whole idea of kind of like stakeholder
capitalism right which is that
shareholder capitalism is very shortterm
is which is true you know we had the the
shareholder value Revolution and it all
becomes about maximizing um maximizing
sh of value over the very short term and
profits distributed are a good measure
of the value that's created by a company
so we need to move to this idea of
stakeholder capitalism which is
basically where the shareholders of a
business get to act in the interests of
all of the stakeholders that are
affected by that business and the idea
is that this is supposed to be kind of
voluntary so the stakeholders the
shareholders supposed to say well we
have a broad interest in society working
so we're going to sacrifice some of our
shortterm profits in order to make you
know the world better over the long term
exactly and the most you know the
maddest version of this is I've heard is
that the big asset management companies
so like black rock for example which
owns stakes in all of the the biggest
companies will start suddenly realizing
that because they own stakes in all of
the economy that it's in their interests
that climate change doesn't get too bad
and that economic growth is good and
that there isn't too much inequality so
they're going to start pressuring um you
know these companies to you know be
better on the climate or pay their
employees more or whatever this is
something that people have actively
theorized and suggested will happen and
of course that's not what's happened you
know Larry think who's the head of Black
Rock says oh we're going to do lots of
stuff on climate breakdown but then
whenever a vote comes up on these issues
if it impacts short term profitability
they're not going to do that and you
know they have a fiduciary
responsibility to their people who are
invested in that company so this is not
going to work on that basis it's not
going to work because the incentives
don't align I like the idea of companies
being more responsible I just don't
think it's going to happen from this
voluntary shift that suddenly everyone
realizes oh actually we don't care about
profits that much so I think that's a
bit of  that people like to
Pedal it's a really curious one I think
you you have to sort of separate big big
big big business I mean we We've joked
before but you know there's 's always
this line about oh you know everyone
does it for the shareholders most
companies I know couldn't give two 
about their shareholders they don't even
you know they're like whatever you know
they are shareholders you know do they
have a duty to make profits like look
I'm trying to make money here I want my
salary to continue you know I'm hoping
to get a dividend one day but the
stakeholder thing is coming but it's
this hugely complicated mechanism that
needs accountants and Auditors and
everyone and it's and regulation it's
coming it's coming the new audit
regulation is coming but yeah take a
while I do think people are thinking
more like stakeholders and again you
think of every company I deal with in
London it's like you know it's rare that
I meet I meet one now who doesn't give a
crap if they can give a crap yeah but I
mean this is the thing they struggling
which a lot of them are and giving a
crap's difficult just as it much is for
an individual as a business I think this
is really interesting actually because
kind of this whole IDE of stakeholder
capitalism tends to come alongside
greater Market concentration if you are
a big Market dominating Monopoly or
oligopoly you can afford to be like oh
well you know we'll give a bit here
we'll you know do something nice there
we'll invest in this particular scheme
or whatever whereas if you're in a very
competitive industry where you know
costs are tight and margins are tight
then um it's going to be much more
difficult for you so actually it's not
necessarily a good thing that we have
this these really now quite high in some
sectors levels of Market concentration
that give some firms the flexibility to
be able to say I'm going to do X or Y or
Zed it's and part of our problem is what
you really want them to do with these
big you know like the companies who
don't deserve have the money like all
the Energy company going well this is
rather you know and and and so we get
annoyed about that so you're like well
taxable well the problem is is people
don't really respect the taxation is
being used that well you know so
companies would say well we'll you we'll
invest the money we'll do better but
they haven't you you exactly what you'd
love to say to them give them the
ethical problem of saying we're going to
put a 20% charitable tax on you and it's
going to go to these Charities it
becomes much harder for them to sit as
shareholders and say well I just think
it's outrageous you know but then you
get into what are the charities
doing I like your well I like your well
maybe but I like your community idea
that maybe a company could have a
responsibility to its community and say
okay you're super rich you've got
offices in these Three Counties each
you've going to have to now make a
donation to that county of 20% of your
profits and they can't get upset about
it and then all these great things
happen in their Community but with that
mechanism those sorts of mechanisms they
are very socialist I guess they they're
very like coming in no but I'm I'm into
that  I think a lot of people would
be into that  it's how it's how you
do it and that it's got to be
proportional fair and that's the problem
because then you get down to the
mathematics but you it would seem you
could just say you know yeah if you've
made Mega profits and all you do is
really get oil out the ground then 
you you know it's it's a it's a rentier
industry  you well done
you and we're going to give some of it
to charity okay you know that's what
we're going to do you know and and don't
get upset about it please you know okay
so Grace this is this is the 5c rule
where we're going to ask we're going to
chop it to 3 seconds given
we we're going to ask you a list of
questions to get to know you a little
better and you've got three seconds five
seconds okay to answer each question
okay DQ the
music what was your first job waitress
in a pub I was paid £425 an
hour what was your worst job um I worked
at the Builder Bear
Workshop oh wow and I had to dress up in
as a bear and go outside and greet the
kids we kind of need a mirror to enjoy
that all day otherwise you're in a
sweaty really hot if you could look how
funny my brother was the killow whell at
uh Windsor
Safari and he used to squeeze the
children really tight with his flippers
cuz he was so hot and angry my God
favorite subject at school history M
special skill oh god um I don't know
guitar singing like I do do that yeah I
suppose that's thing uh what did you
want to be when you grew up um initially
a pop star then a
politician I have changed entirely I am
I Bas the same thing it's fantastic it's
fantastic what did your parents want you
to be when you grew up just happy I
think everyone says this my parents
really meant it they were like my mom
was always like my mother cuz she was
the first family person in her family
goes University went to Cambridge and
her dad really wanted her to be the
first Vale prime minister and she was
like I lived with the weight of that my
whole life I just want you to be happy I
have no expectations for you so what was
your go-to karaoke song Oh God Oasis
Champagne
Supernova one that's um
um yeah exactly Ben something right
there look at that he got a nice little
singing voice  off uh office dogs
where is he where is he he's down there
all  I don't work in an office
but I mean it sounds like that would be
a nice thing to have in an office I
always hated working in an office I mean
it was not really for me I was a bit too
much of free spirit but if you're going
to be in an office have something to
lighten the mood definitely sometimes
they're good sometimes they're a pain in
the eyes sorry where is he he's just
down here being very good as usual as
sometimes uh have you ever been fired
surprisingly no I really feel like I've
been expelled from school several times
never been fired yeah quite a lot I
identify with when you were talking
about how British people are rebellious
I personally think that for the reason
that I'm rebellious that's why I'm
leftwing but that's a story for another
day no no we need to know about
expulsion i' I've only I've only been
suspended what's your
voice oh God probably surfing so cool
wow cool you got down to Coral then
total yeah well I've been doing this now
for a long time on my on my holidays and
it's expensive and timec consuming and
just a whole life consuming so I we have
good surf in the UK though actually cold
but we have good yeah no definitely um
it just depends when it comes in you
have to watch out for the sewage oh my
God yeah that whole thing's been
nightmare to watch don't go out at night
if you're in a Indian hotel that's all
I'm going to say um the happy one I mean
everyone says it but I just have to
bring up my you which is is thanks to my
dad his point when he is the happier is
happiness is a transient emotion you
know and and so his was like don't even
want to progress he says at times you're
going to feel sad at times you're going
to feel happy sometimes you're
frustrated sexy whatever the  but
you want to progress so surely you know
everyone everyone almost everyone said
my parents wanted to be to happy and I
wonder if that's really true or whether
they just wanted you to build a good
life you know maybe it's I want you to
be content CU content a better words
better words I think it might be a
generational thing to be honest because
uh like my parents generation which
would have been like on the CP of Gen X
and what would it have been the CP of
Boomers and Gen X would have been raised
by
1965 something yeah 59 they were both
born in yeah so so I think they absorbed
all this stuff from their parents which
were like you have to be successful you
have to you know as I said my granddad
was this communist who was still like
you as my daughter you've gone to
Cambridge you're going to be the first
you know female prime minister um and it
made them really unhappy because they
were constantly pushing you know through
the 80s through this time where it was
all about individualism and
Entrepreneurship to be successful 80s
were hell yeah and then they realized oh
actually you know I have all this stuff
and I'm not happy and I think they then
said to us don't just make your whole
life about you know achieving and
success and all that sort of stuff like
think about what you actually want to do
so when I said right I'm taking this bit
a bit of a break from my career to go
traveling for eight months at the age of
29 my mom was like great I'm so
supportive I've come back and I'm like
I'm going to have to stay with you for a
while because I spent all of my money
she's like I don't care I'm so proud of
you it's great that you've done that you
know you don't want to be stuck in 10
years time in a job that you don't like
whatever I think that's kind of what it
means already it's about chasing what
makes you what makes you content rather
than just success my dad said that I
tried to move home for three months when
I was doing my house up and he and he
was like I don't I don't really want you
I mean I love you terribly I was so
shocked I was like what yeah but you
know uh I might end up saying that to my
son one day and then expulsion what did
you get expelled from I was expelled um
twice oh no I was asked to leave one
school this was an all girls school I
went to in years seven and eight and
that was because I had seven and eight
is like 12 123 yeah I climbed on the
roof and started smoking um so what I
got suspended for yeah just cigarett at
that time and then they were like you're
disruptive so I later found out I have
ADHD so I was very disruptive all the
time but I was quite smart so IID finish
all my work and then distracted everyone
else event they were like you have to
leave because you're a nightmare went to
their boarding school for 3 years I got
suspended three times so I actually only
got expelled twice if you count that
suspended three times at that school for
various different infractions then they
said you've got to leave but you can sit
your gcss and I was like right well this
is a great excuse to have a a big
blowout party brought in loads of boo
like messed everything up and then they
were like right okay you're out properly
now did still get to sit my GCS I just
wasn't allowed back on the school
premises and then I went to 61 college
for two years and I was only suspended
once so I eventually got my none of
these things you're doing are
particularly crazy no they're not this
was all private schools I did you you
board board no I didn't do like which
one it was it was Lord wesworth so this
was like not in London it was you know
way out in the country side all right
let's go let's go back to the start yeah
let's let's let's wh the clock back go I
have to say wh the clock back I was
going not going to use it but you get
upset when I don't say you feel you know
what and people have that anyway uh how
did you end up doing what you're doing
um so I'm not even sure what you are
doing yeah I probably tell you what I do
yeah so I am um I'm an author that's my
main source of income and my what I
spend most of my time doing uh is
writing books so I've written two books
already I've got a new book coming out
next year which I've kind of just
finished writing it's being edited and
copyedited and all that sort of stuff um
so I do that I write books about
capitalism basically Bally I also do a
lot of kind of media appearances so you
know I'll go on question time and
politics live and all that sort of stuff
top podcast yeah and top podcast of
course talk about the day's Affairs and
and that sort of more like directly
political stuff um and yeah so I'm kind
of you know mixed between writing and
and media the your last book was how the
pandemic will change capitalism yeah
that was just a short one I wrote during
the the pandemic what do you working on
right now so this one um is called we
actually came up with the title really
late cuz there were big disagree on what
the title should be anyway it's team me
and my publisher cuz they've bought the
book so they basically get to tell me
what it's going to be called I was like
I want to be this and they were like no
that's boring no one's going to pick it
up we want it sexy and whatever so it's
going to be called vulture capitalism
which is you know and it's going to have
a naked woman on the cover it might do
it's attacking already that would be
incredibly anti-feminist you should be a
naked man on the cover if somebody's
going to pick it up yeah yeah true
anyway we've really lost the plot but we
have some top tips of uh printing ideas
there for
were going down the route of how did you
end up oh how did I end up doing what I
was doing so I started did my degree at
Oxford did politics philosophy economics
along with all of the kind of worst
people in our political system exactly
um and then I started working for a
think I was an intern a think tank for a
bit um and that was actually doing stuff
around um like local uh economics and
local politics then I went to work for
KPMG actually for like less than a year
uh doing consulting yeah for their
government um and Healthcare practice
which I was not particularly good at I'm
not again you know ADHD not very good in
big organizations I'm more picture it's
too detail exactly exactly let's say
that yeah yeah um so didn't do that for
very long I then went to work for IPR
which was a thing I really enjoyed
working there actually I stayed there
for three years I think doing lots of
reports and that's where I started doing
media so where I started doing
interviews and like doing more
journalistic writing eventually got the
offer to write a book took some some
time off wrote the book the book did
well started doing lots more media um
and you know things just you dyslexic as
an ADHD actually not no although the the
tension to detail thing is like when I
write I like do skip out words and
whatever luckily I have copy editors now
who help me with that but um yeah so you
know things just basically took off uh
and it was during the kind of you know
2017 to 2019 period where socialism was
suddenly fun again so lots of people
wanted my opin fun again yeah uh have
you got a long-term goal um a long-term
goal I mean look my long-term goal I I
like to think about what I do really as
trying to change the way that people
think about capitalism um and trying to
change the way that people think about
the economy so for me the goal is get
the ideas that I'm trying to push out in
as many hands as possible and at the
moment that looks like writing books but
it also looks like longer term you know
potentially taking that onto different
forms of media like trying to get um
young people particularly engaged with
some of these ideas um and yeah you know
just kind of expanding my reach really
what's the most misunderstood thing
about what you do I think people
underestimate how hard it is to write a
book and overestimate how hard it is to
go on TV we all think we could write a
book if we just had
enough it's very challenging to write a
good book what's the hardest thing about
writing a book keeping everything
together in your head wow so it's you
know you know you can write an artic
white guess yeah exactly you can write
an article and everyone thinks oh I can
write an article I can write 10 articles
I can write book but actually having
like the argument and the structure and
being able to keep those ideas together
in your head coming back to them all the
time in every every section every
paragraph to making sure you're really
driving home that key point it's hard I
always found like writing a dissertation
I kind of thought I've got this great
argument and it's and it falls to pieces
and then it sort of Falls to exactly it
falls to pieces and there's nothing
really there when you get right into
when you push yourself it's so true yeah
actually there's only a few times I've
heard authors who I think it's Agatha
Christie was one other people who could
do it that she would didn't know what
the end of the story was and she'd sit
down and she'd write and 3 Days Later
she'd or a week later she finished a
book are they are they  I've never
read one but I mean you know I mean
characterization is not really
non-existent in them yeah and also
they're just stories AR they and I sit
down to tell my kid a story at night and
sometimes I get really into it and then
as you say I forget where I am and all
the details now I just have to finish it
I'm like and then the farman just said
oh I can't be doing this anymore I don't
think they're asleep by then anyway what
what are you most excited about what am
I most excited about for your career god
um I suppose I'm pretty excited about my
next book coming out yeah I mean that
like the process of writing a book is a
nightmare having it come out is really
fun because for about a year you're
doing events everywhere you know I've
got book deals in dozens of countries of
town yeah so you're going all around the
world you're meeting loads of people
talking about ideas doing interviews
you're just talking about this thing
that you've created after a while it
gets a bit boring but it's really fun
that's better than music I find by the
time you release and D agree with this
in your musici by the time you release
an album then you hate all the songs
you're just so bored of it and then
people are like oh I really like that
album you're like yeah whatever and I
guess if you were a big artist you might
then tour and talk about your album but
in a way you don't talk about your album
that much you just go play music sort of
thing I quite like the IDE no no I don't
so by the end of a book you're not sick
of it you're glad it's over you're quite
happy to chat about it you may be I
think I I would say it's about a year
after the books actually come out you're
sick of it by then maybe six months
depending on how much you like it um I'm
not sick about of of this book yet and
I've nearly finished it maybe I will be
by the time it comes out but no I'm
still really excited about it actually
what's your biggest  up so probably
actually and this comes down to the big
picture versus detail thing in my first
book I had a couple of little um you
know like factual errors and like stuff
that was wrong and that wasn't double-
checked and because I was you know this
I didn't have a lot of resources behind
the book but I was growing on social
media so a lot of people were looking
really hard at what I was doing this is
how to say the world from finalization
yeah yeah they like took me apart online
for you know like some on page 63
literally literally notic that You'
missed you know yeah so that was quite
annoying luckily you know they all came
out very quickly and we managed to do a
reprint within a few months that had all
the errors corrected so it wasn't too
much of a big deal but it was like you
know awkward and embarrassing horrible
to wrong isn't it yeah but you know what
it's a good lesson cuz you're always
going to be wrong about something it's
always hard though when it's your own
like your own creation yeah I thought
you I guess it was the start of your
career so you don't get to just hand it
to someone to do the really really
boring going to
check four the you checked all of this
yeah no exactly yeah I'm surprised there
wasn't more wrong with it to be honest
Str what's your passion outside of work
again the same as my vice surfing
surfing weed she's secretly saying cool
thing really bad at it like let's just
let's just you know get that I think
everyone is it is that really hard but I
love it it's great whenever anybody says
something to me I immediately think of
them sharks that's what I I think of
that film with Point bre I love that
film it's so fun quite inspiring I feel
but my problem is cuz I watch Jo I can't
do the paddling with my legs dangling
with my head above the water I don't
care what country I'm even England my
are going to disappear going to be a
little tug from the hly I have to get
out the water so I could never Surf and
also you're huge attraction you know if
you if you're in the right part of the
world great whites love those seal
looking California Australia South
Africa you're you're in a bit of danger
I haven't surfed in any of those places
but there's a guy who studies sharks he
gets a surfboard and he puts a hole in
it and he puts a camera in the thing
looking downwards and he reels it out on
a massive uh fishing line and this is in
South Africa and he's the guy stud so
you get this footage of great whites
hitting this thing so it's dark it's
like a really good camera but it's dark
and then you just see this oh my God you
see this thing and it comes so fast and
the m and you're like think it's a SE oh
my God I am never swimming in that water
you know ever anyway scary oh bad
primeval uh what it's my go uh what's
the worst advice you've ever been given
what's the worst advice I've ever oh God
yeah so when I was at school everyone
used to say oh you're really good at
arguing so you should become a lawyer I
would have been a terrible lawyer
because again the attention to detail
thing and actually a lot of lawyers
don't you know don't actually argue yeah
I don't do a lot of arguing yeah exactly
you're especially now when you're doing
solicitor and baring and it's you know
and you know what I do cuz I'm a
corporate lawyer so even when I'm like
if I'm selling or buying a company for
somebody everybody wants to get to the
same place they all want slightly
different things CU they want to buy it
for cheaply as possible and these people
want to
mediating but you're all actually trying
to do the same thing so it's not really
there's nothing really to argue about
yeah I mean so that was not a very good
piece of advice for me what's the best
piece of advice you've ever been given
the best piece of advice I've ever been
given I think the one that I come back
to most when I'm trying to make a
decision is just my mom always used to
say to me just trust your gut and I
think that's like just the most
important thing you know in any
decision-making process cuz you can
write lists and analyze any problem for
God knows how long but if you're
actually in touch with what you want and
you really kind of you know can ground
yourself in that like intuition I think
that's the most can be difficult cuz
like I personally my gut is very much
attached to my sense of fear yeah I know
what you mean you have to be able to
like disaggregate those
emots no but I'm just saying you know
sometimes somebody will ask me to do
something and my gut will say oh no
don't do that you'll look like an idiot
or it'll all go and that is not really
my gut what advice we give your younger
self what advice would I give my younger
self I think get a
hobby I would have liked it if I'd
started doing the suring earlier because
to be honest for most that was your
hobby but I wasn't I worked so hard I
was just obsessed from about the age of
22 to um I think like 28 I was just like
I need to I did listen to my parents
advice when they were like just be happy
I was like no I need to succeed I need
to prove myself I need to prove everyone
wrong I'm going to listen to all the
things that everyone's saying about me
and I'm going to take them to heart and
I'm going to you know I'll show these
people what an expelled person can do
exactly and it's good because I achieved
a lot but I've gotten to this point in
my life now and I'm like I just I didn't
focus on my relationships I didn't focus
on myself I didn't have anything else
going on it was just work work work work
work right right right go on the media
put myself in such stressful situations
all the time I feel like I was
constantly on edge for a lot of that
time um and it wasn't good for me and it
just made me like you know a shell of a
person really when I think about when it
was the worst feels like you're having a
midlife crisis 100% having I and I can
imag this is the chat I can almost
imagine it out on the waves on the surf
f with the lad saying you know I just I
just I just work too much and they were
like yeah man yeah man right I've had a
mid crisis people work too much it's
like the only California and Britain I
always think it's Coral cuz when you do
get down to call it has that Vibe but
man chill out man you know just like
enjoy for recommendations on what to
read what to watch what to listen to I
mean obviously my own books absolutely
you can get them on in all good book
stores there's an audio book which I
read myself hilariously um the next
one's coming out next year obviously are
you doing in a hilarious manner or you
just no just like it's funny to listen
to myself read it was bizarre it's
actually so difficult to just sit there
and read something got ADHD yeah you
just trip over your words all the time
and you go too fast you go it's just a
nightmare but anyway it's there it's
available um but no okay so other stuff
my a friend of mine we're talking about
we've talked about climate change um
Michaela Loach has just released this
great book called It's not that radical
about climate breakdown and she's this
amazing activist who has done loads of
work on you know campaigning and all
this sort of stuff in the UK and she's
she's got this book out which I think
everyone should read and it's really you
know simple and easy to connect with
podcast podcast oh yeah everyone should
check out if you want a kind of easy to
listen to summary of you know socialist
stuff going on in the UK Navara media is
great um they do a lot of kind of
podcasts and audio and visual content
and stuff um and they get loads of
interesting guests on and whatever
that's kind of like socialism 101
obviously also I write for Tribune
magazine um so Tribune in the UK
definitely check us out uh is like
Tribune was like an old magazine that
was for the the Socialists back in you
know the 1930s and kind of you know
stopped really being released for a
while and it was then bought up again
recently and we kind of relaunched it
and grew it and it's now you know got
this kind of community around it and
it's about news from the labor movement
news from the left opinion like all this
sort of stuff um so definitely worth
checking that out and if you want to
subscribing um yeah I find the
bipartisan thing just I think it's
almost we talk about the structural
problems of democracy or economics but I
don't think we talk about you know this
basic problem that of having red or blue
or left or right or anything you know
the reason fact that labor is red well I
mean I'm I want to be in the middle
because you know I think we all need to
be the middle like if you start any
conversation from the point of view is I
hate Rich I'm just going to be crash but
I hate rich people or I hate poor people
or I think this or I think that you know
we'll never solve this world because we
need to be humans we need to basically
we you know climate change hope brings
us eventually all together because I
think eventually it will that people
will die and die and die until we all
sit down at the  table and say
right let's sort this  out you know
and no red ored left or right  you
know but I don't think either side would
describe themselves in that way right no
but I just think I just think don't take
a side the best way you get to the
middle is by having people articulate
opinions on the opposite end of the it's
hitting each other for a six on either
side otherwise otherwise you get this
kind of faux centrism right which is
what you know people like
they're going to do it's like oh I'm
just going to go and Design This policy
based on what a couple of people in a
focus group just take question one
question at a time and stop worrying
about whether it's left or right and try
and come up with the right answer and
you would end up with something that
isn't necessarily way you know where the
whole idea of left and right comes from
yes oh yeah that's a go and tell us uh
well I think it's from the um well not
really Parliament but the assembly in
French reevolution I yeah this is right
it's the French Revolution Revolution
and the the various different factions
in the French Revolution re re
Revolution yes stood on different sides
of the the chamber chamber
oh all the French it's all the thought
of the French again so uh you've got 30
seconds to pitch anything you'd like um
follow me on Twitter Grace Blakeley
Blakeley has two e follow me on
Instagram same thing um and yeah look
out for news about my book vulture
capitalism which is coming out next year
so there you have it that was this
week's episode of Business Without
 thank you everyone thank you D
thank you Romeo pipper God wonderful g g
guest Grace then it's ch
