this process of selling off companies is
happening right now there are companies
that are being taken over I mean two big
defense companies Ultra and megit were
sold in the last three or four years
it's not just that we gave gave up what
IND industry we had we're still giving
it up it's a process that's going on
right now and it ought to be a big issue
in the current general
election you'll sometimes hear the
phrase that Britain is the 51st state
and it's inarguable that United Kingdom
does have a very profound strong
historic relationship with the US not
least because we share a
language when that term 51st state is
appealed to it often means military
alliances or culture film books
music but what if Britain increasingly
was subordinated to shaped by the United
States when it comes to business and the
economy and what if that subordination
had intensified to an extraordinary
extent over recent Decades of course the
Batton of power was passed across the
Atlantic after the second world war
that's nothing new but the arrival of
the internet and the tech Giants we take
for granted from meta to alphabet
seemingly compound us power around the
world but nowhere more so than right
here in the UK today's guest has written
a brilliant book about Britain's
Economic and Business dependence on the
United States and how more importantly
that shapes the political decisions we
make here right at home Angus Hanson
welcome to Downstream thank you I often
say at the start of an interview I
really enjoyed the book it was so
informative I have to say this
was surprisingly informative I think
it's one of the best books I'll read
this year certainly one of the most
important before we get on to though to
establish some of your Authority your
credentials a moment ago we were talking
about a very shrewd investment you made
a long time ago in a in a gentleman
called Warren Buffett can you illuminate
that well it it actually wasn't a shrewd
investment it just turned out to look
like that I bought one share in
barkshire haway Warren Buffett's company
and it cost £2,000 at the time in the
late 1980s and it's now worth £
630,000 or ,000 actually so half million
pounds and um it's uh I did it just to
get a hold of the annual reports in
those days you couldn't look them up on
the Internet so you needed you needed to
get them sent and sent to you so you
could read them and I get them once a
year still um so it's worked out well
but I think bar hathway is a a bit of a
symbol of American capitalism it's been
a an operator in the UK it's been the
operator in of businesses in the US but
it's also been an investor and it's very
much focused on um how it allocates its
capital and it's very much focused on
going for businesses with high margins
that have what Warren Buffett calls Moes
that are defensible um and that's
probably typical of many American
businesses so this book vassel State how
America runs Britain we've got a hard
copy here Immaculate hard copy I thought
we'd show my well thumbed one instead
all my notes it really is Sensational
it's got so many great um facts and
vignettes in it and the essential
hypothesis is that the business
relationship and of course that
percolates through to politics and
geopolitics and Military and what not
but the business relationship between
the UK and the
US is quite unique particularly when you
compare it to say the US's relationships
to other European countries
so what is so spectacular about
America's business presence in the
United Kingdom it's mostly at scale they
have just got so many businesses that
they've owned for a long time um and
that have expanded but there've been
these two great prongs of American
expansion in the last 15 years um the
tech businesses so the big the big five
or six whoever you want to count um
Apple Google um Microsoft and so on but
also private Equity so private Equity is
much more under the radar activity but
it's dominated by us companies Apollo
KKR um Silver Lake and these com
Blackstone of course and these companies
have have really taken over huge SES of
the British economy um and so so that
that's that's the kind of scale of
domination but it's also the type of
control that the American businesses
have what I found in my research is that
they've they've not just bought up
assets like property but they've bought
the what I call the bridges and the
pipes of our economy so in in medieval
times the thing that you wanted to own
was a bridge where you could charge
people a toll and where it is the only
way from one side of river to another
and that's exactly what the Americans
have done in so many areas so for
example if you do dating through Bumble
or Tinder you're you're maybe dating a a
British person but you're paying an
American for the privilege or if you if
you book if you sell something
secondhand on eBay you're again selling
to a to a British person but paying a
royalty to the Americans for crossing
their Bridge the same goes for using
Airbnb uh you book Cott booked a stay in
a cottage in Wales um from a Welsh
person maybe and you're you're you're
paying the Americans 15% for doing so
but even even businesses that we think
of as selling are actually often those
bridges so for example Amazon two-thirds
of its almost two-thirds of its sales
are not things that they store in their
warehouses and and send out but they're
things where they're effectively
organizing the L Logistics and a British
person is buying from a British supplier
but paying the Americans on the way and
of course there's AWS their web services
which it's out there but when it's all
sort of in in black and white that we
have know MI5 MI6 they base their
internet properties off web services
which are provided by Amazon so this is
the cloud the cloud is American-owned
and it's it's either Amazon Microsoft
Oracle a little bit of Apple a little
bit of IBM but they're all us companies
and we store all our critical D our
government stores all its critical data
there and so do our businesses and we
pay for the privilege Salesforce is
another one where software is stored
there so we're we we're very much
beholden to them and in the process we
we're paying them for the opportunity to
do business at all and again I'm some
I'm on the left and I've thought about
these things for a long time but you
there's a few pages where you sort of
basically illuminate list and list and
list reams of all these firms and these
Bridges these metaphorical bridges in
the UK economy that have been purchased
by the US and after reading the book I
went to a um retail Park I live in
Hampshire and uh you know it's full of
SUVs it's it's it's basically how the UK
economy moved in the last 20 years
encapsulate so much one of which was
these stores and I'm looking at all of
them I'm thinking who owns that who owns
that who owns that so much of it's us
private Equity or they're they're
actually just us chains and um it really
made me rethink quite a lot you've
talked about some of the examples you
know from the perspective of Navara we
operate obviously on YouTube um Facebook
Twitter but even the the the tools to
edit this interview will be Adobe which
again as a software service cloud-based
product yep every company you've
mentioned is American uh every company
you've mentioned is highly profitable
and um every company you've mentioned is
pretty well indispensable for for
British production of of podcasts and
and other media and indeed for our um
for our day-to-day lives but so much so
that even when you want to submit tax
returns you're forced to use American
software so this is extraordinary the
extent to which the British state has
has adopted um American software without
question and we've had opportunities to
make a different choice I mean there was
a company and I Illustrated in the book
there was a company in Manchester that
was offering cloud services and that
could have been a competitor a local
competitor to AWS and and to Microsoft's
aure um and the government made the
decision short-term decision uh to go
for the cheapest supplier with the
biggest capacity and then that Local
Company went out of business and what
government was this what year was this
well it's actually been that was 15
years ago probably 18 now and uh but so
that was as it happens that was a labor
government but it's been consistent
between between political parties and in
a way that's that's the big we're we're
currently in an general election period
and that's the Striking thing that
neither of the the main parties in fact
none of the parties are highlighting
this as an issue and nobody's saying oh
we'll reduce the amount of foreign
ownership or we'll do something about
promoting British Enterprise or we'll
change the tax system to make it more
attractive for entrepreneurs to hold on
to their businesses rather than to sell
out well to the contrary you had this
ridiculous story I think only the Ft
talked about it because it was comments
made to the Ft I think only the
telegraph covered it in addition to the
Ft of Jeremy Hunt saying that the UK can
have a trillion dooll company homegrown
grows through UK Capital markets which
for people watching they might think
okay trillions a lot of money but maybe
Europe's most valuable companies around
half a trillion I think right now um
it's race between lvmh and and noro
Nordisk these these weight loss drug
people but also I think the footsie
itself is worth about two two trillion
so 50% of the footsy through one company
so if anything rather than actually
addressing some of the points in the
book which we'll get on to the default
is still very much denial that this is
an issue absolutely I mean that's a
fantasy on Jeremy Hunt's part um the uh
to get a company of that size in the UK
with current government policies is so
unlikely to happen um I mean you talked
about the scale of some of these bigger
companies I mean if you take the footsy
100 and add to it the next 250 biggest
quoted companies so the footsy 350 that
is smaller now all added together
including our shell and BP and black and
everything um that's smaller now than
just Microsoft it's also smaller than
Apple separately and it's um the footsy
100 is now smaller than Nvidia uh a US
chip company that most people haven't
heard of but that indic indicates how
what a tiny what a tiny player we've
become so Jeremy Hunt's Ambitions to
have a trillion pound company or
trillion dollar company for that matter
are really fantasy and they're not
consistent with his policies
um on tax and Innovation we'll get onto
the policies in a minute but you know I
just about remember sort of the economy
of the 2000s you know for a brief moment
I think vone was more valuable than um
Intel you know its market capitalization
was higher than Intel and you you could
look at these stats and say 2006 2007
which was really the high Watermark of
of that UK services-based Southeast
England model and you know the top 20
biggest companies in the world of course
BP shell RBS HS BC and you know the UK
was a really major economic player but
actually today I think I I looked
yesterday even France has three
companies by market capitalization
bigger than any UK firm and that I don't
think really registers in the
conversation in this country they the
political class sort of seemed to think
we're still operating 20 years ago yes
the political class don't want to think
about numbers as we know we're run by
Arts graduates and um and numbers
actually it turns out rather matter and
and Britain has shrunk its place in the
world has shrunk but it's not just
shrunk in relation to everyone it's it's
been very much taken over by by by the
US I mean to give an illustration of
that the US has a lot of foreign
investments around the world but on my
calculations about 30% almost a third of
those Investments of the us all around
the world about 30% are in the UK it's
hugely focused on the UK and it's and
that's because we've welcomed them so
much and they've done very well here of
course we repres a bridge head to Europe
but we also represent in ourselves an
important profit Center for many big us
corporations so a Tory Minister watching
this would be saying fantastic that's
great news your your point is that
actually there's there's an exploitative
nature to that absolutely I mean many
Americans listening to it would say this
is a great success story and of course
many many Tory ministers would and
culturally they are very um not just
Tori but labor ministers have been very
close to the Americans I did a a quick
study of prime ministers and chancellors
and found out that almost all of them
without exception uh in fact without
exception over the last 20 years have
either worked for American companies
before they came into office or after
they left office I'm including there
doing speaking tours for American
companies um but yeah you're right some
some politicians would say this is a
success story but I think they're wrong
I think they're fundamentally wrong when
you when you're sending about a hundred
billion dollars of profits back to
America every year inevitably it leads
to the impoverishment of the country and
we can see that because we if we look at
the average income per household it's
now about the same as Mississippi the
poorest of the US states and notoriously
poor so we we have become impoverished
by it but also our taxes are partly
higher higher partly as a result of this
because if the American corporations are
paying very little tax we individuals
have to pay more so it's meant that
we're poorer we're paying higher taxes
but it's done other things too it's it's
reduced our community one thing I came
across in in this study was how much um
many towns depend on a key employer and
we've lost that in cities like
Birmingham in bourneville um and many in
Street in Somerset with Clark's Shoes
going but many cities and towns we've
lost our what you might call Hometown
Advantage the advantage of having a
local employer maybe with the owners
living there as well but where they'll
create apprenticeships and they'll pay
for Community Resources and Leisure
centers and so on we've lost that by
contrast you see that all across America
that towns are expanding and have done
very well on the basis of this Hometown
Advantage uh and great if you've got a a
company like Dow Chemical uh in Midland
um where they've got they've got not
only is the company very profitable and
been generous towards the local
community but the owner ERS of the
business the Dal family have been giving
giving lots of resources to the city so
we've lost that so but it's not just
that we lose people I think I'd say to
your Tory Minister I'd say what do you
say about the Y the capable young people
who go out to the States because they're
offered more attractive jobs you can't
blame them but what it means is the more
powerful country can pick and choose to
some extent who it takes in Academia and
in science but we also lose treasure I
mean the amount of artworks going across
the Atlantic each year is about four
billion pounds worth that's Works often
four billion four billion yeah often
going to the Getty museum or other
American institutions I mean that's the
nature of a successful Empire isn't it
that they have they have they have a lot
of wealthy individuals a lot of wealthy
companies and they want to have they
want treasure and if they're free
they're free to buy it and they buy it
from Europe and particularly from
Britain the point about art is
fascinating to me I didn't know it was
44 billion pounds a year in the book you
talk about the example one my favorite
artists Joseph Wright of Derby amazing
you know you you
see just what it must have been like the
sort of early Decades of the Industrial
Revolution and you talk about a painting
that was sold um across the Atlantic I
think three and a half million pounds
Joseph right Derby two boys with a
bladder whatever I call it yes he's very
famous for the the belile one if people
are wondering who the hell is Aaron
talking about they are Sensational
paintings and it really got me thinking
that on the one hand we talk about
returning the path and marbles back to
Greece which I support quite right but
it's interesting at the very moment
we're refusing to you know send that
stuff over there we're also sending in a
really important Heritage of this
country Industrial Revolution we're
sending that across the Atlantic yes
we're repatriating treasure at the same
time as being
plundered yeah it it's a it's a paradox
and very little noticed or commented on
I mean the best that the British
government have done is they've said
well we'll have a period of pause when
something wants to be when someone wants
to export a work of art they must put it
put a notice out to the museums to say
would you like to buy it well that's all
very well um in a world where we we had
enough money to do so but again and
again British M the British museums
British museum itself and other museums
in Britain say actually we can't afford
it we spent our budget for Acquisitions
this year um or or we're in
a divesting mode I mean it seems like a
fair trade to me give the pathon marbles
back give the Ben and bronzes back and
we'll get Joseph R Derby I quite like
that but anyway um yeah that was a that
was a real a real shock to me that four
billion figure and like you say you use
the words there an Empire and often and
it's very important to say you you you
use the words um this is a book about
business not politics it's mostly about
business and it's very much Pro British
rather than anti-American I'm not
anti-American in it but I think the the
business spills over to the politics you
a in many important ways it's it's the
Americans don't just have a business
interest to Brad they have business
interest that they support and in the
last few years the number of people for
example in the American Embassy has gone
up by 50% they're not diplomats they're
not concentrating on um some of them are
but that the extra ones aren't
concentrating on more more diplomatic
activity they're concentrating on
supporting their businesses and there
are many situations where there are
questions about
regulations where the American
government Lobby very heavily in favor
of of us companies um and of course they
want to they want to retain control
um our
um Elon Musk says that Twitter is Our
Town Square which was a reasonable
description of it our town square is in
that case is controlled from California
but that's true of Facebook meta as well
um so we've allowed and I think that
relates to politics too because these
are places where our political
discussions take place but I mean
fundamentally if we want to make a
political decision that the Americans
don't agree with we will hear about it
and it will change um of it's behind
closed doors but there was a case a few
years ago with under Boris Johnson with
WWE where the Americans didn't want us
to have Huawei kit in our telecom's
equipment and they said so and we said
oh well we'll look at it and the British
government consulted the experts in the
intelligence community and the experts
said no it's fine there one or two
places where we shouldn't have it but
it's fine in telecom's towers and the
Americans oh no it's not and there's a
huge public spat um where Donald Trump
said you you better not have it or
there'll be no trade deal by the way
there still isn't a trade deal um and
the British the British said well okay
then and they climb down so most of the
time our interests are aligned enough
that you don't get this this sort of
dispute but if we step out of line the
Americans will make sure that we conform
with what they think is important and
we're having a debate right now about um
nuclear uh not nuclear power that's
that's the Chinese and the French but
you know nuclear submarines or more
specifically Trident missiles which of
course are um manufactured and serviced
in the United States yes and so when
people talk about Trident independent
nuclear
deterrent we can you know some people
would say it's not a deterrent we don't
have to go there today it's very
questionable whether or not it's
independent uh because if you have
something which is being serviced in a
foreign country it strikes me that's
that's arguably not the case in the
political debate I've not heard it
called independent for some some years
now I think the reality is that
government and civil Serv officers civil
servants are stopping using that
expression because we know they know
that that's a that's a sham that it it
it there's no
situation politically or technically
where it could be used independently of
the Americans well technically is the
one I find interesting right I mean
politically that's fine because you're
in a well I don't think it's fine but
you're in a political Alliance you have
collective security I I sort of grasp
that but technically is the one I find
fascinating because I I haven't got
especially strong views on nuclear
weapons I think we should have fewer
countries should have them I think we
should ideally have a world without
nuclear weapons but I understand the
arguments about why would you want to
get rid of them when you're allowing
Iran to have them etc etc I think
wealthier countri should have as few as
possible I think that's a sensible way
to go what I find fascinating is that
there aren't center right politicians in
this country saying we want nuclear
weapons but it should be a homegrown
version like the French that's what I
find fascinating and I think sometimes
the argument of for or against misses
that broader Point actually because you
care so much about this you're saying
the literal defense of the realm is
impossible without this technology and
yet we depend on it from elsewhere yes
we've got some some very weird thinking
going on in government when it comes to
our relations with with the us and one
of the things is we we say oh we
wouldn't allow um I don't know say the
telegraph to be taken over by a foreign
owner but it depends what you mean by
Foreign if it's from the Middle East no
definitely not if it's from America well
maybe they're not so foreign after all
but um for me foreign is foreign um and
uh the British ought to and should be
able to control their own destiny and
their own assets well I mean Rupert
Murdoch at News International he is a he
is a US citizen he is and he's um
effectively sold Sky TV so that's Now
American again many people think of it
what we find is that when when
corporations are taken over by Americans
they often don't Rebrand as American
they allow people consciously they allow
people to carry on thinking of them as
British or British organizations so
Boots the chemist still uses all the the
reference to noting in the um 19th
century but I mean boots is owned by
Walgreens in America um the same goes
for recent takeovers when Hotel shakala
was taken over by Mars Corporation a few
months ago They carried on referring it
to a British chocolate maker um so
they're they're quite sensible in
keeping the local branding and the
result is that many Ordinary People and
and indeed many people in the in the in
the policy Community don't realize just
how many of our compan our companies of
the companies with which they trade are
us owned I mean it goes down to
everything me coffee shops people think
Coster is owned by Whitbread well it was
but now it's owned by Coca-Cola and
cafiro as well as owned by CFO is owned
by an American Lives who lives in London
an American individual right and
Starbucks obviously Starbucks is
obviously from Seattle um a lot of
coffee sold by McDonald's um so yeah
pretty well the coffee markets the
retail coffee markets sewn up high
margin Market um and one that where
where the
it's it's increasingly hard for people
to compete do your patriotic G you go to
weather spoons I wouldn't say that uh
it's not it's not it's a illy it's not
bad coffee but before people have a go
at me I'm not suggesting that for a
moment but that does hit on an
interesting problem if you if you're
unhappy about so much being owned by the
Americans is the right thing to do to
start acting in a sort of hair shirted
way and say I'm not going to order any
from quite from Amazon I'm not going to
go to Starbucks it seems to me that that
is not a formula that works in terms of
the long term it's policy change we need
we we need the government to have a a bi
British policy the Americans have a bi
British policy most European countries
have a by sorry the Americans have a bi-
American policy and most Europeans have
a a biocal policy but British don't the
thing you said about boots as well is
fascinating I mean we we made a Tik Tok
about the history of boots a few months
ago uh obviously Florence boot Jesse
boot um and and this is still capitalism
this is still private firms nobody's
suggesting it's radical or revolutionary
I don't want people to think that for a
moment but it really that that story of
the of the boots firm and what it became
what it's become I think really shows
you an extraordinary trajectory for
British capitalism over the last 100
years people don't know this but I think
is it Nottingham University a lot of
their Estates are were given to them
bequeathed to them by Florence boot um
at one point it was the most popular
workingclass library in the country
boots um and what it's become instead is
effectively a tax dodging um
exploitative company which rips off the
NHS um through prescription and whatnot
uh and it's effectively a means of
sending large amounts of money from this
country to the United States and that
shows you how much is changed and your
book just gives example after example
you said bourneville a moment ago H and
Clarks I've not heard the Clarks one can
you well bourneville was cadb so C Cadre
was taken over by by um uh craft wasn't
it and um with the with the RBS funding
it with RBS funding it and and with a
with various undertakings about What
factories they keep keep open which were
not able to be delivered um uh well
Street in Somerset is a is a town that
used to be dependent on one on one
business Clark's Shoes and it was very
successful um company and very
prosperous town and when Clarks
effectively declined uh with the growth
of Far Eastern Manufacturing um it the
the the town lost the lost its heart and
lost a lot of its wealth and certainly
lost the apprenticeships um and so
that's that's been typical of the
decline of the UK but in many cases
that's because companies have been taken
over by by us so that sounds more like
um a post-industrial story whereas
bournville um arguably boots with
Nottingham less so I mean you could you
can point to an inflection point of a
takeover by a us company are there any
other sort of major examp I mean craft
is not us but are there any other major
examp craft is us is it is it or it's
it's no no you're thinking Nestle the
craft is us that is isn't it absolutely
and um so there there are quite a lot
where where the takeovers have happened
recently so something like arm in in
Cambridge yeah and as you with a company
like that of course they like having the
research facility there but ultimately
the the big decisions for that company
are going to be made where the where the
headquarters are and where the listing
is um so that's owned partly by American
corporations partly by Japanese
and it's listed in New York now so I
think that there's a whole question
about the relisting of companies where
because of CR the Builder Merchant
recently moved to have an American
listing flutter the gambling company um
but even huge companies like shell have
seriously considered relisting from
London to New York um and you can see
why with high valuations there it's
going to be better for the executives
but also it's going to be better for the
shareholders so there there are reasons
why people want to relist there but it
seems to me that that's quite damaging
to London but it's also it's a first
step in a company becoming changing its
nationality so so what are the major you
said that are undervalued and it's
something I've always I've heard in
circulation a lot you know footsy
companies are undervalued what explain
why that is I think it's partly because
American institutions are better funded
and take a longer term view um it's
partly because they'll they'll it's
thought that they will prosper more um
more in in the US environment lower
regulations um more scope for expansion
um so it's about creating a an
environment in which they'll they'll do
well um but we we could we could take
the view the British government could
take the view that it it it doesn't
allow takeovers in the same way that
it's done so in the last 20 or 30 years
um at the moment we've got a real real
jumble sale going on all sorts of
businesses are being taken over and the
government show show no concern about it
there's a big uh computer software cyber
security company in Cambridge called
Dark Trace that's just being taken over
by um tomama Bravo which is a specialist
in US Chicago based specialist in in
software companies and they they know
what to do they'll they'll it's so
predictable what they'll do they'll gear
up to buy it nothing wrong with that
well perhaps there is because that
gearing will reduce their tax
significantly and perhaps increase risk
they'll gear up to buy it they'll tend
to increase prices if they're uh other
businesses or anything to go by they'll
tend to reduce costs and they'll achieve
what they call synergies which means
sort of cross- selling and um buying
collectively um so they're it's a it's
it's a well-worn path and the British
government are doing and policymakers
are doing very little of anything about
it the cabri example is great because I
think Peter mandelson that time was the
trades are and you have the loan I think
it was a 7 billion pound loan from RBS
to craft to buy cabur so at that point
it was a taxpayer owned bank all the
more remarkable and ultimately I think
it rediles in Switzerland I think the
tax doile changes they lay off workers
and they increased the amount I think
temporar change and I think they
increased the amount of sugar in the
chocolates the quality of the chocolate
deteriorated including famously the
cream eggs yes so it's it's quite
remarkable that a publicly owned
taxpayer backed bank is
financing this crazy set of outcomes and
politicians aren't really aware of it
being you know a bad idea one of the
reason reason these takeovers are so
attractive to the US multinationals and
indeed other multinationals is because
they can to some extent to a large
extent eliminate tax and that makes
makes a company more attractive if you
can uh and and there are so many
legitimate legal ways they can do that
but particularly it's around what's
called transfer pricing so that you put
your you put your trademarks in an
offshore location such as Cayman Islands
and then your local UK
subsidiary pays its pays these for the
use of these trademarks pays large sums
to the tax Haven and it reduces the
local taxes uh local profits and almost
it sometimes eliminates the local tax
while the real profit is is taken into
the tax Haven where it's taxfree so this
is something we could do something about
but it's actually quite difficult for
the British in some ways to do to to act
on it because of the 10 major tax Havens
the British control eight so we would
have to be quite radical and there has
been talk about it by chancellors but
it's only been talk we'd have to be
quite radical in what we do with our tax
Havens so far all it's gone all they've
gone for is more transparency saying
well you've got to say who owns what but
that doesn't deal with the the core
issue of allowing them to operate in
that way all the things you're talking
about I mean they're coded as leftwing
you know it's coded tax avoidance tax
evasion taking on the tax Havens I I
genuinely don't understand Angus how
over the last 10 years these haven't
become mainstream demands among centor
right politicians centor right um party
activists voters I find it absolutely
crazy the thing you said about the
trademark what's the deal with um
Starbucks and the Netherlands so how
does that work because I've heard
something like that they they root
certain taxes through certain
jurisdictions I'm I'm a bit confused so
if you can clarify that I'd be grateful
well I have to be careful what I say
about an individual Corporation because
these companies can can be litigious um
but from what uh Reuters have researched
it it's clear it seems clear that um
Starbucks have got a long record of
minimizing their tax within the law um
but certainly not within the spirit of
the law so that they theyve put their
trademarks I think in the Cayman Islands
and they do they can do their um have
subsidiaries owned in Amsterdam and they
can do their I think things like trading
in coffee if it goes through um in
Commodities profits on that are very
lowly tax
in places like Switzerland um so anyway
it's not it's not about one particular
corporation it's it's it's a pattern of
behavior that that they show um and
actually one of the biggest tax Havens
is Ireland um so apple and ancestry.com
and lots of the big uh tech companies uh
Facebook and lots of the big farmer
compan us farmer companies they trade
trade through Ireland so they're selling
into the UK through Ireland um with a
much lower tax rate um typically 12 a
half% if they're paying the official
rate or if they've got a special deal uh
far lower sometimes almost zero not much
above zero but it's been great for
Ireland because they've got a they get
about almost 20% of their budget
government budget paid for by the taxes
that they do collect at these lower
rates on this topic of Ireland you also
mention in the book about how
multinationals kind of cook the books I
don't mean that in a in a sort of
accusatory way they they
can they can confuse perhaps GDP figures
and and what they're meant to express so
often when we think of GDP we think of
quality of life we think of you know
Prosperity GDP per capita is obviously a
very good way of judging that Ireland's
GDP per capita is about twice that now
it's getting there twice that of the
UK um and if you go to Ireland it's not
it doesn't look twice as wealthy as much
of the UK and presumably that's because
of these tax dodging multinationals
absolutely the scale of movements
through the tax Havens is such that it
distorts the position in the in the
world tables of GDP and so companies
countries that look as if they're quite
highly um quite important in GDP terms
uh like Switzerland and Ireland and
Singapore um uh once you take out what
are effectively tax-driven transactions
their position in the tables drops right
down so yes it's what I found was that
the British were very reluctant to
produce any figures on o on on this that
they they don't collect them some of
what they do collect they they don't
make public but the Americans are much
more open and much more systematic in
their collecting of of numbers and I
struck a rich seam with the uh Internal
Revenue Service there's an obscure page
it's absolutely not advertised anywhere
and you have to search quite hard to
find it um and when you do you can't
just cut and paste it because it's a
directory to various PDFs anyway one of
those is a a set of PDFs of a
spreadsheet of all the countries that
American corporations trade with the big
multinationals and how much profit they
make and how much tax they pay on it how
many people they employ it is two or
three years out of date because it takes
them time to collect and collate the
information but it's an absolute
Treasure Trove and it ought to be looked
at far more by the British I mean here
we are we the country is deeply
penetrated by a foreign economic power
and we're not even even watching we're
not even measuring and that economic
power is telling us what they're doing
if only we'd read their numbers so for
example um the US multinationals turn
annual turnover in the UK uh is now $800
billion put that into Sterling divide by
28 million homes in this country and
that's equivalent to
23,000 per household is the equivalent
of how much Us sales there are in the UK
so it's big but they're willing to give
these numbers and we're just not reading
them I mean I spoke to um I I did an
interview with Philip Hammond who was
very good actually and very helpful um
but he former Chancellor former
Chancellor but he was under the the
misapprehension that the American
Americans employ just a million Brits
and these figures reveal that it's well
over one and a half million and actually
if you include indirect employees people
like uber and Amazon Flex drivers it's
probably 2 million Brits working for
American corporations so about twice
what the what the British think it is so
the penetration is far is far deeper and
wider uh than the establishment willing
to accept and they're just not looking
at the numbers yeah you have a stat here
which is that um us corporations have
more employees in the UK than France
Germany Portugal Italy and Sweden
combined absolutely and that's of course
authoritative because that comes from
the Americans own figures from the
IRS yeah I mean those aren't small
countries France Germany Italy they're
the the G7 economies no so France is
Germany's a big country than ours and
while we've got 2 million while 2
million British employees work for
Americans the Germans only have 450,000
but in southern Europe in Spain and
Italy each of those countries only have
200,000 working for American corporation
nothing wrong with working for American
corporations but it's a good way of
measuring the extent to which they've
they've taken control of the economy
there's a great quote here as well in
the book before we move on um amazing
quote from Denny lwell uh from 1930
America conquers Britain we were
Britain's Colony once she will be our
Colony before she's done well we're not
done yet I mean the Scots might have
something to say that in the next few
years but we're not there yet not in
name but in fact but we shallan make
Britain's mistake too wise to govern the
world we shall merely own it nothing can
stop us nothing what chance has Britain
got against America absolutely very
preent writer um and he he was talk he
did a lot of analysis of how well the
Americans were doing industrially in the
in the N early 20th century um but he he
could he could see the future and of
course the real turning point was the
was the second world war um when Britain
emerged um basically bankrupt um and the
Americans had extracted such a price to
help um with the the the sort of
gunboats for bases deal um which
Churchill said he had no choice but to
do um and uh and perhaps he was right
but from from then on the the American
economic machine was was was moving
across Britain but I think nothing
compared to the last 15 years this is
this is I think where people people say
oh we've always had Ford at dagnam we've
always had American companies here but
it's about the scale of it and as we've
moved to a digital world that's a
digital world which is owned by
Americans and as we've moved to a from
quoted
companies uh an economy dominated by
quoted stock Market companies to a world
a bigger more private companies the
private Equity world that's where the
Americans have really really cleaned up
I mean that is key because if if we had
Peter Hitchens in here he would say that
Brit the British Empire dies in 1940
1941 Dunkirk fall of Singapore and that
after that we become effectively some
sort of dependency on the United States
and I I think that's that's right you
know the second world war is started or
involves two European Colonial Powers
it's ended by these two non-european if
you don't include USSR you know hyper
Powers which they form the the two
Rivals of the Cold War I think that's
true but like you say with this book
actually we don't need to we don't need
to sort of dig and look back 80 years
this is really since the arrival of the
worldwide web um and the early 2000s yes
and and it doesn't have to be like this
it's not as if I mean some people say oh
well this is happening all over the
world but I mean we represent a third of
American foreign investments we've been
we've been taken over to an extent that
France and Germany haven't and yet they
are still under the NATO umbrella so
it's not like we have to sell all our
businesses in order to get to have a a
mutual PCT for military protection it's
it's it's they're different things and
it's one thing to believe in free trade
um which the British and the Americans
and most of the Europeans do but it's
not the same as believing in free trade
in our companies we don't have to allow
everything to be taken over I mean what
the french did famously when pepsic Cola
wanted to take over their big milk and
yogurt company Danon is they labeled it
as a strategic asset and they said our
strategic assets are protected from
takeover back off and now Denon is still
French owned and in a way it was a
strategic asset because one of its roles
was to was to support local communities
to buy milk from small farmers um and to
support um yogurt makers locally and uh
so yes it's industrial but it's the
French recognize the importance of
keeping it keeping it within their
control and it's not just a matter of
Pride but it's it's much more than that
it's about where the profits go and it's
about who regulates the companies so the
danger once you've got a a business
that's that's owned in in America is an
anonymous head off is there across the
Atlantic on another continent can be
making big decisions about layoffs and
priorities and
regulation whether even the they want
that branch of the company to exist I
suppose somebody might be watching this
and there might be sort of you know
Ultra liberal person they two bigots
they're talking about you know uh BR
putting Britain first British there's a
very material I mean as I'm a socialist
you do not want to be sihing off profits
to somewhere else you want your workers
to enjoy High labor standards you want
to be able to collect taxes from the
companies operating and selling goods
and services in this country and I think
that's there's a very important leftwing
I think there's also you know doesn't
it's not entirely leftwing but I think
over the last 20 25 years people from
from the left have thought well
particularly the center left people like
the mandon wing of the labor party if
they're Center left Center you know they
would say well this is just you know
doesn't matter where they're from you
know it's unimportant actually it's very
important if you want to provide a a
well-resourced public um sector
absolutely I mean my favorite question
in the last three years has been who
owns that and of course I've been using
my Apple American computer or phone and
I've been using Google American owned
but it doesn't matter they provide good
information on this um and when I search
who owns that company it's amazing how
often the answer is an American
corporation I mean just to give an
example we we um we thought of uh during
the covid pandemic we we the British
with astroica were the first to develop
a a vaccine and yet at the end of the
time 2third of the vaccines were being
bought almost exactly two-thirds were
bought from American companies um so
beyondtech and um fisa which we just
thought all these are kind of familiar
names these weren't just any names these
were names of American corporations so I
think it does matter who owns them and I
think we can easily find out using
Google
and Google and our phone yeah and and
the point about France I think is key um
I I like I think France does so many
things better than the UK so many things
and people say well it's GDP is L than
ours because they work less they choose
to literally work less they retire
earlier they have a shorter working week
they're GDP per capita if they work the
same as us would be higher because their
productivity is higher but besides all
the you know highspeed rail um the fact
that they've got I think 90% of the
electricity comes from nuclear which
they build their nuclear capability in
terms of um warheads and whatnot
entirely domestic they have a you know a
domestic I mean to be fair we're also
with with with Aviation we share that
with them somewhat um they have a
domestic industrial manufacturing sector
which we basic gave up I mean that's
that's prior to a lot of this stuff and
that's about political choices in the in
the 80s and the '90s A and I would say
it's worse than that it's not that we
gave it up we're still giving it up this
this process of selling off companies is
happening right now there are companies
that are being taken over I mean two big
defense companies Ultra and megit were
sold in the last three or four years but
there are companies now that are subject
to to take over dark dark Trace in in in
Cambridge but but wi canton's just been
sold Big H company with 20,000 staff so
what I'm saying is that it's not just
that we gave gave up what IND industry
we had we're still giving it up it's a
process that's going on right now and it
ought to be a big issue in the current
general election well maybe this will be
the game changer into you but maybe
maybe we'll have to wait a little bit
for that there is a great stat in the
book about tech firms and this is
another one that you know it's another
Touchstone of modern politics all the
politicians love to say we're Innovative
we're new we're you know technologically
um in
again going back to Jeremy Hunt he said
that that trillion dollar company would
of course be a tech a Tech Giant and you
say the footy 100 when it was launched
in 1984 had more Tech firms than it does
today just to be clear the footy 100 is
the 100 most valuable listed companies
in the
UK that's a remarkable statistics how
did you work that out and what are you
what are you classifying there as a
technology company well it's interesting
because if you look at the very few tech
companies we've got left um they aren't
really tech companies so I think
probably right move and auto trader are
the only two and really they're they're
using Tech but really they marketplaces
aren't they and um so in terms of pure
tech companies um we've probably got the
accounting firm in Newcastle um that's
about it really um so we basically lost
them all um but in many cases I mean
deep deep mind was classic case which is
a very promising tech company which
Google took over very cheaply as it
turns out but I'm sure Google knew it
was a bargain at the time um so we've
we've allowed these takeovers to happen
um in fact we've even encouraged them
friend of mine had a tech company which
he he sold and he said to me by selling
it now I got my um my entrepreneurs
relief allowance I'll pay maximum of 10%
tax if I carry on trading I'll pay 40%
or more tax on the trading profits so it
pays me to sell so we've set up a tax
system we on entrepreneurs want to sell
but we could find other ways of
encouraging people who build up
businesses to hold on to them that's
what the Germans have done with their
midat so they've got a lot of companies
very often specialized in a particular
Niche very often exporters very often
set up soon after the war family
businesses but with a kind of commu
extended family and Community around
them and they they wouldn't sell even
for a profit because it'd be socially
unacceptable they're they they're
embedded in their Community they provide
jobs um they wouldn't be able to face
their Community if they turned around
and said we sold out to a foreigner so
there's it's not just about the tax it's
also about the um the culture culture of
keeping hold of your companies and
building them up owning companies to
grow them rather than um to sell them in
fact it's one rather depressing thing
about about um British business advice
these days they always talk about what's
your exit strategy and anyone who's been
in a business discussion will will have
been involved in these discussions well
maybe there isn't an exit strategy maybe
it's a stay in the room strategy maybe
it's a grow the room strategy so it's um
there's a cultural issue as well as as
well as a tax issue so you say culture
that's fascinating because maybe you
don't know Angus I'm a Marxist okay
don't hold it against me and you know KL
Marx would say that capital um capital
is money which makes money it's value
and emotion and you're always seeking a
higher rate of return you're in compet
ition with other the capitalists and
that the the asset management private
Equity model globalized core periphery
relations with the US and the rest of
the world you can map all of that onto
that sort of marxist framework it makes
perfect sense there's a higher rate of
return by boots being bought by these
people um and effectively you you buy
low or and you sell high or you reduce
your cost you keep on to it you move
your tax base do all these things that
can all be
explained through marks essentially
saying that's how business operates
then you're making you say the cultural
argument and this is empirically what
happens right in Germany France Italy
there are very large family-owned
companies that wouldn't do this and they
sort of fly in the face of that Ultra
capitalist argument of maximizing
revenues shareholder returns blah blah
blah so what would be your sort of
political response then because I've
given the critique if that's that is the
direction of a purely capitalist Society
we we don't you never really live in a
purely capitalist Society sorry to to
bore you but you know when Marx writes
Capital it's called Capital critique of
political economy he's criticizing ideas
of political economy rather than the
actual existing economy but it's an
abstract set of values that we seem to
be moving further towards in the
anglo-american countries and it's a
slightly less developed set of things in
a set of relations rather in in
Continental Europe so so what are you
saying we should be more like
Continental Europe you say it's a
cultural thing how does that work that
that would have to be necessarily sort
of like nationalist I suppose or what
Social Democratic or
not necessarily I mean there are lots of
things we could do to tweak our to tweak
our business rules to get closer to
having family or locally owned or even
cooperatively owned businesses um but
we've actually moved them the other way
so one of the things that large
businesses have is advantages of scale
well we can count that can be counted in
various ways um but a big advantage that
they have is the advantage of this
borrowing using other people's capital
and um that has the advantage for them
that they can uh they can take over
bigger targets um but it also has the
advantage that interest payments on that
Capital are tax deductible so one of the
things that private Equity does is it
typically borrows so much that it
doesn't that it doesn't actually need to
pay tax in the short term um and very
often when they sell out they've got
mechanisms to be able to do that very
what they call tax efficiently or what
you would probably say tax avoiding um
so so we we can tweak the rules to move
nearer nearer to your model I don't
think we I don't think these changes
will create a Marxist uh way of working
but it will be it will be less
capitalist um I think in a way what
Britain needs to do is develop its own
form of capitalism um closer to the
European model rather than adopting the
US model Lock Stock and Barrel um and
also by adopting the American model as
we've done we've made ourselves very
open
to the to this this wave of takeovers
the book The book's called vessel state
so I suppose if you're trying to
condense it down then by adopting that
us variant of capitalism we have
effectively made ourselves open to
predatory takeover by us business I
think we're a vassel state in in in in
that way yes that we've made ourselves
more open but I mean a vassel state a
vassel is someone who works at the
direction of someone else and I think
the the British largely do and I think a
vassel is someone who works in order to
enrich someone else and I think in that
sense the British do but there's another
there's another meaning of vassel within
the British economy that we've created a
sort of vassel Class A group of people
who work um really very much at the
margin uh they can't afford to get ill
um I'm thinking of people like Amazon
workers um and it's not a particular
criticism of the way Amazon does
something it's a criticism of the the
whole system of having um employees who
are working at the minimum wage having
to get having to live in places where
it's expensive to live having to get to
work without costs not having adequate
insurance cover um for for when things
don't go right so I mentioned in the
book James bloodworth's book which is an
excellent analysis of how in the real
world American capitalism works for Uber
drivers and for Amazon workers and
because he went under underr for six
months with each of each of four very
loway jobs to experience what it was
like and what he says is that um it it's
all right as long as it's all right but
then if you get an injury there's no one
there to support you and I think the
British model after the war and and
right through the 60s and into the 70s
the British model was and still should
be that we're there to support each
other and that we don't want to have
people who are who are made destitute
because things don't work out for them
so effectively a Social Democratic model
is what you're talking about here
certainly something less brutal than
than than we've got with with with the
workers in in in many of these companies
so when when labor in the last election
talked about the national Investment
Bank and also Regional investment Banks
is that a policy that you think okay if
we're trying to build an ecology a bit
like Germany that's something we should
try well it depends how it depends how
those would work there there's been
constant talk of new Banks uh and for
and then they're typically not funded by
pe very well and not funded not run by
people who've got a Clear Vision of what
they're trying to do um but yeah Finance
is important and I think um we we we
probably should have uh banks that
support certain sorts of Enterprise that
are socially desirable um what you've
got at the moment is Banks who are
motivated to support uh business
businesses that are that they're not
worried about what the business does
they're aoral in a sense um so they're
they're motivated to support customers
who defin who have a lot of collateral
and and can make the interest payments
well that's natural for a banker but so
yeah I think we should have a a better
banking system for for Enterprise well
particularly for co-ops right I mean
co-ops often are very they can compete
perfectly well with private firms the
problem is during a crisis they they
struggle to access Finance during during
an economic downturn because of course I
mean I'll spell it out if you're a large
bank and somebody says firm says I need
500,000 or 10 firms say we need 50,000
the 500,000 is a is a better bet um if
it's a good customer obviously so that's
I mean something when I was writing my
book I found really fascinating that
access to credit during a crisis is the
real pinch point for cops historically
but actually crises are at the heart of
capitalism yes I mean it's a sort of
punctuated equilibrium sort of issue
that it's not just about what happens
you know when things are running
smoothly it it is very much as you say
about what happens in the crisis and my
my reading of it is that with private
equity in particular this is a kind of a
mechanized industry of of people who are
looking for a crisis they're not looking
for a crisis in the economy or their own
they're looking for a crisis in a
particular industry when that happens
they're they're ready ready to take over
at rock bottom prices and um so so we're
we're talking about the constant churn
of businesses and we we've now got this
group of um people who some some people
have described as being like vultures
but I mean they're business people but
they're they're looking for opportunity
and so so if you're a private company
and you're you're in trouble you may get
taken over but at a very low price have
you read Brett Christopher on Asset
Management I think you'd really like it
um well yeah asset management and uh and
wealth management and another book as
well when I'm reading this and I'm
thinking it it's good for our audience
you can go on and watch us on YouTube
it's techn feudalism by yans far fakis
fam with that yes very much yeah and I
thought I actually thought reading this
I thought this Brett Christophers and
Janis it's kind of all it's a similar
story you're all you're all sort of
telling um on the techn feudalism point
and again you you you talk about all the
different firms from you know oh just
everything it's crazy
um that we depend on with the us and
then you go on to payment services Apple
pay Visa Mastercard obviously Google pay
I mean I when I when I swiped in coming
from London watero to Bermane I use
Apple pay and obviously a tiny fragment
of that payment goes across the Atlantic
yeah not necessarily that tiny yeah what
what's happened is we the the US payment
companies have killed cash they wanted
it to die we're now at a point where for
of our transactions in the High Street
14% so only one in seven are done with
cash and many shops and Industry
businesses refuse to take refuse to take
cash um that but it's not what consumers
often think is oh well this is happening
all over the world it's not in Germany
58% of transactions are with cash
they've chosen cash because it's um very
cheap much cheaper for the shopkeeper
it's very easy to to handle it has some
other advantages too you're more aware
of what you spent if you use cash
whereas as they say the the credit card
anesthetizes the pain of spending um and
so that's of course very good for the
credit card companies but there's
another thing about cash if you're
thinking of normal ordinary people that
cash allows you to to budget and many
people still use cash and jam jars to
work out their to work out their budget
and why shouldn't they it's a good way
to do it but it's it's a bit pointless
if you worked out your budget you've got
your cash to spend on something you
can't use it um so the the credit card
companies took the view that cash wasn't
doing them any good whereas in credit
card payments they're always getting
something it's not just the the front
companies as well it's the the
processing companies that are
American-owned companies like World pay
um which pops up on the screen when You'
when you've touched it with your phone
or with your card um so yeah they've
that this is another example of sort of
almost where we started of bridges and
pipes it's a it's a it's something it's
a pipe you have to go through to make
your payment and they're taking a
royalty on on the way it's incredible
really because we spoke to a guy called
Brett Scott he talked about cashless and
you know he he said you have to at least
keep a certain amount of your money
monetary infrastructure should be
physical cash has to be and he he sets
you know sets out the reasons why and so
far the people defending cash have been
people like Nigel farage who are you
know the sort
of the uh the tribunes of the petty
bouris in this country and it's really
interesting if you look at a
sociological difference if you go I live
in Portsmouth if you go and hang out if
I hang out with the partner of my um
sister-in-law W of cash he's a Tradesman
right um carpet Fitters Builders cash
cash cash if you were with a young if
I'm with my colleagues here at nvar
media London graduates it's all cashless
it's a really notable sociological
divide between the petty Bourgeois and
you might say graduate of the future or
graduate class
and politically actually I had never
thought about it again until reading the
book The Big takeway actually is if
we're looking at this through the prism
of us Imperial
relations you absolutely want to keep
cash you absolutely want it or if you're
going to have a cashless system it
should be publicly owned it should be
based in the UK yes exactly we could
have our own credit card system um we
did we did do we had a a company called
access and we quietly allowed it to be
over taken over by MasterCard there
could have been a a strategy by
government to say this is a a strategic
asset we want to have a national
nationally based credit card and when
was that taken over oh that was a while
ago I can't remember access but maybe
I'm just sort of maybe that's in my like
you know 25 or 30 years ago okay
probably not then but but they they they
could have they could have ch chosen not
to do it um but there is no drive
towards protecting National Assets in
that way um it's just there seems to be
just a big hole in our policymaking well
you had that that funny scenario a few
months ago of niga frage being debanked
and then him saying I I want a bank of
Last Resort and it should be publicly
owned it should be the post off the post
office used to be publicly owned and
they would give you a bank account you
thinking Nigel farage is coming out for
a public ownership of financial
infrastructure uh strange world we live
in yes and the post office has just been
taken over by by a check buyer after 500
years of Independence I'm not saying for
it or against it but it doesn't seem to
have been considered as a as a strategic
asset and don't seem to be enough enough
protections for ordinary consumers uh
and ordinary workers for that
matter on Amazon you you said about
cashless great statistic on Amazon I
think 30% of online retail in this
country goes for Amazon 30% which is
crazy should we just close it down
should we just say no that's it no more
what's what's the what's the what's the
ideal solution really I know you'd say
we should have Alternatives based in the
UK paying tax here but in the short term
what to do about all this is a big
question and it's not an easy question
um we've got to start by recognizing a
problem uh and that's sort of what what
vassel state tries to do to recognize
the extent to which we're American owned
secondly we've got to start measuring
it's an absurd thing to be trying to
deal with a an illness when you know
there's an illness there but you haven't
properly diagnosed it what it is so we
need to to have a proper measure so that
all government departments should should
measure what how much of their
expenditure is made with companies of
each nationality it's not an overly
nationalistic thing to do it's what
other countries do um so start by
recognizing then measure um then I think
we need to have a bi British policy um
as other countries do so conscious
policy there then we need to adjust the
tax system so that it's not so friendly
towards debt and it's not so friendly
towards foreign ownership we need to
make sure that tax is charged fully on
companies uh from whatever country they
come and reduce or eliminate transfer
pricing um in terms of how we get there
from problems that are already
entrenched well that's difficult we need
a very powerful uh uh markets Authority
uh merges and markets group and at the
moment they're they're they're trying
but they they're too weak um and yes
that could allow that could insist that
people uh operate companies operating
here uh demerge different operations um
so you could say for example that that
Amazon has to uh but this is to some
extent actually a department of a US
issue that Amazon should should be
broken broken down into different
different Siz companies I think the main
thing is to reduce further F further
takeovers but yeah it's it it's also
difficult Aon because Amazon are good
great product they they do deliver
things the next day um they do they they
do um have a great customer service and
um it's very convenient and they have a
huge range of products pretty well
anything you can buy anywhere not quite
but it's it's a very wide range um and
uh so it's we should be careful not to
not to knock good service
um but but we we've had our competitors
and they should be encouraged and
incentivized um to to fill spaces in the
market it is very good I'm not going to
lie I've bought so many things off you
know I've got a Prime Membership it is
very good but also I look at I look at
the British High Street over the last 25
years and it's just been it's been
smashed to bits I mean if
you if you I like to call it London OKO
if you sort of this you know if you're
within an hour of London you're fine um
if you go to Winchester you've got two
waterstones bookstores you go a few
hours West to pool 25 years ago
comparable wealth comparable High
streets no bookshops because the point
is the people with those jobs need to
live in London you have this wholly
different when it comes to offline
Commerce there are some exceptions you
can go Hy on why or tot s you know but
or or other major cities like Edinburgh
broadly speaking it's about the
southeast and how close you are to to
London absolutely yes so we're a bit of
an island of of wealth and convenience
and so on but I mean water stones is an
interesting example somebody said I'm
not going to buy your book Angus on
Amazon because I want to support British
companies so I'm going to go to
waterstones and I said well I'm sorry to
disappoint you but water stones is owned
by us private Equity so I said well I'll
go to my local book shop well I said
good but um but I mean in terms of prime
you give that as an example where you've
got a membership of it you've got that
because presumably you get free delivery
on most things and you get a certain
number of free films and you get quite a
lot of things bundled together yeah now
this Bund Ling is um of goods together
by the big companies is something that
really should be challenged because what
it does is it prevents small companies
getting into into each of those sectors
um it's a form of Monopoly power to
bundle stuff together and very
attractive to you and me as consumers to
pay our at or 100 quid a year to to be
to be benefiting from that but it it's
it's very anti- competitive um and
bundling occurs all over the economy so
maybe we don't ban Amazon we just ban
Amazon Prime well no you could have
Amazon Prime but you could say you could
that has to be it has to be only yeah
doing free delivery you have to have a
different service that people buy for
their for their videos and for their
music for Amon because in France as I
understand it I think there's like a
minimum price on books I might be
getting this completely wrong I think
they've got three times as many sort of
independent book shops as we do because
basically they're you're not really
saving that much by buying online is the
point um so there are things like that
and I mean I'm I'm totally in favor of
that I think that's a very good thing to
you know to do um but my point I was
saying about what what Amazon and what
these big tech companies have really
done to the UK High stre over the last
25 years is terrifying it's very bad I
actually think it's a big reason why
we've had brexit I think lots of people
in lots of parts of the UK outside of
the southeast walked around they thought
where I live is looks crap looks awful
um and My worry is with AI applications
that really changes over the last 25
years are just going to go stratospheric
with AI and it's going to be us owned Ai
and all the stuff you're talking about
here is just gonna it's got go to a
whole other level absolutely no AI is
American-owned um and to use chat GPT I
pay my $20 a month and I'm thinking
there it is another but but I need to
because it's a good service um but I
would be happier to pay 20 PS a month to
a UK AI company um but all the things
that I've mentioned the the tax
incentives and the the structure of
industry and the attitude of ministers
and the way that government buys often
buying from us companies all those
things meant that it's unlikely that a a
British AI company can can succeed and
prosper in the General market for there
are some good British AI companies in in
in certain niches but at the moment as
things stand if they're successful they
will be bought up um by Google and
Facebook and others final question is
this all the legacy of Margaret
Thatcher she changed the political dial
in this country in a certain direction
and trying to embrace a more American
Star capitalism I think it's one of
those things isn't it that any any
discussion of British economy always
ends up with with concluding that it was
thater that got us off to the wrong on
the wrong foot I think she did she did
have a very strong relationship with
Reagan and with the Americans and she
was very admiring of American capitalism
but I think we've gone to a different
scale I think she would be horrified by
the um by the situation we're in now she
was quite analytical and she would have
seen the extent to which the Americans H
have um have taken over so in in her
when she was in power 3% of the US Stock
Market was owned by Americans it's now
30% so even when we talk of a British
company we're really at best talking of
a 70% owned British company although
with other in foreign institutions it's
likely to be a 50% British company so I
think she she would have been horrified
by that but I mean there were examples
yes when when when uh she fell out with
Michael hlin over um the Takeover of
Western helicopters it was it was she
was supporting the Takeover by Sikorski
the American company that bought it in
the end so yeah it wasn't it wasn't just
a general opening up of capital markets
and welcom with the American model there
were specific government policy
decisions which she made to support
American cap specific American companies
so I think you're probably right I think
it did it did start with with a lot of
it started with Thatcher um but again
she was before the internet age gave it
a a completely different uh different
dimension and obviously well before the
AI age which as you say will we we we'll
move things further on but I mean
perhaps I can ask you do you think your
dream in your book of AI and other
Technologies um creating more Leisure
Time um is going to mean that we won't
worry so much about the American
domination well no it's it's something
that you know in that book I couldn't
really go into obviously geopolitics and
and the relationships between states
which is arguably a state of Anarchy
right it's different to um I think
humans are inherently Cooperative but
the evidence of the last several hundred
years is that not nation states are not
inherently Cooperative with other nation
states so that is something that you
know it troubled me in the book and I
I quite overtly say I think in the final
two chapters that really the path from
one to the other because I do think that
you know that Economist headline from a
few years ago what happens when labor
becomes Capital we're going to get there
we're going to see the plummeting um
price of human labor because
increasingly uniquely human capabilities
will disappear I think I think the
bridge from one form of political
economy to another is going to be
something which looks like a radical
form of social democracy and so when
you're talking about for instance
certain kinds of bank that can Finance
corera business or a different kind of
British capitalism I think in the short
over the next 20 25 years yes certainly
I don't you know I don't I don't see
that as and I know that some people
watching or listening might really
strongly disagree I I don't disagree
with that at all I the trends I talk
about in that book are really over a
century I mean who knows right um so
there's still a place for markets
there's still a place for private firms
in the short term I just don't want
those anywhere near um things are
fundamental you know importance to human
beings which would be the universal
basic Services if you want to be a
private Enterprise and make money you
know make make phones I don't want you
anywhere near the water system it's low
margins anyway it's quite hard to
administer I certainly don't want
private Equity there so
I I I I I I think this analysis can fit
in with that perfectly well and it's
interesting you said that about thater
if she saw this she'd be a gas because I
think she would be that's what's
fascinating to me now with with
contemporary British conservatives is
that they've they helped create a model
a political economy over the last 40
years which they don't
like yes they've encouraged to be
they've encouraged us to model ourselves
on the Americans and instead of just
modeling ourselves on The Americans
we've created a system that's welcomed
the Americans in um so so much of so
much of so many of the decisions on
regulation and everything else are made
in New York and Washington um and in
California um one of the extraordinary
things is just the sheer success of
California in in in in dominating not
just online businesses but all sorts of
all sorts of reprodu businesses where
where you can get scale by using the
internet and um yeah I think I think she
would be she would have been she that
model wasn't in her in her vision at
that time in fact wasn't in anyone's
Vision until about 2000 yeah this has
been such a great conversation I really
enjoyed it Angus thanks Aron vassel
State how America runs Britain uh I
don't think it's a very leftwing book
but I think you might have some leftwing
conclusions uh maybe you don't like me
saying that uh this has been a real
pleasure thank you so much thank you
thank you it's been a great pleasure
