okay did anyone else notice this really
weird line in Indiana Jones in the dial
of Destiny it's not yours you stole it
then you stole it and then I stole it
it's called capitalism the bid is 160
and this is not an isolated example you
know more and more movies seem to be
winking to us the audience and letting
us know that they get it look into the
clear Center of this Glass
Onion miles Brown is an idiot and it
might feel good to be seen by Hollywood
but you know I'm starting to wonder are
they just selling our political values
back to us in a way that validates our
beliefs while they continue making tons
of money you stolen hundreds of millions
from people who've done nothing but work
hard all their lives now Mark fiser
wrote that films have the ability to
perform our anti- capitalism for us
allowing us to continue to consume with
impunity you know in this way we get a
political version of the sitcom laugh
track that's where and laughter allows
us to just sit there in silence as the
studio audience laughs for us and we see
this all over the recent Cannon of ether
Rich films like the knives out Series so
she bumps him off for the inheritance
come on no have you seen her insta she's
an influencer triangle of sadness you're
all
equal that is so true everyone's
equal saltburn Oliver I have a complete
an not a horror of ugliness ever since I
was very young I don't know why because
you're a terrible person even Barbie
gets in on this action you set the
feminist movement back 50 years you
destroy girls innate sense of worth and
you are killing the planet with your
glorification of rampit consumerism and
while these movies are all critical of
the rich they feature wealthy characters
that are pretty one-dimensional you know
they're either idiots who just sort of
lucked into money or evil monsters who
would use all the child labor in the
world gladly if it got them more Jets
and cars and fancy wine now the
working-class characters in these movies
don't really fair much better they're
often portrayed as helpless victims and
and moral Angels or in some cases just
resentful sociopaths now these movies
and their critiques of capitalism might
make us feel proud of our correct
politics but we have to ask what's
behind this new radical Hollywood and
who's benefiting from it right why why
do billionaires in their Studios want to
make movies critiquing billionaires in
their Studios one of my favorite
saturnist Chris Morris said this about
the trend the problem is that I think
we've got used to a kind of satar which
essentially plates the court you do a
nice dissection of the way things are in
the Orthodox Elite and lo and behold you
get slapped on the back by the Orthodox
Elite who say jolly good can you do us
another one in other words when we watch
movies about capitalism being bad it
actually demotivates us to change
anything about our world so we might
then want to ask are these films doing
more harm than good now I don't want
that to be true um I don't know what you
think but I really want to believe that
popular art can be politically valuable
but in this case I do see how this type
of anti- capitalist sentiment is so
easily co-opted to create profitable
content for major Studios so today I
want to try to make sense of it by
looking at why so many of these films
get it wrong and to do so we're going to
look at a movie that gets it right or at
least less wrong than the others the
menu now before we get cooking I do want
to say welcome to wise crack 2 my name
is Michael I'm glad you're here now if
you are a regular viewer of wise crack
thank you so much for joining us over
here uh this is your first time seeing
one of our videos so good to meet you
now this is our new channel where we're
going to focus on analyzing films TV and
games trying to see how they can help us
understand the world better and still
using all the tools of philosophy that
you all know and love now if you've
never seen our main Channel wise crack
please check it out we release weekly
videos use philosophy and critical
theory to make sense of all types of
cultural social and political Trends
okay so let's talk about the menu and a
fair warning we're going to spoil the
movie now right off the bat we're
introduced to a character who seems like
the quintessential insufferable rich guy
bab please don't smoke it'll kill your
pallet Tyler strolls into the restaurant
and can't help but stunt on the staff
with his knowledge do you make that with
a p Cod yet you know desperate to be
seen as an Insider he makes sure that
the cooks know that he knows about the
hypers specific gear they're using now
while you could take this as a show of
respect uh it's not he's actually
fetishizing a commodity that he's never
done the labor of producing himself um
and commodity fetishism describes what
happens when we ascribe value to a thing
and not the human relations that you
know made thing basically he's wholly
focused on the cultural value of Chef
sl's fine dining Cuisine ascribing the
value to the food itself and the gadgets
that produce it more so than the
incidental human labor that goes into it
sort of like how One values a supreme te
you know not for the hands that made it
but the exclusivity of the brand itself
now for Tyler the production of this
food and the hands involved in that
production are negligible he's sort of
like an excited little boy when the cook
knows his name but he doesn't even
consider returning the favor he knew my
name B yeah I noticed you didn't ask his
name yeah well you know you know the
cook's not valuable to Tyler because of
his Humanity he's valuable for his
proximity to a particular cultural
fetish in this case the food at a famous
restaurant this fetishization and the
belief that consuming and understanding
high-end food makes him cultured it
actually undermined the value of his
obsession you a wise the mystery has
been drained from our
art you see that now don't you because
for all of Tyler's high-end consumption
an Associated expertise when he's forced
to enact that knowledge and actually
cook he just totally falls apart while
that's not the point of the movie I do
think you should know how to cook three
things so if you don't know how to cook
you know learn how to cook three things
if you don't know what ask in the
comments and let people give you
suggestions I would say omelette simple
pasta sauce and I don't know a seared
piece of fish I think if you if you do
that you can go a lot of places from
there but don't do it how he did it cuz
he well he he dies he can't mediate
between the worlds of cultural
fetishization and material production
and he's made painfully aware of the
unbridgeable gap between his cultural
understanding of food and the actual
labor of creating it his Bourgeois
pleasure of consumption is irrelevant
when it comes to the more proletarian an
act of production he seems to understand
this and sort of accept the punishment
voed upon Him by Chef we can see this
more clearly by comparing Tyler to
another one of my favorite onscreen Rich
Bros my buddy Shane from season 1 of The
White Lotus like Tyler Shane sees the
consumption of luxury as essential to
his character you know we see this when
he absolutely freaks out when a
logistical mixup prevents him from
staying in his desired hotel room the
guy lied I mean that is just stupid or
something we did book the room with the
pool and we paid for it my mom forwarded
me the booking just as enjoying dips
with no bread confirms Tyler status
being denied the room with the plunge
fool seems to threaten shanes they're
also both with women who they seem to
Value primarily as eye candy that
enhances their own status even as they
treat them like  but the difference
is are telling you know Tyler willfully
takes his own life when his disconnect
with the labor behind his fetish is
revealed and he can't stomach the
disdain of the chef he idolizes on the
other hand Shane gets away with killing
the hotel manager and still gets to keep
his wife after treating her like
absolute ass now I don't know what you
guys think but personally I I don't
really find either of these characters
relatable or even realistic please let
me know in the comments if you find one
of these characters relatable cuz if so
um I would love for you to be a
benefactor of our Channel now Shane
represents a flattened and cynical
version of the rich guy archetype one
who acts like just an absolute 
and then fully gets away with it his
underlying psychology seems to boil down
to something
like but with Tyler we get a deeper look
into the psyche of a person whose entire
understanding of the world is mediated
by capitalism and which to desire
something means you must necessarily
acquire that thing the sort of practice
practice of cultural appreciation turns
into Reckless consumption you know like
uh but like if you appreciate art you
got to buy a Rothco with auction also if
you have the money to buy a Rothco at
auction again hit us up we would love
for you to be a benefactor in this way
some of us might be more like Tyler than
we like to admit if you don't think that
makes sense just just work with me for a
second you know because being obsessed
with food is a defining Millennial trait
maybe because you know dinner at a hip
new restaurant is way more Fe able than
a mortgage on a hip new condo but you
know how many Foodies out there are
aware of the Stark difference between
the conditions in which their meals are
served and the conditions in which they
are produced okay so for example most of
us don't take the bus home with the line
Cooks to see where they live we're about
as disconnected from this stuff as
someone like Tyler is uh now a lot more
to say here but real quick if this is
your first time here please do subscribe
to the channel ring the bell so you know
what new videos are coming out like it
leave comments all that sort of stuff
and if you love movies thinking about
them and talking about them please check
out our movie podcast show me the
meaning it streams right here every
Tuesday at 5:00 p.m. Pacific uh and the
podcast is available later in the week
if you like this you will definitely
like that okay I want to consider
another type of character that always
shows up in these sorts of movies what
I'd call the smug Finance bro um shout
out to any smug Finance Bros who are
watching the working money yeah baby
yeah baby we're pathetic aren't we oh my
god dude somebody shoot us now they
might seem like total parodies but hints
of their Humanity actually Peak through
the surface me and a man are not good
it's not good your fault no it was her
fault she made me text her coworker yeah
of course it's my fault bro these are
guys who seem fully subsumed by the
logic of capital you know while Tyler
thinks he's a Gourmand with an aesthetic
appreciation for fine dining these dudes
I guess to their credit Harbor no such
self-d delusion you know cash rules
everything around them Tyler thinks his
good taste makes him more than just a
rich guy but these dudes know that they
are nothing more than Rich guys which
makes them funny to watch uh until it
stops being
funny we see them you know only
understand the world via economic
relations they can't conceive of an
alternate motive for anyone actions thus
why they assume that you can buy your
way out of being murdered to say a
 number man and honestly you guys
probably feel this I felt it you know
it's it's hard to feel too much sympathy
for these dudes they've gotten Rich
doing Financial crimes and they
basically treat everyone else like a
bunch of NPCs and their artof the deal
lifestyle but they've you know also been
dehumanized via their own type of
alienation now typically alienation as
popularized by Marx describes how
industrial labor labor sucks the
humanity out of workers you know they're
alienated from the products of their
labor which are sold for someone else's
profit from their fellow workers who
they're forced to compete with and even
from their own Humanity as their
existence is reduced to workers as
living conditions are just enough to
keep them alive now for many of us this
might look like working a 10-hour day at
our main job while doing a bunch of side
hustles to make rent leaving us with
little time to develop as people or
explore our Hobbies hang out with
friends fall in love things of that
nature but the same system creating this
alienation also dehumanizes those on The
Winning Side you know the stock Traders
and CEOs of the world now if you're
thinking Michael are you about to look
me dead in the eye and tell me to have
empathy for stock Traders and CEOs kind
of but not really so so don't click away
yet now they're disconnected from the
human cost of their wealth they don't
see the relationship between quarterly
earnings or or reductions in spending
and human beings and you don't have to
be a millionaire to be affected by this
type of alienation you know we're
usually unaware of the labor conditions
that create our phones much less the
lives of the workers who make them and
when we order Thai food on door Dash all
we know is that in 37 minutes a bag of
pad tie is going to magically appear on
our doorstep again this video is brought
to you by door Dash # we don't use them
humans this isn't really a moral issue
you know know you're not being a bad
person when you order delivery You're
simply participating in a fundamentally
exploitative and alienating system but
it's worth noting that Marx builds his
theory of alienation off of hegel's
Master and servant dialectic a big idea
you don't got to know a lot um but this
is where Hegel notes that it's not just
a servant that's dehumanized via a
master who's appropriating their labor
you know the master also suffers in as
much as they're totally disconnected
from labor I mean if you grew up with
like a super rich dad shouted out if you
did you know maybe there's a time where
like something broke and your super rich
dad had to pay someone to come fix the
thing and the working class person knew
so much more than your Super Rich Dad
that it like negatively affected your
Super Rich Dad and you drank a lot more
scotch that night you didn't see him for
two days and Mom started going to tennis
lessons a lot more and then everything
else fell apart from there basically I'm
saying that like hey
described cuck theory for the first time
now while the servants life does largely
suck they do get to see their
Consciousness reflected back at them in
their labor which helps them develop
their own Humanity that sounds a little
unclear um you know imagine you go to a
pottery class and you create a thing and
and you put some effort into it you
bring it home you put it on the table
and and your roommate says hey that's
pretty cool every time you walk by that
you might think like hey I'm not a total
worthless piece of  I made a cool
Bowl the people like you know you see
your creative Consciousness staring back
at you in an object that you've made now
in hegel's example the master and having
others carry out labor for them doesn't
get to see their Consciousness reflected
back at them and because of that they
don't really develop their Humanity in
the same way as Hegel sees it this
relationship to labor is fundamental in
cultivating both our humanity and our
ethical relations to others honestly
guys you just learned as much about
Hegel in the last minute and a half than
many will learn in a whole semester so
good for you to put it in a mellow way
every time that you drop your laundry
off for someone else to clean you're
slowly destroying your own soul this is
why films that associate the behavior of
the rich with an individual lack of
morality are missing the point cuz when
we focus on the moral Corruption of
individuals we then ignore the economic
and social conditions that create these
exploitative relations it's turning a
structural issue into an individual one
now this is why slavo xek says I don't
like this moralization that comes with
these movies you know we are full of
anti-c capitalism today maybe even too
much but they always focus on personal
corruption greed we should move from
this simple moralistic anti- capitalism
to more fundamental questions such as
why people are pushed to act like that
we see this sort of like personal
corruption in a movie like The Glass
Onion
anywhere you go it's going to be your
word against mine how do you think
that's going to go cuz cartoonishly evil
rich guys make it way easier for us to
watch the movie and just think like wow
I'm I I could never be that depraved I'm
I'm one of the good ones even if I just
got a huge raise that place is the crown
jewel of my kingdom not going to let
some crash test dummy with a gun fu it
up is that clear Mr Pettis but while
these rich guys are heightened for
satirical purposes our friends in the
menu aren't really that far removed from
a group of MBA students who are eating
sushi somewhere in Boston right now my
dad used to say that you buy the
experience you know unlike the born evil
rich guys from other films feels like
for these dudes their souls have just
been slowly eroded by the system you
guys ever get burnt out or but hey
enough talking about rich dudes let's
look at how these films talk about
actual working class characters okay
before we do though I need some
fuel which is a delicious sip of coffee
from Wise crack's official coffee
partner uh yes please coffee they are a
small roaster based right here in Los
Angeles they're run by four individuals
they're fully independent and they just
make really really delicious coffee uh
if you order some of their beans with
the code wise crack there's a link in
the description you get 20% off your
first order so you know if you want to
have the sort of high-end taste for
culinary Delights we've seen in the
movie without being a psychopath maybe
just treat yourself to some really
delicious coffee at an affordable price
again that's yes please coffee get 20%
off with the code wise crack now let's
get back to it one of the biggest
problems in Eat the Rich movies is that
poor and workingclass characters can be
represented in uncomplicated ways
they're either down tried in victims
with an inherent sense of morality it's
a physical thing that I just the thought
of lying yeah it it makes makes me puke
or resentful monsters thirsty for
power which M all of
this now while the kitchen staff in the
menu does represent the working class
more broadly the film focuses on two
characters in particular you have chef
slowick and then Margot who is a sex
worker in Tyler's date for the evening
now they're both valued even if
tenuously by the wealthy in the case of
Chef slowick Elite magazines write about
him CEOs invest in him the rich travel
to an isolated island just to eat his
food in the case of Margot her coolness
and sex appeal compel men to spend lots
of money to share her company but see
this value is contingent on the taste
and desires of the rich who have
notoriously fickle stomachs and libidos
I mean look at how Tyler speaks to
Margot I can because ding-dong I'm the
one who's paying so maybe shut up and
eat and let's not forget he brought her
on this date knowing that the final
course was death so you brought Margo
mmhm
why that's just cuz you don't offer
seeings for one so you hired her knowing
she'
di yes I listen I know that you've been
on bad dates but at least you've never
been on a date where the person knew
that you were going to die at the end of
it but we would love you know bad date
stories so let us know if you got them
and Chef slowick knows that he's
basically owned
I would have to say that Doug veric owns
me except now things are a little more
complicated and I own Doug
veric in both cases we have people whose
work in Slow's case his food and in
Margo's case her sexuality are products
for a class they don't belong to you
know neither of them could afford their
own Services yeah I know in Margo's case
that would be particularly compc ated
but you you get the point and this
commodification and alienation sucks the
joy out of their respective crafts I
haven't desired to cook for someone in
ages you we see the same thing for
Margot what rattled me is that he told
me to tell him that he was a good man
and that I was his daughter and that he
loved me and I loved him while they've
both been exploited by specific Rich
individuals what's really broken them is
economic relations under capitalism you
know they're not alienated from the joys
and pleasures of food and sex because of
Rich diners and horny nerds they're
alienated because they exist in a system
predicated on the exchange of Labor as a
means of human survival contrast this
with Zoe krait's directorial debut blink
twice where a workingclass person is
morally wronged by an upper class person
now in the film The the real issue is a
rich person and their hanger On's lack
of morality not the fact that wealth
structurally affords them the ability to
abuse workingclass people with impunity
this Center personal responsibility
rather than structural inequality the
film's ending is framed as happy because
The Virtuous protagonist is now the one
endowed with money and power this
suggests that the hyper concentration of
wealth is not inherently a structural
problem but rather that its moral
implications depend on an individual's
character you know like we've been
saying throughout this video it's the
difference between
watching one of these movies and being
like damn rich people are are bad and
watching one of these movies and being
like hey there's a set of structural
conditions in our society that mean that
rich people can develop their
subjectivity in a certain way that they
exploit other people uh with impunity
while those people are systemically sort
of alienated from their Humanity now in
the menu both SLO and Margo get to see
their bosses
die we go s and while it offers a
momentary sense of Freedom it's not not
enough to stop slowick from burning it
all to the ground now unlike saltburn a
film where a middle- class character
murders a rich family to inherit their
wealth uh which Paints the middle class
as ultimately resentful and and lustful
of the upper class now SLO doesn't kill
his boss as some scheme to steal his
wealth rather slogan and staff are aware
that nothing can fix the system you know
no Act of individual Vengeance can dis
alen them no evil scheme can restore
their fundamental Humanity the
contradictions of the system are just
too big to be resolved and in an act
that we could say is at least kind of
akin to self- imulation SLO and his
staff burn themselves to the ground
along with the human s'mores as an act
of symbolic protest against the system
only Margot avoids getting sored instead
enjoys dinner in a show from the comfort
of a boat
but the thing is this doesn't mean that
she has a happy ending you know she's
she's not going to return uh to the
shore and and find a new world which
prioritizes Humanity over profit what
she does get is a cheeseburger which
represents a rare moment of dis
alienation you know without the economic
pressures of fine dining Chef slowick
was able to create something that
connected him to a time where he loved
cooking it's like the one thing he makes
in this movie that you feel like you put
love into and Margo gets to enjoy
something that was made with that love
care and as I read the film it seems
like this burger takes her back to a
more innocent time before she was eating
expensive meals that she doesn't like
paid for by weird men who seem like
horrible fathers and just like how
consuming the perfect cheeseburger isn't
going to create revolutionary change for
Margot passively consuming Eat the Rich
movies isn't going to create
revolutionary change for us maybe the
point is that the better films in this
genre at least help us break out of that
illusion thanks for watching guys we'll
see you next time
