over the past year prageru has been
officially accepted into public schools
in seven states and they just recently
launched their financial literacy class
in New Hampshire which students can take
to receive actual credit required to
graduate this is kind of wild when you
think about it because as I've talked
about in past videos their academic
content is not good so what I wanted to
do for this video was to take this
financial literacy course look into some
of their other new academic offerings
and make a fun little video dunking on
how bad they are because don't get me
wrong this class is bad it is literally
just 75 minutes worth of videos and then
a couple of quizzes it's basically three
Dennis Prager monologues in a trench
coat masquerading as something of actual
academic value but while I was looking
deeper into it trying to figure out how
it got accepted into New Hampshire
schools in the first place I discovered
a rabbit hole so let's talk about this
terrible financial literacy course the
clandestine deals that got it into New
Hampshire schools and what it means for
the future of pru let's get into it
shall we but first we need to ask with
groups like prer U becoming ever more
mainstream how can we know who to trust
while there's no such thing as an
entirely unbiased news source there are
ways to figure out what kind of biases a
source might have so you can become a
more critical reader that's why I use
ground news the sponsor of today's video
ground news is is a website and app
developed by a former NASA engineer who
wanted news to be more data driven and
objective here's how it works you look
up a topic or article and then ground
news searches over 50,000 news outlets
from all different political angles and
then uses information from three
different news monitoring organizations
to give a visual breakdown of
information like what the source's
biases are how accurate it is and who
owns it I recently ran across a story
about how a Virginia school board voted
to restore the Confederate names to two
schools and when you find a story like
this ground news gives you a ton of
information like in the coverage details
section they tell you how many articles
have been published about the story 84
in this case as well as the breakdown of
the political bias of each of those
sources visually we can see in the bias
distribution chart that 33% lean left
25% lean right and 42% are in the middle
you can also see how many of the
articles are from highly factual
Publications 62% of the Articles here as
well as who owns the various
Publications like how 15 % of the
sources here are from Independent News
organizations when you look through all
the Articles you can sort them by their
bias recency or factuality and you can
even hide payal sources which I find
really helpful one of the most
interesting things about this though is
being able to compare how different
sides frame the same story like for this
story so many of the right laning news
sources refer to the decisions as being
part of some larger wave a broader Trend
or a movement to return Confederate
linked names to schools and they framed
the decision as a restoration as going
back to how things should be I also
especially loved this one uncancelled
Virginia school board votes to rename
two schools after historic Confederate
leaders four years after they were
changed it's exceptionally silly but on
the other hand many of the left leaning
sources focused on how the original
decisions were made in light of the 2020
George Floyd black lives matter protests
being able to easily compare the
different sides of his story can help
you more clearly identify biases and the
kind of inflammatory language that's
being used to influence you but
something else that's really useful is
their blind spot feature which is fully
unlocked with the Vantage plan it
highlights stories that are
disproportionately covered by only one
side of the political Spectrum I know
that I often get stuck in my own little
internet bubble so it's good to see
stories that you may not otherwise like
this story about a new nature
documentary series on gay and trans
animals which has only been covered by
right leaning sources but because of
this blind spot feature I now have a new
super cute show to watch ground news
just makes it so much easier to spot the
biases that permeate all of our news and
become a more critical consumer of media
now that I've been using ground news I
feel a lot more confident because I know
where my news is coming from what kinds
of biases it might have and what kinds
of alternate perspectives I might need
so if you want to read the news with a
little bit more of a critical eye then
head on over to ground. news/ zoib and
subscribe for 40% off unlimited access
this month with the Vantage subscription
again that link is ground. news/ zooe or
you can use the QR code on screen and
thank you again to ground news for
sponsoring but with that let's get back
to the video so let's talk about this
financial literacy class this class was
not very good like I mentioned it
consists of 15 5 minute videos from prer
U's cash course show which have been
divided up into four modu ual each with
its own 10 question assessment at the
end culminating in a final 40 question
assessment a 90% score on which will
allow you to receive this a certificate
of completion which you can then use to
receive actual academic credit to
fulfill your high school graduation
requirement in New Hampshire from a
pedagogical point of view this class
structure isn't exactly rigorous but
it's also not uncommon for online
courses and if you've seen my other
video on Prager 's lesson plans then
this probably all feels kind of familiar
too watch a video and then answer some
questions is prer use emo the videos are
fine they're all very obviously for
children they have that sickeningly
sacker and pop energy of kids television
but they're well produced and
competently written some of the little
visual gags are genuinely kind of cute
but overall they're just fine and the
questions are also just fine there were
a couple that were confusingly written
but for the most part there're nothing
to write home about genuinely the worst
part of all of this is that it's so
lazily made and doesn't really have any
academic value students could so easily
just ignore the videos and then Google
the questions to get the answers I don't
think that anyone is going to learn
anything from this course at the end of
the day this class is really just
inoffensive it's not bad enough to be
funny and it's not bigoted enough to
Warrant massive backlash it's just meh
but then you have to ask how did
something this aggressively mid get
approved well that is a great question
in 2018 New Hampshire created their
learn everywhere program which
essentially allows students to get
credit for their extracurricular
activities like for instance if you were
on a recreational soccer team you could
get your fette credit or if you took
piano lessons you could get your music
credit but the organizations running
these activities have to be approved by
the New Hampshire State Board of
Education to be able to actually Grant
students certificates of credit for
those activities once an organization's
program has been approved by the board
students don't need permission from the
school to enroll in a learn everywhere
program if a program has been approved
you can just do it and then get your
certificate exchange for academic credit
no questions asked on one hand this is
fine I think it's cool that you can get
credit for the activities that you would
be engaging in anyway but I also think
that there's a lot of potential problems
for instance while it's a good thing
that the learn everywhere programs don't
use any state funding so they're not
taking money from schools or being
financially supported by taxpayers that
does mean that they have to be paid for
by parents which injects more economic
inequality into public education also in
their FAQ this program is just
explicitly said to be based on how
Charter Schools work so that's not a
good sign but the exciting thing you
might notice about this idea of students
getting credit for anything is that it's
vague as hell and honestly while I was
looking into the requirements for who
could apply for this program it didn't
really seem like there were any real
limits you just have to say what program
or subject your organization will
provide credit for and then describe how
you will evaluate students and that's
pretty much it as far as actual
educational requirements go it's
honestly a little concerning but the
good news is that for these classes to
be accepted into the learn everywhere
program they have to go through a whole
G L of evaluations and discussion and
voting before they ever actually put in
front of any students and luckily thanks
to the investigative reporting of Sarah
Gibson for New Hampshire Public Radio we
know exactly how prer youu got through
this particular bureaucratic Gauntlet
now I know bureaucracy is super boring
but I promise this gets interesting so
just bear with me so prageru submitted
its application on June 28th 2023 and
then a twers approval committee was
formed as part of the review process the
committee also reached out to New
Hampshire teachers and other experts to
look at the application but
interestingly neither the teachers nor
the Elon members responded to the offer
to review the application but the lack
of reasonable availability of these
members of the committee to participate
in the review of the application did not
preclude the completion of the review
process so without the feedback of
teachers the committee reviewed the
application and on July 10th sub
committed their feedback to prageru this
feedback included some issues the
reviewers took with the assessments just
the assessments those were the only
comments the reviewers had but based on
those comments prageru was given the
opportunity to submit another
application which they did and on July
24th their revised application was sent
to Frank adbl the education Commissioner
of New Hampshire who reviewed the
application and sent his recommendation
to the State Board of Education to
approve Prager U's application soon
after after on August 10th the Board of
Ed had a meeting to discuss whether to
finally officially accept prageru as
part of the learn everywhere program but
these meetings are public and the public
had some thoughts several people
attended the meeting and shared their
opinions on prageru and the Board of
Education decided to table the
application until later because of all
of the concerns then the next month on
September 14th the board unanimously
voted to approve Prager use cash course
as part of the learn everywhere program
and the rest is history or financial
literacy I
guess so let's recap at the end of June
Prager U submitted an application to be
accepted into the learn everywhere
program and after a single round of very
light revisions a two-person committee
decided that the course was good enough
to be submitted for acceptance then in
July commissioner Adel BL gave the
application his stamp of approval and
sent it off to the Board of Education in
August the board listened to the
Republic's outcry against frager U and
then in September they approved the
application anyway
so what happened it seems kind of weird
that such a controversial applicant
would be approved with such relatively
little oversight right well there is a
tiny bit of context that I left out of
the story like I mentioned earlier there
were only two committee members who
reviewed the whole thing which is the
absolute bare minimum for what's allowed
under New Hampshire state law
but these committee members are supposed
to reach out to other Educators to get
further guidance on whether the
applicant should be approved or not well
they reached out and no one responded
and that's kind of odd right after all
it's prer you everyone has strong
feelings about prer you well as it turns
out the teachers they reached out to
were given a total of 4 days to read
through the application look through
piger U's website evaluate all the
offerings and then write up their
findings oh and Not only was it only 4
days it was also 4 days over a holiday
in fact during the public board meeting
in August the president of the American
Federation of teachers New Hampshire
said that being asked to review the
content of the videos between July 3rd
and July 7th when teachers are on
vacation is an insulting ask of
professionals other critics agreed and
even suggested that pru's application
should be withdrawn until teachers have
a fair chance to to respond it almost
feels like the teachers were set up to
fail doesn't it well then you'll be glad
to know that even though the teachers
were given hardly any time to share
their thoughts on prageru Prager U
itself was given plenty of time to
defend themselves against the public
outcry that the Board of Education had
received their CEO Marissa stright
actually sent a whole letter to the Boe
in September before that second board
meeting breaking down all the claims
people made about them and addressing
all the complaints there are actually
some great lines in here like our lesson
plans are nonpolitical
okay and regarding the Absurd claims
that prageru is a racist homophobic and
anti-science organization these claims
are simply untrue they're made by the
true extremists those who are more
interested in turning our children into
social justice Warriors than in teaching
them basic concepts of judeo-christian
morality or my favorite our cash course
certificate program is a well-crafted
highquality educational platform
perfectly suited for the learn
everywhere program is it maressa yes it
really but even after pru defended
themselves so well people were still mad
and at the final board meeting in
September the meeting minutes included
over a hundred pages of emails sent from
students parents teachers
representatives and other community
members all across New Hampshire sharing
their concerns about allowing prer U
into public schools in the state some of
the emails were explicitly about prer
U's political leanings with many writing
about how approving financial literacy
materials from this organization lends
credibility to its materials as a whole
While others just expressed concern over
the lack of academic rigor in the course
itself like I talked about in my video
about prageru's lesson plans even if you
push all the politics to the side Prager
U's educational work would still suck
and lots of people writing to the Board
of Education even people who otherwise
liked prer you felt the same way Mark
McAn executive director of the New
Hampshire school administrators
Association and former business computer
economics teacher stated the content was
good but does not believe that it is
enough to provide students what they
need for any sort of comprehensive
financial literacy program assessment is
supposed to be meaningful varied and
authentic 40 multiple choice questions
don't meet those criteria it's not
asking kids to analyze anything
synthesize information put things
together to draw hypotheses they're just
regurgitating information they watched
on a video and sure there were some
emails in support of the course but a
big chunk of those were just in support
of any financial literacy course not
necessarily prer use specifically just
because some people don't like the
source does not mean that the courses
don't have Merit kids today should learn
how to manage their finances for their
own success surely it would provide some
practical information that would benefit
students as they begin to take on
financial responsibilities anything that
makes high school students smarter about
their money will be helpful clearly
these videos will not make anyone a CPA
but they will help young people to keep
their checkbooks balanced and then of
course there's my favorite email from
Good Old Deb I support the prageru
financial literacy course the comic
Sands really just uh makes it now you
might be asking without the support of
any teachers and with all of this public
backlash how did this course get
approved well let's take a second to
talk about education commissioner Frank
Adel during all of the back and forth
with the public Adel blue was always on
the side of prageru like he always had
some kind of rebuttal for anyone's
concern about the program it seems like
he's a huge fan of Prager U which would
make sense given that he spoke at one of
their events
which he received compensation for
before the course was approved in New
Hampshire schools to quote New Hampshire
Public Radio according to public records
obtained by nhpr as the prageru learn
everywhere application was pending Adel
blue spoke to Prager U donors at an
event in California received lodging
paid for by Prager U and agreed to
record interviews for Prager U's
marketing campaign now you might think
this sounds super
sketchy because it is and just to be
clear I'm not saying he did anything
illegal he probably didn't I don't know
I'm not a lawyer but at the very least
there's some ethically iffy eyebrow
raising stuff going on right the nhpr
article goes on to describe exactly what
adal blue was compensated for prer you
staff emailed adal in July asking if he
would participate in an ad featuring
State education commissioners about
bringing prageru to students and speak
about learn everywhere with prageru
donors at a virtual town hall though
prageru's application before the State
Board of Education had not been approved
adal Blue agreed to participate in both
he wrote in an email that once Prager
U's financial literacy course was
approved in New Hampshire I'm looking
forward to pushing out that offering
considerably he personally wanted to
shill for this specific program
when people became aware of this they
got understandably upset but were
assured that adal's appearance at a
prageru donor event was just an
opportunity to promote New Hampshire's
own education initiatives and adal bl
said his relationship with Prager U was
unrelated to whether or not the group
got State approval sure okay so it's
just a coincidence that he approved the
course at the same time that they paid
for him to come down to do a whole press
event for them sure
okay whatever you say now there are
rules about disclosing these kinds of
relationships especially when money is
involved but according to official
records adal bl's trip wasn't reported
until several days after nhpr started
looking into things and that would be
bad enough but it's not like the Board
of Education members who were voting on
whether to accept prer 's application
were completely impartial either for
there's state board chairman Andrew
kleene who according to a rolling stone
report also serves as president of the
jiah Bartlett Center a conservative free
market think tank isn't that just
interesting now again I don't know that
there's anything actively uncouth
happening here I just think there's a
lot of extra context that can be added
to an otherwise straightforward story of
how the prageru class got adopted in New
Hampshire because it wasn't
straightforward it was fought against
the whole way and yet because of the
relatively LAX approval process paired
with the suspicious treatment of the
teachers who could have advised against
adopting the course and the fact that
both the board chairman and the
education commissioner had relationships
with right-wing think tanks in general
and even prageru specifically we've now
ended up with an unpopular organization
pedling its inferior product in public
schools in New Hampshire so what is to
be learned from all this like what was
the point of me making yet another
prageru video well many of the
conclusions that I've drawn here just
reaffirm a lot of what I've said in the
past like I said in an earlier video it
is exceedingly obvious that prageru just
doesn't care about education what they
care about is their brand everything
they do is incredibly lazy in their
lesson plans in their financial literacy
class and even in their econ 101 class
that I took well I say class so I
received an email from them advertising
an economics 101 course and I thought oh
perfect I can do this at the same time
as their financial literacy class and
it'll be great awesome and so I signed
up for it
and it's just a series of emails it is
it's just a series of emails just emails
one every day which each contain a
single five minute video and not even a
new five-minute video one of their old
five-minute videos from the past several
years but it gets worse as part of the
class you also get access to their econ
101 textbook as well as a book from
their Partners at the atlas Society so
you think that's something right no
their econ 101 textbook is literally
just a compilation of the transcripts of
the videos they sent you Illustrated
with AI generated in the most boring
style imaginable so you're just getting
two separate versions of the same years
old 5minute videos and they have the
audacity to call it a class even the
book from the atlas Society is just a
46-page pocket guide to socialism
written by a group founded on Ein Ran's
philosophy who believe that ethical
self-interest should be the backbone of
society every single thing about this
whole organization is just so lazy but
don't get me wrong just because they're
lazy doesn't mean they're not dangerous
they are first of all they might not be
putting outright bigotry or explicitly
right-wing talking points in their
financial literacy lessons but many of
those things are implied or just baked
into the underlying assumptions of their
kids content for instance their video
about taxes is supposed to teach kids
about the pros and cons of taxes but the
pro are just glazed over and every
character in the video actively
complains about paying taxes and whines
about them the whole time this world
nothing can be said to be certain except
death and no no no no no don't say it
please don't say it please don't say it
taxes you said
it okay I get it I get it taxes are
everywhere but is there a way to reduce
the taxes I pay forun why is that the
why is that the question why is it not
oh what are the what do I get for my
taxes what is the benefit of taxes
like the framing of this is just so
frustrating I am so frustrated kids who
watch this are going to get the
impression that taxes are the worst
thing in the world and do no good for
anyone there's also the
oversimplification of bigger issues like
poverty they have a whole video
dedicated to budgeting and they suggest
that you can just budget your way out of
being poor and that being poor just
comes down to personal choices rather
than larger issues but that's just not
how that works there's also no
questioning of things like maybe this is
too much to ask from prageru but for
instance when they talk about Banks
being for-profit or the existence of
overdraft fees or the idea that debt is
good actually they just accept that
that's how things are and don't provide
any room to question whether things
should be that way because that would
require critical thinking skills and
Prager isn't here to promote critical
thinking they're here to promote their
brand but most concerning to me at least
is their most nefarious subtle
propaganda the series of videos in their
craftery show which are all about making
military inspired crafts they have
catapult cannons paper fighter jets and
an Iron Dome
Defender and this is what they argue is
non-political amazing free
Palestine anyway this is not to say that
this is all unexpected or anything I
wasn't expecting Prager use classes to
be rigorous inquiry based explorations
of systemic issues it's just that their
work is so blatantly biased and yet they
keep getting accepted into schools like
the stuff they're saying is normal and
fine but it isn't to quote that Rolling
Stone article from earlier the Board of
Education Hearing in New Hampshire and
the events leading up to it are still
emblematic of prer U's expansion
strategy the organization has sought
rubber stamps by courting members of
conservative administrations who in turn
work to push through approvals any
authorization however minimal is then
marketed as a sweeping endorsement of
their content and Mission boosting their
credibility and some people argue that
this endorsement isn't dangerous because
prer youu isn't making money from these
Partnerships and sure they aren't that's
true but you know it's more powerful
than money influence prageru is ramping
up their initiatives with politicians in
order to spread their brand through
those politicians constituency and
politicians are then using prageru as a
Launchpad both of these groups are
giving each other legitimacy Prager U
gets taken more seriously because
they're collaborating with politicians
and politicians get to spread their
messages on a massive platform it's a
win-win and it's dangerous and they're
not going to stop for now prageru kids
approved material in New Hampshire is
limited to a free financial literacy
program called Cash course but in an
email to the Department of Education the
head of education at prer U kids
expressed enthusiasm about the course's
growth saying they plan to build similar
programs for civics history economics
and more if they are given the space
they will just keep growing while I was
making this video news broke that
prageru had just been accepted into
schools in Louisiana and not just their
kids content either but even some of
their 5-minute videos they have a whole
document outlining all the videos that
can be used as part of the curriculum
which is 96 pages long and they're also
going to be a part of the state's
Freedom week where teachers are given
special resources Chosen and approved by
the state Prager used materials aren't
just free options anymore or they are
being explicitly pushed by the
state you know if I had a nickel for
every time prer youu announced that
another state was added to its education
roster while I was making a video about
their education initiatives I'd have two
nickels which isn't a lot but it's weird
it happened
twice anyway prageru is now in yet
another state and we need to take that
seriously as I've talked about before at
best prer youu has nothing of value to
offer and at worst they're actively
dangerous to students CU they don't care
about students they care about money and
power they've just found that education
is their best path for accumulating
money and power if we want to save our
schools from prer U's influence we need
to be cognizant of the problematic
beliefs baked into their content and be
critical of their relationships with
politicians we need more journalists
like Sarah Gibson of New Hampshire
Public Radio we need more critics
speaking out about the problems with
prageru and we need voters to Ed public
servants who exploit their relationship
with prageru to prop themselves
up we
deserve
better thanks for sticking around till
the end of the video I know this one was
a little different from my usual stuff
uh but I hope that you like it
I want to give a big thank you to my
patrons and members whose names are
scrolling here beside me probably
probably over here I don't know I'm
trying a new setup we'll see uh as well
as an extra special thank you to Hugh
Sophia Jared S Justin Lowry Megan louns
and Shep Alderson I truly would not be
able to do this without your support if
you would like to join these folks in
the credit as well as get early and AD
free access to my videos then you can
join my patreon at patreon.com zoeb or
become a channel member using the link
below and finally we have our Patron
poem of the video for Eline here is
forget me
not let me be your damp Woods on some
Dawn in early July where the air is so
thick you can hear it and Len white bark
turns the oak trees
blue let me be that brief sweet moment
before the promise of afternoon sun
where the grass crunches yellow and
sweat soaked linen sticks to your
skin then let my Morning Mist burn away
in the Cradle of Maple and pine when the
day breaks like a fever and you forget
the feel of
Dew and until next time stay safe stay
warm and I will see yall again soon I
hope bye folks
do you like my mug it has eyeballs on
it this was a birthday
gift uh last year I think from my sister
so get say shout out to Zoe sister in
the comments if you get to this part in
the video cuz look at this mug look how
cool this is everybody needs an eyeball
mug that's my hot take eyeball
mug best mug this is which is the best
mug I love the mug mug is good good mug
good mug
