I'm no saint but I generally try to do
the right thing are you sincerely trying
to save the world I'm trying to do good
things good idea for an electric jet
imposs my middle name I suppose Elon
Musk has a pretty big pitch he's the
good billionaire using his wealth to
protect the future of humanity it's
gotten him something most billionaires
don't have a fan base I've never signed
a big life-sized version of me first I
want to say I love you a 2021 poll
showed musk with a 50% of approval
rating way higher than his fellow
billionaires this popularity has done
very well for him musk is now the
seventh richest man in the world musk is
now the fourth richest man in the world
Elon Musk is now the world's richest
person again according to Forbes we took
a deep look into musk's entire career
court documents SEC filings and
interviews to break down the story Elon
tells about himself and how he leveraged
it to accumulate wealth and power this
is the classroom from more perfect union
and today we're going to look at how
Elon musk got
rich Let's skip musk's South Africa
childhood critics say he inherited his
money from his father's Emerald mine and
Elon says that's not true he claims he
rejected his abusive father's ill
begotten wealth and came to North
America as a teen with $2,000 to put
himself through college he knew he
wanted to work with the internet the
only way to get involved with the
internet in '95 that I could think of
was to start a company uh cuz they want
a lot of companies to go and work for so
I thought well we got to make something
that's going to return money very very
quickly Elon joined forces and funds
with his brother Kimble they drummed up
some cash from investors including 20K
from their father and started zip 2 a
map and local listing company ZIP 2
eventually planned to merge with City
search but Elon wouldn't have been in
charge that did not sit well with him at
the time a city search executive said
City search wanted to focus on customers
and financiers while musk wanted to
focus on General visibility visibility
for him I'd like to be on the cover of
Rolling Stone that would be cool the
these disagreements led to the deal
falling apart this is a pattern for Elon
a need for soul credit and control it's
a huge part of his story zip 2 sold and
Elon made $22 million which he invested
in his next project I've sunk the great
majority of of my net worth into x.com
which is the new Banking and mutual
funds company so this is an ATM what
we're going to do is transform the
traditional banking industry that quote
defines musk's strategy promise
revolutionary technology and highlight
how he is risking his own money and he
also points out a key element of his
success wooing investors raising $50
million is a matter of making a series
of phone calls as x.com took shape
investors and the board didn't think
musk had the experience to be CEO so
they brought in Bill Harris elon's
co-founders were also unhappy one
accused him of promising the sun moon
and the stars to the media when there
was nothing there future SEC filings for
the company even mention a lack of
proprietary technology as a corporate
risk the tech they did have was
problematic for example there was a bug
allowing Bad actors to transfer funds
from any account in the nation's banking
system with just an account number a
major security flaw a co-founder was so
displeased with musk he left and took
many employees with him musk's reaction
will hire more people eventually musk
pushed out CEO Bill Harris and replaced
him with himself to centralize
Authority x.com merged with a competitor
Peter Teal's confinity confinity owned a
piece of technology called PayPal musk
and teal got glowing press coverage but
because PayPal came out of confinity a
lot of the coverage centered teal
according to Ashley Vance's 2015
biography musk kept championing the
x.com brand While most everyone else
favored PayPal eventually the company
scrapped x.com to focus on PayPal a
decision the Press gave mus credit for
but Mutiny was brewing executive rolloff
boa alleged musk was hiding serious
Financial issues from the board EMP
employees put together a coup they
petitioned the board to fire musk and it
worked musk was fired and replaced with
teal Botha said it was just in time it
would have killed the company if Elon
had stayed on as CEO for 6 more months
regardless musk hits it big when PayPal
eventually sells $180 million he had
been laying the path for his next move
since College when I was in college
there were three areas that I thought
would most affect the future of humanity
the internet uh the transition to a
sustainable energy and Transportation uh
sector
and space exploration in particular the
extension of life to multiple planets
with the the capital that I got from
sale of PayPal um I was able to go into
both those those areas enter SpaceX and
Tesla musk wasn't with Tesla at the
start he invested in a company that
already existed but most media calls him
a Founder what happened we spoke with
Edward Neer author of ludicrous an
in-depth examination of Tesla Motors
Elon Musk was not one of the original
founders of Tesla right there was these
two guys Martin neighbor part and Mark
tarpening who who actually Incorporated
the company uh musk came in because he
wanted to do the same thing but like
with his previous companies Elon was
focused on publicity specifically public
perception of himself as the Visionary
founder part and parcel of being a hot
startup right is is you have to have
that sort of charismatic Visionary
founder but it wasn't Elon Musk it was
Martin abber har Aber har even had a
Blackberry ad where he's being presented
just like Steve Jobs as this Visionary
Tech guy and I think that was exactly
the kind of that that Elon Musk really
wanted out of Tesla um as much as
anything else he sent an email saying
like this is embarrassing you know I'm
an important part of this company and I
want to make sure that I'm included in
the coverage and and in these emails
that leaked it it makes it very clear
that being that guy being the the
Visionary Figure Head of this company
was was really really important to him
so shortly after this this whole
exchange and mus getting really angry
about his lack of prominence in the in
the media coverage he went and wrote the
top secret master plan blog post and
this was really musk's coming out party
positioning himself as really the that
Visionary founder for Tesla one of the
really interesting things is that you
know there's really not a lot in the in
the top secret master plan strategically
anyway that Tesla wasn't kind of already
planning on doing it all culminated in
abrah hard's ouster and a series of
lawsuits leading to a settlement with an
important stipulation musk could legally
call himself a co-founder of the company
musk knew that to acquire more power he
needed to be called co-founder on paper
musk has long insisted he never wanted
to be CEO of Tesla but after abrah
hard's aler they brought in you know two
different new CEOs before musk himself
eventually took over musk took over at a
rough time the 2008 financial crisis
Tesla needed an influx of capital musk's
usual strategies wouldn't work the
sources of capital that would normally
provide that such as the public markets
the debt markets they're in shambles but
a year earlier Congress passed a $25
billion Loan program for the Department
of energy part of which would go to
developing low emission cars musk went
on a media blitz trying to convince the
public that Tesla deserved the loan it's
helpful to let your Congressman Senator
know that you think companies like Tesla
should get a portion of the atvm program
but public approval wouldn't be enough
at the time Tesla only had 1500 cars on
the road and hadn't truly proven that
they could produce cars on mass or
significantly reduce submissions Tesla
was stuck in a catch 22 they needed to
show they had the support of other
corporate investors specifically
traditional automakers like dimler the
makers of Mercedes and other cars but
Daimler wouldn't be interested in
investing if they didn't get the loan
he'd announced that the loan was
approved before Tesla had even submitted
um a a complete application for the loan
let alone received any kind of actual
approval for it by saying that this was
a done deal that gave dler the
confidence to to partner with them and
having that partner ship with a you know
Century old one of the biggest names in
the car business in turn gave the
government the confidence in Tesla's
viability to then ultimately give them
the loan and and so it's this it's this
you know circular trick that that Elon
plays it was more than the money it was
a boost for public and investor
relations just a few months later Tesla
registered for an IPO their SEC filing
even admits the loan was essential to
the business in 2013 Tesla paid off the
loan in full to huge Fanfare from the
media CNN literally just copied their
press release but Tesla still isn't
profitable their stated goal is to
accelerate the world's transition to
sustainable energy but Tesla's actual
strategy is exploiting well-meaning
government climate programs look at
carbon credits government permits to
emit a certain quantity of greenhouse
gases companies earn carbon credits for
reducing emissions and have to spend
them when they emit too much Tesla earns
a lot then sells them to other companies
erasing whatever progress Tesla made the
Boost from selling carbon credits led to
some of the only profitable quarters
Tesla had ever had they even used to
list regulatory credits and automobile
sales in the same line in some SEC
filings it allowed Tesla to announce
better financials and pull in more
investors retail and institutional musk
gets paid almost entirely in stock and
he's really good at manipulating the
Stock's value he uses the same strategy
he used with Daimler and the department
of energy announcing funding that might
not exist like when tweeted am
considering taking Tesla private at 420
funding secured you can't just do that a
federal judge determined elon's tweet
had falsely inflated Tesla stock and
caused billions in Damages the covid
pandemic also helped musk when the
Federal Reserve executed recession
stalling fixes on Wall Street Bankers
invested in Tesla despite musk's
derision of covid stimulus checks Tesla
received stimulus money from the
government at the beginning of the
pandemic Tesla stock hovered around $120
a share in late 2021 a year and a half
into covid it was worth 10 times that
all of which greatly increased the net
worth of the top shareholder Elon but to
maintain the world saving myth he has to
look like he doesn't make any money my
cash balances are are very very low I I
simply had loans against my my stock so
I I i' if if Tesla's phasex went
bankrupt I would go bankrupt too most us
companies don't allow their Executives
to take out loans against their stock
but Tesla does and musk has taken
advantage borrowing millions of dollars
for his personal coffers using his Tesla
stock as collateral loans don't count as
income in the eyes of the IRS or the
public but even without the loans in
2021 musk made
18,043 times the average Tesla employee
Tesla justifies that wild ratio to
investors in SEC filings by arguing
elon's worth it Elon Musk has
contributed significantly and actively
to us since our earliest days raising
Capital bring bringing investors and
raising public awareness yeah Tesla's
own SEC filings admit that the myth of
Elon is inherently tied to the value of
the company if people stop believing in
Elon Tesla loses value and Elon knows
that he even admits much of Tesla's
value is based on a promise the
overwhelming focus is is solving full
celf driving that's really the
difference between Tesla uh being worth
a lot of money and being worth basically
zero but full self-driving has yet to be
safely implemented and the latest data
suggests it's incredibly unsafe Tesla's
system is nowhere near ready regardless
musk is still wildly wealthy from the
promises he's made and that's also made
him very powerful Elon says his goal is
we want to
maximize happiness of the population and
propagate into the future as far as
possible but he's really using that
wealth and power as all billionaires do
not to save Humanity but to crush it he
squashes worker power they fire me
because I tried to improve the liveses
of my co-workers and myself that's why
they fired me cuz it wasn't a part of's
plan and now that he has both power and
a soap box his dangerous anti-government
political beliefs are even more
important previously Elon was a liberal
darling Obama's 2015 State of the Union
seemed to be written for musk solar
power Tesla re-energized Space Program
astronauts to Mars but as soon as
Democrats questioned musk he changed
lashing out and announcing support for
far-right figures and ideas he likes the
politicians willing to support his myth
and let him continue Building Wealth at
the expense of the rest of us he isn't
the only billionaire doing this but his
skill at mythb building and his massive
popularity make him the most dangerous
musk tells a story of a self-made
billionaire using his money to save the
world and enrich Humanity but he really
built his wealth on the backs of others
to enrich
himself thank you for watching and don't
forget to like And subscribe we'll be
covering the stories of other
billionaires and multi-millionaires to
examine the policy failures that made
them rich as well as the worker
empowering stories and explainers you're
used to this has been the classroom by
more perfect union
