would you know if a 15 cm nail
penetrated your
foot in
1995 a construction worker fell off some
Scaffolding in New York
City found that he' Fallen onto a 15 cm
nail which had pierced the work boot
entirely
the construction worker was in great
pain was given Fentanyl and mazalan for
the pain was taken by the paramedics to
hospital where it turned out that the
nail had passed cleanly between the
toes the boot the boot itself was
severely
injured but the toes were entirely
intact and yet the construction worker
had been in in genuine great pain needed
the fenil in order to have the nail
gently
removed what's going
on so that's a dramatic case it's a
little sort of anecdotal case in the
British medical journal
1995 but what I want to do today is just
to convince you that regardless of
dramatic cases like that all of our
experience Moment by moment is
constructed in something like that way
way it's constructed by some weird
mixture of what we expect to be
experiencing like great pain because
I've seen this great big nail go right
through my workbook and what the sensory
information the information from the NOS
receptors in this case is actually
delivering and I think everything that
we experience is built in that way and
in some of these sort of false
perspective pictures you can see
photographers playing around with your
um with your brain's predictions about
what's what
so the picture I want to put on the
table is about brains as prediction
machines I think that's a fundamental
thing that a brain is it's a prediction
machine that is busy predicting all
kinds of different stuff not just um
what you see what you hear but what's
going on in your body as well um and
also of course what you might be doing
in the near future but a lot of it about
predicting the present although that
kind of sounds and we don't real realize
the extent to which this is going on
mostly because the predictions are
normally unconscious loads you know you
make a few conscious predictions we'll
come back to those later but most of
what really matters here is going on
unconsciously and you have very little
control over that um so here's a a demo
um those of you that are sitting there
can probably see this demo okay it's a
so-called Hollow Mask illusion so this
is an ordinary kind of um sort of like a
joke shot mask I guess it's Einstein in
this case and um this is the hollow side
of the Mask now those of you sitting
back there that side's probably looking
fairly convex to you probably looking a
bit like a normal face but if I rotate
carefully here we go yeah that's the um
normal face side and then we come around
I'll try and do it for people on the
side in a
minute and then we come around and
that's the con okay so now let me I'm
just going to do this now just try to do
this since we brought all this Hightech
apparatus with um here we go for people
over there that's see um that's the
concave side there right and oh you're
going to be difficult aren't you um
how's that going to
work hold
on you getting there yeah right
cool okay excellent all that down now
that was the difficult bit gone off
without much of a hitch that's good um
so what is going on there your brain is
getting perfectly good when you're
looking at the the concave side your
brain is getting perfectly good
information saying that that is a
concave side um no lack of information
being transmitted to the brain there on
the other hand a bit of your brain is
kind of saying that faces aren't like
that I know a lot about faces faces are
convex that's just what a face is
particularly a famous face I've seen it
lots of times um and that prediction of
convexity is kind of trumping all that
real sensory information that is coming
in from Vision in this case um so in a
way this is a good thing your brain is
kind of trying to sort the signal out
from the noise using what it knows about
the world but sometimes it gets things
wrong as a result as when you're looking
at the concave side of the Mask or if
you happen to be falling onto a 15 cm
nail and there's a is that was in case
it didn't work so you know just let's go
through this bit now that was another
version right
so I think we will have all experienced
something in this ballpark if you've
ever experienced Phantom phone
vibrations you probably experienced that
feeling of the phone going off in your
pocket even when it's actually not in
your pocket or it's turned off or
nobody's calling you um there very
common um I actually get Phantom wrist
vibrations now thanks to the Apple
watch my Phantom wrist vibrations are
very clever now because if I start
walking quickly I expect the watch to
give me a double little ping saying hey
you're exercising and I feel that even
if I'm walking quickly I'm not wearing
the watch it's really weird so um I
think we do all um experience our
predictive brains in action what we
don't realize is how much of everything
that we experience is like that that's
mostly what I'm going to be talking
about there's a recipe for Phantom phone
vibrations um they're extremely common
in people that are strongly expecting a
call no big surprise there um medical
interns for example have a very high
incidence of phantom phone vibrations uh
they're exacerbated by stress and
caffeine and both of these mess around
with dopaminergic systems that were
returned to later um because dopamine is
a big player in the predictive brain and
and other neurotransmitters will come to
that but there's a little recipe for
getting Phantom phone
vibrations going do one more demo if it
works this one is um sine wave
speech so what's going on in S Wave
speech is there's an ordinary speech
recording and then it is stripped of a
lot of the usual um acoustic information
so you get a kind of skeletal version
um it sounds a little bit like the
clangers anybody that remembers the
clangers it's British thing if you're
not British you know don't worry about
this but um back in whenever it was
there were these things on the moon and
they kind of
went kind of like that and that's what s
w speeech sounds like um when you hear
it the first time what I what you'll
experience here is very rapid learning
on the part of the brain so I'll play
you the sineway sentence I'll play you
the real sentence the non-strip down one
then you'll hear the sign wave one again
and all I want you to do is just
appreciate the difference in your
experience the huge difference to your
phenomenology as we philosophers
sometimes say that um a good prediction
can make so here we
go it was a sunny day and the children
were going to the park real sentence
coming up it was a sunny day and the
children were going to the park same
sign wave again it was a funny day the
children were going to the park should
sound very very different with it one or
two more the was kept to the cage at the
zoo the camel was kept in a cage at the
zoo the camel was kept in a cage at the
zoo one he was sitting at his desk in
his
office he was sitting at his desk in his
office
so if you listen to that to those kinds
of recordings enough you become a native
speaker of sine wave speech you can um
play me a brand new recording I'll hear
it fine you know it's just oh yeah I
know what that is um so when we hear
speech sounds in our ordinary language
we're performing the same kind of trick
you hear spaces between the words well
sometimes I'm not talking this quickly
you hear spaces between the words that
I'm saying but if you look at the actual
acoustic signal it's pretty much
continuous those spaces are inserted by
by the predictive brain because it's
correctly predicting that there are word
boundaries there so everything that we
experience is built this way this was in
case that demo didn't work it's like
it's a visual version of the same thing
see the what's going on now see that one
again um so what this suggests to use a
phrase that comes up in this literature
is that perception is a kind of
controlled hallucination the brain is
continuously trying to guess what's most
likely to be coming at it from both
interception and
extration and um so it's using a model
to do that guessing and what you
experience is then a kind of mixture of
what the brain was predicting and what
the sensory evidence is telling you so I
think one one moral of this um account
is that you never experience raw sensory
information you always experience
prediction in some form or
other so imagine a world in which the
local weather forecast made a little
difference to the actual weather in that
region that's a weird kind of world and
let's not even think about what goes on
in the Border Lines between regions and
things but you know a confident forecast
of rain made rain itself just a little
bit more likely a confident forecast of
sun made Sun itself just a little bit
more likely we don't live unfortunately
in that kind of weather world but I
think that this is the experiential
world world we live in our confident
forecasts tweak our own experience in
the direction of the
forecast now you know people have said
things like this for a long time um
there's stuff like this in Emanuel K
kind of constructivist picture of
perception and experience it's really
super clear in Herman Von helmholz uh
the idea that perception is the product
of an unconscious inference and in the
20th century um Rick niser Richard
Gregor and others the analysis by
synthesis movement um had the same sort
of picture and here's Richard Gregory um
delivering the Christmas lectures I
think here in
1979 so I feel very um as if I should
have more bangs and whistles that was
all I had
yeah um so what's new now well since
about
2005 what's new I think is a
comprehensive neuroscientific theory of
all these effects
and it's actually a theory that deals
not just with perception but with action
too tonight's not long enough for me to
give you the account of action but it it
will be important in discussion I
imagine um so maybe uh you know one of
the pioneers of this is Carl friston at
UCL here in London 2005 published theory
of cortical responses which was
beginning the hard work of of turning
these sort of um intuitions into a story
that was both computationally clear and
also neurophysiologically plausible
that's sort of where we are now with it
I
think um so much so that lots of people
are writing books about it me included
I'm selling one experienc
machine um so there are lots of good
books about this out there um my
colleague annel Seth has one an early
one by yob houie the predictive mind
wonderful book Lisa Felman Barrett's
book on how emotions are made a big
stress there on inceptive prediction
predicting the states of Our Own body
and the importance of that my own
earlier book and the current sort of
Bible the active inference Bible because
predict I'll call it predictive
processing lots of other people call it
active inference which I find a bit
clumsy but it's the same
thing so what I'm going to do is
introduce as it says a sketch of a part
of the theory and then look at some
applications in computational Psychiatry
a particular interest of mine what might
these accounts say about um both
neurotypical and atypical forms of
experience and then look at some puzzles
and challenges towards the
end so oh what do I do there the more
traditional view had perception of
something that works from the outside in
you get this in dayart all those
beautiful drawings of energies hitting
the eyes impressing things like little
tubes almost like little wax Impressions
going deeper and deeper into the brain
eventually something cool happens at the
pinale gland but we won't worry about
that um but it was all outside in
perception was the world coming in from
the outside and making a richer richer
impression on the
brain and this picture came through in
20th century Neuroscience where most
textbooks leading textbook when it's
talking about Vision has all of the
arrows moving um inwards from the
sensory peripheries deeper into the
brain in artificial intelligence David
Mah had a basically feed forward
processing picture of um Vision super
influential wonderful work uh but
predictive processing turns a lot of it
upside down most of the brains work is
being done from the inside out that huge
metabolic budget that we'll come back to
soon is mostly in the business of
keeping your model alive and using that
model to make predictions just like you
know a weather forecast needs a weather
model to make predictions your brain
needs a model of the world to make
predictions
so yeah brains like that uh predict in
the present the consequence of that that
is very efficient and interesting thing
is that in order to get to grips with
the world all the brain needs to do is
deal with the errors in its own
predictions so if I'm busy predicting a
certain kind of visual scene and I'm
getting information from the world that
is consistent with my prediction I don't
need to do anything this is all as
expected but if I get prediction errors
stuff that I've been unable to predict
then something ought to happen
ideally so prediction error signals are
are a sort of anti-hero almost of these
accounts they carry the news they are
the sensory information that is
currently unexplained so they are a form
of sensory information they're just that
particular bit of it that is currently
unexplained by the brain's best ongoing
predictions um they carry the news and
what do you use them for you use them to
select better predictions so if I'm
going to see something that I didn't
expect to be there then I better get a
flurry of prediction error um use that
prediction error to recruit a better bit
of the model a bit of the model that has
a plastic yellow duck or something in it
so that I can get to grips with the
Unexplained bits of sensory
information uh oh and that's sort of how
these models actually sort of look if
you're um schematically drawing them
thing to take away from that is just
that these are multi-level models the
brain's not just kind of sitting there
making one prediction I I don't know um
uh what shall I have uh computer laptop
on the table instead high levels of
making predictions about I know
something's going on low levels are
making predictions about the precise
details of the arrangement of stuff on
the screen and each intermediate layer
is trying to predict the layer below it
so you know just like you might use
information stuff you know about
sentences to predict stuff about words
and stuff you know about words to
predict stuff about letters and stuff
you know about letters to predict the
distribution of Ink on a page so it' be
a bit like
that so it's super efficient you use the
active World model to make an educated
guess and if the guess doesn't
accommodate trusted and we'll come back
to that in a minute bits of sensory
information prediction eror is your
friend and it ought to improve your
guessing it's super efficient it's used
in commercial um motion compressed video
for example that goes back to 19 59
where people realize that you don't need
to send the information in the next
frame of a video if it's more or less
the same as a frame before it all you
need to do is send the difference so if
someone's running against a static
background just send the information
about the difference in where their legs
are going let the background stay the
same suppose you also knew their gate
just how they were running then you
don't even need to um update where their
legs are going because you predicted
that too so you can get as clever as you
want about about this the clever you are
the more efficient you
are and I think this helps us make sense
of what's a really really posing fact
about the brain the neuronal connections
in the brain that run as they sometimes
say top down from deep in the brain
towards of sensory peripheries they
greatly outnumber the ones carrying
information inwards that's a bit of a
surprise on the perception is a big
thing we're doing it all the time and
it's all from the outside in it's not
it's mostly from the inside out and
prediction errors just kind of tidy up
around the edges the picture here so for
example at least 90% of the input to
lateral genicular nucleus which is just
after the retina comes from deeper in
the
brain um on average throughout
cortex the these outflowing Pathways
outnumber the inflowing pathways by at
least two to one and in some areas by 4
to one so it's a the brain is Wired from
the inside out and these kinds of
accounts uh make a lot of sense of that
wiring so the anomal is resolved the
hard work's being done from the inside
out and hey no wonder the brain is
spending an awful lot of energy all the
time even when it's at rest because it's
maintaining the world model it's
maintaining a model that can be used to
make these very detailed predictions
it's as if you're constantly running a
simulation of reality in your brain well
you are running a simulation of reality
in fact you're experiencing one right
now and if I do something unexpected
I'll just give it a few prediction
errors I know we go we
go so prediction error anchors the
brain's imagining if you like the
brain's constructions to the world but
this raises a
puzzle question if the brain can do this
if it really can use Flur as a
prediction error to rapidly correct its
own guessing why do we sometimes get
things wrong you know what happened with
the worker that fell on the 15 cm
nail you know there was no notive pain
information coming from the toe where
they were feeling the pain um to the
brain why didn't the brain then
immediately get prediction errors and
correct its
guessing indeed so this brings us to
what I think is arguably the most
important bit of the Contemporary
picture it's something that wasn't there
in the earlier versions of this story um
what it is is the idea that the the
balance between prediction and sensory
information is never fixed it's
something that the brain itself has to
estimate Moment by moment so your brain
is estimating how much to um take
account of certain predictions how much
to take account of certain bits of
apparently sensory counter evidence you
know in the case of The Hollow Mask your
brain's ignoring a lot of sensory
counter evidence because it's really
confident in its
predictions which of course again um is
interesting from the perspective of you
because you know it's a hollow M but
you're still seeing it the other way
around because those intermediate levels
of processing are just absolutely
convinced of the
convexity that so it's a kind of a kind
of weight in game the brain is
estimating how much confidence it has in
certain predictions or certain bits of
sensory information this is known as
Precision weighting um and the Precision
waiting game is kind of a zero sum game
so if I up the Precision on uh my
predictions I am lowering the Precision
on the bits of sensory evidence that are
meeting those predictions and vice versa
and this is happening at every level of
processing and if these accounts are
right in every area of the brain they're
probably not all processing predictions
and prediction eras in quite the same
way the amigdala has got its own special
thing to do um but that's kind of what
they're all doing if these accounts are
on track we'll come back to that
question um yeah so on a foggy day for
example you might not want to rely too
much on what your eyes are telling you
particularly if you know the area you've
got a great model of the world it's like
I'm going to rely on my model and just
um you know I'll take some account of
the visual information but not too
much so in the brain the idea is that
this Precision weight in economy centers
on the complex neurotransmitter system
so uh all of the things there dopamine
nor adrenaline atic acetal Coline um
Garba glutamate they're all there
somewhere
catonian um so that's a big bit of the
Precision weight in economy is being
done by complex neurotransmitter systems
it's also being done probably on faster
definitely on faster time scales by the
neuronal phase by the temporal phase of
neuronal oscillations low versus Fast
frequencies of neuronal oscillation will
come back to those towards the end if
there's
time so Precision increases the
influence of particular predictions or
particular bits of sensory information
it's kind of what attention is if these
accounts are right then what attenion
really is is uh variable Precision
weightings going in the brain which I
think is kind of useful we all use this
word attention no one really knows
exactly what it is there a proposal here
that's what attention is it's exactly
that um this is a Mooney image it's bit
like the uh woman with the horse earlier
I don't if you can see this one but
here's the actual
image and here's the Mooney again right
now I think that what we can take away
from these things is that predictive
brains have a very very delicate job to
do they have to create a very fine line
if you're going to spot the hidden frog
you've got to up the Precision on an
awful lot of bits of information about
froggy Contours in particular and you
downgrade other bits of information
that's kind of what's going on when you
allow the when you the Frog can I was
going to say jump out at you yeah
exactly
um and I think it's because we can do
this delicate Precision waiting that
predictive brains are good Detectors of
faint patterns in world's full have
noise
so it's important to get these
weightings right and if they go wrong
very bad things will happen it's what
that's trying to say you know if your
brain starts to misestimate the value of
certain predictions or to overestimate
the value of certain bits of sensory
information then bad things will happen
and we'll look at a few of those bad
things in the next um half hour um
at this point though you might also be
asking well can't it just get the
balance right you know um that's
actually a very tough question we may
come back to it in discussion because I
would say there's no right balance there
is no balance such that that balance
will always reveal how things are
because it all depends on the kind of
world you happen to be living in at that
time how volatile it is what's going on
there so I don't think there's any right
answer to how this Balancing Act can be
done there are some ways it can um
change so computational Psychiatry as it
appears through the lens of this
account is mostly a matter of trying to
see how differences in that Precision
weighted Balancing Act might generate
different profiles of experience that's
that's that's pretty well what's going
on in an awful lot of work
um I think it's a good way of bringing
together a systematic understanding of
of a lot of um atypical experiences the
wide range of typical experience and
also what happens under the effects of
psychedelic drugs for example um which
we won't get
to so for example suppose you assign a
very high weight into the sensory
evidence very very high weight into
sensory evidence what's that going to do
to you as a prediction machine one thing
it's going to do is it's going to make
it harder for you to detect faint
patterns in a noisy environment to
detect faint patterns in a noisy world
you want your model of how things are to
to be sort of I don't know taking a firm
hand over the sensory evidence your
model is what's going to give you the
best grip on things probably so there's
a lot of interes in work now suggesting
that autism spectrum condition involves
just this kind of overweighting of the
sensory evidence that um in fact it's
sort of it's very much in enhanced
sensory evidence is the kind of profile
is emerging from quite a lot of detailed
studies here and there's a very
interesting side debate that I won't go
into but it's a side debate about
whether what's going on is weakened
influence of the models or heightened
influence of the sensory information
from a basian perspective um these are
going to look very very similar but they
won't look quite the same and the
evidence is now strongly suggesting
that autism spectrum condition is not
about weakened model use it's actually
about enhanced sensory
information um so what would happen if
you're enhancing sensory information
like that well a lot of environments
will seem difficult to negotiate you may
become wary of noisier hardto predict
environments social worlds where lots of
very small cues really matter might be
especially challenging um so again I
don't one thing that comes out of these
accounts is it's if there is a sort of
social understanding um difficulty in
autism spectrum Condition it's a side
effect of the real thing which is
enhanced sensory information it's not a
fundamental thing I think that's quite
interesting um it also makes sense of
the uh cases where people with Autism
Spectrum condition just do better so
stuff like uh the embedded figures task
where you're showing something and ask
to find the geometric figure in the
thing there the rocking horsey thing
whatever it is um people with Autism
Spectrum condition do better at that
than
neurotypicals probably because they're
better at allowing the sensory
information to speak for itself know
they're not getting um wayed too much by
that sort of um strong top down that's a
whatever it is I don't know what that is
actually rocking horse
thing right
so now imagine something different
imagine that instead of assigning extra
weight to the sensory information you
assign extra weight to some of your own
predictions what's going to happen then
it's pretty obvious what's going to
happen then at that point you really do
start to hallucinate things you know
you've taken some of the control out of
controlled hallucination and you just
got
hallucination um and you know I think we
all do a bit of this this is why we see
faces in the cloud and things like that
um because uh we can have strong
predictions about faces and if we just
allow a certain sort of relaxation to
happen you can do this spot
in so there are accounts of um delusions
and hallucinations in schizophrenia and
psychosis that are emerging at about
this point where the idea is that
there's a kind of
overweighting of unconscious
predictions and that that in turn might
arise if you're having false prediction
errors if for some reason the brain is
generating false prediction errors then
you're going to have to come up with
some sort of model to try to deal with
this stuff that is kind of saying to you
this is important you're not getting
this this is important stuff revise your
model so the model gets revised it
becomes very firm and then it can alter
experience pulling it in its own
Direction just like with the Hollow Mask
illusion yeah so they become highly
weighted uh these can be pred itive
models of complex conspiracies
impersonations nowadays it's the
Internet it's the internet is a source
of a lot of these models
um at that point a a strong prediction
is altering your experience in a way
that then seems to confirm the model
that is making the predictions and
that's something that I think is really
important to get to grips with the the
the tendency of predictive brains to get
locked into spurious Cycles of
self-confirmation where your own
predictions are changing the way you
sense the world and then you think oh
I'm getting evidence for the model that
I'm using to make these predictions but
that evidence is
furious I think we have effects like
that in in daily life actually our own
unconscious expectations alter the way
that we see things and experience things
and we think we're getting evidence for
our own
models so that's a kind of ailles here I
think of the predictive brain spuriously
self-confirming predictions but it will
also turn out to be something that we
might be able to turn to our advantage
I'll come back to that later check in
the time yeah
so as just one experimental demo of
these sorts of self spuriously
self-confirming Cycles little bit of
work where um subjects were they had
expectations created in them by teaching
them to associate a particular geometric
Q with higher or lower levels of heat as
indicated by the little thermometer
thing
so in the induction phase as they called
it expectations were put in place so
that if you saw this geometric Q you're
associating it with low heat if you see
the other one you're associating it with
high
heat in phase two of the experiment real
heat stimuli are applied to people's
bodies in the geometric cues so now
they're actually getting some heat but
unbeknown to them the applied heat
levels were all exactly the same so they
get the geometric Q they already
associate it with more or less heat um
but they're actually getting exactly the
same amount of
heat now as you might expect subjects
reported the expectation induced effects
more or less pain in line with the
induced expectations geometric cues and
they supported this they didn't just ask
them this question it was supported by
something called the neurologic pain
signature a slightly contentious um fmri
profile for um something like real pain
is going on rather than I'm just
reporting what I think you want to hear
me report so they they did that as well
as a
report so that explains I think why they
didn't update this is what I think is
interesting here you you you should be
asking yourself but why don't you update
you're given the same
heat can't you just feel it and update
your model but you can't because your
model is making you feel more or less
heat and so you think you're getting
more evidence for your model you
certainly don't think you're getting
counter evidence for your model um so I
think it's a nice example just a simple
sort of controlled example of the
way experience when it's shaped by
prediction can get locked into to these
sorts of spirly self firming
Cycles as they say expectations modify
pain perception and this modified
perception drives subsequent
expectations so you maintain the
misguided ones even when you've got good
sensory evidence to the
contrary so what I want to do now is to
see how Cycles like this could be at
work in stuff that's maybe a little bit
closer to home chronic pain uh is the
example that I'll start with here so um
somewhere between a third and half of
the population of the UK at least
experien chronic pain so it's a huge um
it's a huge Health
burden so there's a puzzle in chronic
pain I mean chronic pain as you all know
is kind of long defined as a sort of
longer term version of pain it's not the
acute pain that you get when you um
fracture an ankle or something this is
something that's been going on for a
while so the match between the
experience of chronic pain and
identified standard causes is only high
for acute and localized things like you
know the the fractured ankle and so on
if you move to longer term conditions
the match is very
bad and there's a lot of examples of
this reported breathlessness in
pulmonary disease discomfort with atrial
fibrillation asthma cancer related
fatigue lower back pain a very very
striking example
and these are all cases where the amount
of pain
experienced just doesn't sit very well
with the peripheral etiology if you like
what seems to be um going on
structurally in the relevant bits of the
body and this isn't just across
different patients this is across the
same patient at different times as
well so it's a a huge amount of
variation for what's apparently pretty
much the same level of sort of basic
structural um bodily
damage and it affects the same person at
different times too I think this is that
me no ah you got the same ringtone as me
you're just panicking me here that's it
that's
right
so yes wide variation in experienced
pain I think this falls into place
really really well from a predictive
processing perspective I mean what goes
on over those longer time spans one
thing that goes on is you've got an
awful lot of time to form expectations
about how your experiences of pain are
going to vary across different contexts
um different life histories will also um
do this differently so I think that we
can expect different life histories to
differently balance that sort of
precision weighted balance in act and
sort of random things that happen
contextually like I don't know you
experience an asthma attack in a
particular kind of context that could
make it more likely to experience it in
another context given the role of
prediction in those events
um so they can become highly sensitive
to context and I think that can happen
even when the context turns out not to
actually be clinically relevant um the
longer you live with a condition the
longer you've got for things like that
to start to happen it's not surprising
um so this is just kind of like this
it's kind of the same thing again about
predictions changing experience and then
you think that you're getting evidence
for the model that you're using to make
the predictions even when you're not um
I do think this is part of the puzzle of
chronic pain and it's something that we
can begin to address um let's get to
that so no one there is saying that the
chronic pain isn't as it were really
experienced as pain of of course it is
you know just like the um just like the
person that fell on the nail was
experiencing excruciating pain so so far
it it will seem like bad news it just
seems like you know predictive brains
are good they're rather efficient but
they're getting us into all sorts of
nasty little Corners um what can we do
about that so there's some good news
with apologies to John
cinski um I think there's a kind of
opportunity here to push back against
Bad predictions and install different
predictions that might be helpful they
might even be spuriously helpful in a
certain sort of way you know maybe it's
a a trick in just the same sort of way
so I'm going to end by looking at some
of those interventions emerging chances
to sort of hack the predictive brain in
a good
direction so there's an obvious example
the careful use of placebos a very
interesting area I think um it's known
that the efficacy of placebos varies a
lot it varies basically according to how
confident the patient can become a
relief from the placebo um you can get
this by differently describing the
potency of the thing that you're being
given um you can also get it by doing
Placebo surgery for example instead of
just a placebo pill Placebo surgery is
very effective um for certain things
um mostly I think because we think
surgery is pretty serious you know I
think that's a pretty serious
intervention I'm expecting I'm expecting
something from this um at least that's I
think what the brain's thinking um so
patients receiving Placebo surgery for
osteoarthritis of the knee report
similar relief to those undergoing
normal surgery and they get more relief
Than People given placebos um pills or
coachin so you know pretty good studies
here athletes show improved performance
when hooked up to what they think are
pure oxygen Delivery Systems when in
fact they're just air um they also show
improved performance if they're given a
drug that they're told will increase red
red blood cell um amounts even though it
doesn't yes a 1.5% increase which is big
if you're a elite athlete um so there's
obviously tempting ways to get around
the doping laws
here interesting to me that honest
placebos work too um an honest Placebo
is one where you're told this is a
placebo you know there's no Clinic
active standard clinically active
ingredient here um but nonetheless a lot
of people report significant amounts of
relief I think that's just another um
excuse me gone too far I think that's
just another manifestation of the fact
that most of the predictions are
unconscious that you know if you're
given something that comes out of a nice
little sort of um Bubble wrapped Thing
by someone authoritative in a white coat
then even if you know it's a placebo mid
levels of your neural processing don't
it's like oh yeah this is this is going
on um so another sort of systematic kind
of pushback here is something called
pain reprocessing Theory it's very
interesting and promising I think so
this to get into this sort of bit of the
the the account we need to think that
the basic experience of pain is kind of
it has a sort of role to play and that
role is telling us that our bodies are
in imminent danger that if we basically
if we keep keep on doing what we're
doing this is not going to be
good
um and that's true if youve just
fractured your ankle you don't want to
you know keep walking on that right
now very Cy borgy ankle there what's
going on there um but in a lot of these
cases of chronic long-term Pain and
Disability it seems like the prediction
of imminent bodily damage has become the
problem if you like what's got locked in
is an expectation that if you continue
doing stuff it's really going to be bad
for you that's a big component of what
pain is on these Accounts at least is
that very
expectation so as people do say in this
literature your experience of pain
there's a little bit like a malfunction
in morning light in a car it's a bit
like you know that light's going on it's
saying you better pull into the side of
the road right now don't keep doing this
um looks like you've got to stop what's
going on but suppose it's a warning
light that's malfunctioning
um and of course what's interesting here
is what if you think of a warning like
malfunction you probably think oh
there's a bit of wiring that's gone
wrong but in the predictive processing
accounts of warning light malfunctions
there's not even a wiring problem it's
just a kind of it's just a sort of
balance inact problem there's nothing
structurally wrong with the the wiring
of the brain um so I think it's quite
it's an interesting sort of software
problem if you
like so chronic back pain case I
mentioned earlier in 85% of cases
there's no standard peripheral cause um
let's not say that there's no cause it's
just not a cause that matches up to the
to the
pain um what pain reprocessing theory is
trying to do is to reframe the pain in a
way that pushes back against those
predictions basically involves
um doing a talk a bit like this I
suppose um so saying that chronic pain
you know might be that kind of falce
alarm um involving locked in predictions
but then trying to install different
predictions mostly by getting people to
do a little bit more despite the pain
and oddly enough doing more makes
experiential pain become less so it's a
little bit as if just by driving the car
a bit more you could make the warning
light get a little bit dimmer which is I
think that's the trick that we want
there's a a very nice um documentary
called this might hurt on that that I
think you can probably still get on on
Netflix or
prime so this will be a helpful cycle
this I think is the flip side of all
those unhelpful Cycles where
expectations tweak experience in in kind
of bad and self- entrenching ways this
is a way of tweak an experience that
might be helpful and become entrenched
in a a good way so the best systematic
study here is Asher 2022 and 2023 stud
of chronic back pain report and
neuroimag as mentioned earlier and
basically they just found that it works
um large and sustained reductions in
Pain and Disability following PRT as
compared with both Placebo and usual
care in about 73% of cases so it's
promising for you know for chronic back
pain a particular kind of
pain okay how am I doing for time oh
this is interesting I may just have time
to do what I wanted to do
imagine let's see um so another example
is functional neurological disorders
sometimes called psychosomatic or
psychogenic those terms not so much in
use now um functional neurological
disorders neurological symptoms without
standard structural causes so you know
chronic pain actually is a is an fnd by
uh by this definition at least 16% of
new referrals to neurology clinics are
diagnosed in the end with some form of
functional neurological disorder meaning
basically um that you can't find
anything
um so examples included unexplained
cases of blindness deafness pain fatigue
weakness abnormal gate trema seizure um
functional problems are normally
diagnosed by variabilities of impairment
so typically typically stuff like
um um distracting attention from a
particular bodily part can reveal intact
abilities in that in that part there
something think Hoover sign works that
way I I won't have time to go into the
these examples but one example we can do
this is an example shared with me to
With Me by John Stone ex- colleague up
in Edinburgh this is Miss A who had a
slow but eventually total loss of vision
she'd had severe migraines before but
she's had no other history of stress
trauma abuse head injury anxiety none of
you know none of nothing really just
severe migraines fmri was normal um what
stone noticed though was that when she
was talking to him about her total
blindness she was copying his bodily
movements and would sometimes follow his
gaze all the while absolutely not
experiencing anything visually not
consciously um but she could do Gaye
following a movement copy and that's a
rather strong cue uh clue but some
there's something more intact there than
you might imagine her eyes responded
normally to an optokinetic drum so
that's just a thing that um it kind of
extracts an a stigmus response from the
eyes and so you they kind of twitch a
bit in um in response to the change in
pattern so she exhibited the normal
pattern of response with the optokinetic
drum ston and colleagues conjectured
that the severe migraines had basically
made her brain start to constantly
predict Darkness you know she spent a
lot of time retreating from the
migraines into darken places she began
to they thought um just expect Darkness
her experience then had to fit in with
that expectation be a little bit like
your experience of the Hollow Mask or
Phantom phone vibrations you know all of
these things that we all experience just
a rather dramatic
version so the treatment there was to
try and push back a bit just like pain
reprocessing Theory really again against
those hidden predictions um one thing
that stone and colleagues did was just
shared the science of predictive brains
and how predictions locked in
predictions can affect experience um
also um when I say shared videos shared
videos with people she trusted because
she couldn't see the videos you know
she's still still um functionally blind
um also induced experiences of flashes
of light using trans magnetic cranial
stimulation so you know the big the big
thing that looks like a a windup
mechanical toy thing that applies a big
uh a big pulse of um of magnetism to the
to the brain that can induce phosphines
and so that's kind of proven to her
brain that's the idea it's proven to the
brain that seeing is possible so she
made a full recovery of course you don't
know whether those things were
responsible for the recovery you never
know might have just recovered anyway
but she did recover um and the main
message today is that these are just
extreme examples of the way that we're
all constructing our sensory experience
all the time functional neurological
disorders are just uh just a dramatic
kind of um manifestation of that thing
that we're all doing all the time and
that's true even when there's a standard
cause when you know you've got illness
Burns other kinds of um
injury so I think the more we appreciate
this the less resistance there ought to
be to the diagnosis of functional
neurolog iCal Disorder so one thing that
happens right now is patients don't want
to hear that they they really do not
want to be told that they've got a
functional neurological disorder and I
think that's because we've got the wrong
metaphysical model of um what it's like
to be a normal human being to be a
normal human being is to build
experience in just this way so um
functional neurological disorder suggest
a an extreme
Exemplar hopefully getting these sorts
of accounts on the table might help us
see past old dualisms of Mind and Body
might even erode the distinction between
psychiatric and neurological disorders
Al together you know personally I don't
think it's a very helpful
distinction so more generally lots of
other promising ways to hack and nudge
our predictive brains um immersive
virtual reality therapy for pain this is
very effective it's used sometimes as an
anesthetic during Dentistry there are
good results when um changing the
dressings of burns patients so this will
be roughly your in a sort of immersive
VR see in an undulating jellyfish or
something kind of nice and soothing like
that um
and I think what these accounts give you
is it's not just distraction you might
think oh it's just distraction and it is
in a way but now we understand what
distraction is doing just like verbal
reframing another example it's a way of
altering those precision weightings and
seeding different predictions and all of
this is going to change your experience
verbal reframing also very powerful so
you know I get little tingles in my
hands before I having plenty of them
behind that door um and you know I've
tried to reframe that as chemical
Readiness to deliver a good performance
rather than hey it's all going to crash
and burn it does seem does seem to help
um so all of this stuff I think falls
into place self-affirmation verbal
reframing the therapeutic use of music
touch and ritual um I think that we've
got a systematic way of understanding
that these are genuine and potent
interventions um they're all nudging
predictive
brains meditation is another one I'm
very interested in um my ex postdoc Mark
Miller has done a lot of work on
this what he thinks meditation is doing
is giving you greater control over the
Precision weighting mechanism um and you
can kind of see how that might work you
know I can kind of enhance the sensory
experience so that I sort of um reduce
the grip of models I can uh I can allow
things to to drift or to become very
precisely fixed if we could con get
control over our in Precision weighting
mechanisms we would have what my
colleague Al and Deans calls
phenomenological control which would be
an amazing thing to have you would you
know you would be able to tweak your own
experience in the ways that
are best for you and your
life right eight minutes to say what's
missing that should that should be
enough shouldn't it um so it's a very
incomplete picture altering the brain's
best predictions isn't going to heal a
fracture it's not going to cure a cancer
it's not going to kill a virus so um I
don't think we know what the scope and
limits of these effects are yet still to
be determined clearly good for stuff
like pain anxiety breathlessness fatigue
sports performance
cancer related fatigue so you know lots
of clear applications and unknown
boundaries there are big individual
differences in how effective some of
these therapies are um therapies like
Placebo hypnotism um uh pain
reprocessing Theory and there's some
very very interesting uh clues that
there might be a genetic difference
underlying that so there's an enzyme
called
CT and CT controls the metabolism of
dopamine in the brain so the more CO2
you've got the more um you're kind of
eating up dopamine uh you can kind of
see what might go on here if you don't
eat up so much dopamine then if dopamin
is a big player in the Precision waiting
game you may have more phenomenological
control and that is in line with the
results here which is that um which is
that people with high levels of
genetically determined see omt are less
susceptible to um these things like
placebos hypnotism
PRT so I think that's very interesting
sort of bringing this stuff right down
to the molecular level and then all the
way back up again to the experiential
level um a big challenge is working out
what the contents of the neuronal
predictions are in different brain areas
you know that's really not that well
known um there's nice work by the L mle
lab up in Glasgow and the title of his
paper there says what it found
scene representations conveyed by
cortical feedback to early Vision can be
described by line drawings so the idea
there is that it's kind of line drawing
level information being fed right back
down but he's got beautiful experiments
um uh suggesting that nice work on the
amydala
recently we need to uncover the detailed
neuronal circuitry of prediction and
error exchange there's a lot of very
cool somewhat Neuroscience work finding
explicit prediction error responses is
in layers two and three of mouse
cortex and that's got a nice sort of
recent twist that I'm not going to
mention for
time um there's nice work on the role of
Alpha Beta versus gamma frequencies in
communicating predictions and errors
with the idea that the fast gamma
frequencies are carrying error through
the system and the slower Alpha Beta
frequencies are carrying predictions
down the system this has even led to a
suggestion for a particular
implementation of these accounts which
is different to the standard one and I
won't go through that difference because
time will trip me up and I won't get to
the last bit of metaphysics if I do um
but the idea there is just that um is
just
that you have the same neuronal circuits
doing prediction error but differently
prepared by Alpha Beta rhythms which
allow gamma through when they're not
prepared that didn't make sense to come
back to that in discussion okay um I
think at any rate this is a good moment
in the history of this account because
we've got some
competing stories about what the
implementation is in the brain and it's
only when you settle on an
implementation that you can really begin
to test these stories properly so you
can play pin the um pin the tail on the
coonan cycle here where are these
accounts in the cycle of pre- science
normal science model drift model crisis
um I'm not going to give away where I
think we are in that cycle but certainly
uh having competing implementation level
proposals is a really important moment
um assessment of the evidencebased don't
worry about that um conceptual
challenges is prediction really the most
fundamental thing that brains are doing
um some people think that if it was we'd
all just crawl into a dark corner and
stay there making very um successful
predictions there's a good way out of
that dark core cor but I'd have to give
you the account of action but there'll
be time in discussion maybe that's
sometimes called the dark and room
puzzle what is the relationship between
all those mid-level unconscious
predictions and the top level conscious
predictions no nobody knows um how does
language fit into the predictive process
in picture nobody knows um what about
culture and the human built environment
we we build great worlds to think in we
build worlds that allow us to minimize
different different kinds of era to get
our jobs done like painting lines on
roads or building Large Hadron
colliders um and we have a nice big
project on this at the moment uh that
takes me out to Spain sometimes to look
at dolmans in galsia so why not
archaeologists Vision scientists
computational modelers and cognitive
philosophers like me working together to
explore material culture and how the
worlds we build change the jobs that
predictive brains need to do and how do
these things really work together we're
going to have to worry a lot about this
in the near future because predictive
brains are now sharing their worlds with
AI based forms of predictive
intelligence we need to understand these
new um ecosystems communities of
mutually predicting agents um for some
speculations on thaty work by the versus
AI
group Carl friston the person that did a
lot of the work on active inference is
the chief scientific officer of that
group so keep an eye on them um oh yeah
the hard problem why and how is
conscious experience possible at all you
might have noticed the books called The
Experience machine but I didn't mention
the hard problem um I think there are
big Clues I go through them in the book
big Clues on that involve the account of
interception the body predicting its own
bodily States and the account of
action action is a way of resolving
prediction errors by changing the world
in order to make some predictions come
true so once you get all those bits
together I think we nibble at the edges
of the hard
problem so I think there's real progress
I tried to tell the sort of upbeat story
in the experience machine I think we're
closing in on a principled multi-level
science of at the very least the
structure and variety of human
experience we got a small set of
factors predictions precisions
prediction errors and they combine to
yield these striking differences in
experience so I think that we're heading
for a periodic table of experiential
variation one that captures neurotypical
atypical and Altered States but at the
very
least I think that this brings us a few
steps closer to appreciating both the
diversity
and the
um
continuity of
Human Experience thank you
