an AI company stole my work and I'm far
from the only one over recent months
there's been a veritable Avalanche of
Revelations about the unauthorized use
of artistic journalistic and video works
to train generative AI tools such as
open AI chat GPT Google's Gemini and
anthropics Claude where once there was
merely a mountain of suspicion that such
theft was taking place now sits a stack
of cold hard evidence that some of the
most valuable comp companies in the
world right now have been developing
their tools on the backs of the stolen
labor of video creators journalists
artists and authors A lot's been said
about the legalities and morality of all
of this but I want to talk about its
broad a potential impact on the online
media and Creator economy because even
at a point where the AI stock bubble
looks set to burst the rise of
generative AI looks set to significantly
alter who gets to PR profit from The
Works of writers journalists artists and
others and this has the potential to not
only short change individual Publishers
and creators but have a desperately
damaging impact on who's able to
contribute to our popular discourse and
debate the future is AI to understand
and create language it understands
prompts written the way people write
copyright Shield means that we will step
in and defend our customers and pay the
cost incurred is there I boom actually a
bubble two major copyright lawsuits
against AI art generators a couple of
months ago my agent got in touch they
were giving me advanced notice of an
article which was about to be published
by a recently launched news startup
called proof news the piece in question
was the result of an investigation
carried out by journalists Annie
Gilbertson and Alex Ryner into the use
of YouTube videos to train the AI models
which power generative AI tools
including anthropics AI Chann bot Claude
and Apple's new Apple intelligence
system see as you probably know by now
generative AI that is AI tools which
responds to user inputed prompts by
producing text images or video require
huge SES of data to train generally
speaking the more data or a tool can be
trained on the better results it will
produce and there's been a widely held
assumption that the companies developing
these tools have been freely helping
themselves to the work of creators
journalists artists and others in order
to improve their products these AI
companies have been pretty cryptic about
what bodies of work they've been using
for this purpose and the suspicion upon
many has been that this is because
they've been helping themselves to huge
quantities of copyrighted material
without asking for permission or giving
any kind of payment to the creators of
that work but Gilbertson and Ryner the
writers of that article wanted proof
which you know is kind of fitting given
the name of the outlet they work for
they thus began to dig through the
research papers which developers often
publish following new breakthroughs and
when they did they found repeated
references in Publications from
anthropic apple and Nvidia to something
called the pile the pile is a data set
developed by a nonprofit organization
called alther AI it weighs in at a
whopping
825 gab of data which given it's
comprised solely of text is absolutely
wild comprising books Wikipedia articles
Forum posts email chains and much much
more the pile is an absolute Treasure
Trove of written English it's perhaps no
surprise then that anthropic apple and
Nvidia have all made use of it in
training their respective AI models as
they trolled through the pile however
Gilbertson and Ryner found something
else they discovered that around 6 GB
and 500 million words of this massive
text vile was made up of subtitles
scraped from YouTube videos the exact
videos which had been stolen for the
data set had been obscured but when they
spotted that the data set included
references to the video ID codes which
are contained within YouTube links ryer
was able to reverse engineer the data
set to create a tool through which
creators and their fans can find out
whether their work had been used and
when I searched my name I indeed found
that that 18 of my own videos were among
them now I was far from the worst
affected Creator here some channels such
as Ted's Ted Ed Channel had hundreds of
videos stolen and the response to the
proof news article from creators was
unsurprisingly one of Despair Scott over
at nerdsync made a quick response video
which brimmed with Unapologetic rage
Jacob Geller described the Revelation as
nauseating and Abby from philosophy
described a similar sense of violation I
felt a little less personally wounded by
all of this perhaps it was because the
videos were old and thus the memory of
the work that I put into them has mostly
faded maybe it's because my videos tend
to be less personal and vulnerable than
those of other creators more than
anything though I think I'm just used to
this kind of stuff already I've been
working in Creative Fields most of my
life and particularly when it comes to
making and distributing work over the
internet I think I've just come to
accept that someone somewhere is usually
ripping me off in one way or another I
didn't like it but I have come to accept
that this kind of thing will happen even
so this Revelation did set alarm bells
ringing in the back of my head about the
ways in which the Embrace of AI tools
such as Claude or chat GPT looks at to
reshape the economics of the creative
portions of the web particularly when it
comes to journalism commentary and other
forms of social and political discussion
one of the promises of the early
internet was that it would give us a
space in which we could more freely
discuss the world around us many of us
hoped it would allow us to come into
contact with New Perspectives and voices
and to some extent this has been the
case even just on YouTube I'm constantly
confronted with new outlooks and
viewpoints which would never have been
given airtime or page space in
traditional media but what if this shift
to an AI centered media economy is about
to place that at risk what if the
widespread theft of the work of
journalists commentators and creators
and its subsequent remixing and
regurgitation by AI tools has the
potential to place new limits on the
kinds of perspectives we're able to come
into contact with because there's a real
danger that this could happen and not
for the reasons that you might initially
think woke AI machine super woke woke in
the negative connotation of that word
combat woke AI see there's been plenty
of concern from right-wingers that AI
models like chat GPT or mid Journey
might impede political debate by being
too woke the accusation is that
developers might be so Keen to avoid any
controversy or offense that they'll set
these systems up to only give right on
happy clappy liberal answers to users
prompts which isn't an entirely
unfounded concern Google recently had to
pause the roll out of image generation
on its Gemini chatbot after requests for
it to produce pictures of German
soldiers from World War II returned a
plethora of racially diverse Nazis which
is pretty historically inaccurate in a
predictably ludicrous response Elon Musk
decided to fix this dilemma by
instructing developers of x's grock
chatbot to program it to avoid answers
that are woke this kind of institutional
bias whether woke or in musk's case
anti-woke is certainly a real challenge
but there's a slightly more complex
threat which emanates from how AI risks
reshaping the economic model which
currently funds the production of news
related media because the Embrace of
tools which have been set up to
instantly scoop up any form of
journalistic political or critical
expression in order that they can be
repurposed to generate profit for AI
companies and their customers places the
entire economic model on which such work
relies at risk and where the internet
has previously had at least something of
a democratizing effect on the media
landscape such a shift has the potential
to return considerable power into the
hands of corporate media magnetes now
the internet has never been particularly
kind to
journalism the site now reports having
100 million videoos videos and claims
60,000 new videos are posted every
single day one journalist typed relevant
words into the internet one website
alone the consumer Action Group has
113,000 members I mean I was actually
amazed to learn 7 million people use the
internet as the worldwide web started
gaining widespread adoption during the
1990s more and more newspaper Publishers
began launching websites for their
titles the New York Times The Wall
Street Journal and the Washington Post
all began publishing daily articles on
newly minted websites in
1996 while the guardian followed suit 3
years later doing so had immediate
tradeoffs making their reporting freely
accessible online surely meant that some
people who otherwise would have paid to
purchase a physical newspaper no longer
would nevertheless the Hope among Media
Company owners was that publishing
online would massively increase their
newspapers reach not only might some
readers who previously would have been
fiercely loyal to a rival publication
give them a chance but they could reach
international Readers and others for
whom buying a physical copy of their
paper might not even have been an option
where going online meant for going
upfront sales revenue then the general
Hope was that additional advertising
might make up the deficit a slide deck
produced for starford the guardian at
the time revealed their hope to become
the intelligent person's home on the net
the Assumption was that internet users
who wanted to find out what was going on
in the world on a given day would log
onto the internet head to the homepage
of of their paper of choice and browse
around a bit reading a whole bunch of
Articles and think pieces as they did
they would be served with a veritable
Feast of ads which would fund that
journalism and line the pockets of each
publication's owners that however is not
the direction that things went in
instead two new phenomena emerged which
would fundamentally alter how people
engage with the news on the one hand
search engines and on the other social
media from the very beginning Google
stated that its goal was to organize the
world's information and make it
universally accessible and both Google
and social media have played a key role
in making the internet less for booding
long gone of the days where one had to
remember the URLs of the various
websites you wanted to catch up on in
fact to many people even typing in the
URL of a website other than Google
Facebook or Twitter now seems kind of
archaic it's these services not the
likes of the guardian or the Washington
Post which would become our metaphorical
homes on the net even for folks like me
who boot up our phones or computers with
the explicit intention of catching up on
the news few navigate directly to
newspaper websites most will instead
load up social media to see what stories
people are sharing And discussing there
which as I mentioned before has had huge
benefits for media plurality it makes it
much easier and more natural to engage
with mult multiple perspectives on a
single news story in a way which would
have been much less likely or at the
very least much more expensive in the
print era the challenge is that this has
also made news publishing a much more
precarious game a world in which readers
simply dip into a news site to read a
single article and then instantly return
to social media is one in which
Publications aren't able to show as many
ads to each reader the associated
reduction in reader loyalty also means
there's less certainty in terms of how
many people are going to visit each day
and in the associated Revenue which
comes from that what's really crucial to
understand however is that this doesn't
mean that news reporting journalism and
other forms of current affairs
commentary generate less economic value
than it once did journalism continues to
be incredibly lucrative the real shift
is that a significant chunk of the value
it creates now get sucked up by Google
Facebook and other social media
companies in pre- interet times
newspapers could charge Hefty sums to
companies wishing to advertise on their
front pages but the role of the
newspaper front page has effectively
been replaced by the news feeds and
results pages of thirdparty companies
who now get to pocket that cash for
themselves there's two ways to view this
search and social media companies will
argue that they deserve that money
Google boasts that its products give
people choice and help them find more
highquality journalism than ever before
they would argue that they are
delivering new readers to news
Publications and deserve to be
financially rewarded for that the
alternative perspective is that the key
appeal of Google Facebook and the rest
is massively boosted by the fact that
users can turn to them as a portal to
access the news one recent study
suggested that Google searches for news
stories generate the company $440
million US every year in this view
Google is effectively using the work of
journalists and their employers as free
content for their sites newspapers thus
find themselves in a position where they
are generating significant value for big
tech companies whilst they themselves
struggle for cash some media
organizations have sought to reassert
their revenue generating abilities by
introducing paywalls with some success
where articles remain free to access
several governments have begun to step
in to protect Publishers in 21 the
Australian government introduced the
news media bargaining code this forced
Google and Facebook to hand over around
$50 million us to a variety of large
media organizations in return for being
allowed to list their content on news
feeds and in search results nevertheless
this is a mere Slither of the 11.9
billion worth of Revenue which
researchers at the center for economic
policy research have suggested tech
companies are effectively scalping from
media companies each year the
consequences for the quality of
reporting that we rely upon to learn
about the world around us are plain to
see in a world where every single
article has to fight to be read
journalists are further encouraged to
frame their reporting in sensationalism
and clickbait where this hasn't helped
to increase Revenue layoffs have been
the order of the day 8,000 jobs were
lost across the media Industries in the
US UK and Canada in 2023 alone so bad of
things got that the UK's Press Gazette
now keeps a regularly updated page of
redundancies but what does all of this
have to do with AI well in effect what
we've been left with is a system in
which a huge chunk of the economic value
created by journalists is scooped up by
a new breed of intermediary companies
who have inserted themselves between
Publishers and readers I've discussed
this model of what the Canadian writer
Nick cernik calls platform capitalism in
a handful of videos before and again
there have been some positives to come
out of this so far it's maybe worth
acknowledging that you probably wouldn't
be watching this video If YouTube hadn't
emerged as a platform which connects
people like me who create news related
videos with potential viewers regardless
of what you think of the quality of my
work or that of any other creators this
has allowed all kinds of perspectives
and opinions which would never find a
voice in Legacy Media to get a fair
Shake nevertheless the rise of AI tools
such as chat GPT and the content theft
which makes those tools possible will
only serve to turbocharge the power of
these new intermediary companies and the
way in which it will do so risks
crushing this more positive aspect of
the New Media economy it's certainly not
all good news for media Barons such as
Rupert Murdoch or Jeff Bezos either but
there's a real danger that adds a
further twist to this story in which the
power of such figures to shape the news
that we read watch and listen to is
stronger and more Insidious than ever
before large language models have
captured the world's imagination this is
the Humane AI pin about a year ago
November 30th we shipped chat GPT Apple
intelligence is the personal
intelligence system that puts powerful
generative models right at the core of
your iPhone iPad and Mac ever since the
first mainstream generative AI tools
were announced in 2022 we've been
encouraged to view the likes of chat gbt
Claude Gemini and mid Journey as
completely new and revolutionary and on
a purely technical level it would be
ludicrous to suggest that they're not
pretty impressive that being said they
didn't come from nowhere and they're
really much more of an incremental step
forward from previous machine learning
Technologies than some kind of pure
unpredictable invention the same is true
of of the economic impact AI is likely
to have on our online media ecosystem as
we've seen the trajectory of the digital
economy today has been one in which the
economic value created by journalists
belong with that created by visual
artists video creators and others has
increasingly been siphoned off by big
tech companies these companies have
inserted themselves as intermediaries
between content providers on one hand
and audiences on the other and expect to
profit handsomely from allowing the
former to share their work with the
latter generative AI tools and the
people and companies who use them to
create new works are effectively another
form of intermediary let's say that I
decide to launch an AI powerered News
website and because I want to attract a
young heavily online audience I decided
to publish as my first article a 1,000w
piece about Charlie XCX declaring that
carela Harris is brat now I'm not a
young man anymore I've not listens to
Charlie xcx's album brat I don't know
what a brat summer is and given it's now
Autumn it's probably too late for me to
find out but that doesn't matter because
I'm not actually writing the article
chat GP tears although in reality chat
GPT isn't writing the article either
instead some of the article substance
will be drawn from chat GPT searching
the internet and some of it will be
produced by calculations the all makes
based B on its prior training the
resulting article is actually a
Frankenstein like amalgamation of
perhaps hundreds of previously published
articles some of those will explicitly
be about KLA Harris Andor Charlie XCX
whilst other articles and books and yes
YouTube video subtitles will have been
used in a more broader sense to teach
chat GPT how to construct a decent
sentence and paragraph and argument in
short then chat GPT is acting as an
intermediary it's taking a huge sample
of pre-existing work written by
journalists music reviewers social media
users and others and simply rewriting it
for a new audience what makes this far
worse than the large chunks of Revenue
which Google YouTube Tik Tok and
Facebook take from Publishers is that
neither open AI as the creator of chat
GPT nor I as the publisher of this
fictional website are sharing any of the
revenue we make from subscriptions or
advertising with those original authors
at all in fact they're not even getting
the basic decency of credit for their
work whether or not this is legal it's
obviously immoral chat GPT might olude
this act of plagiarism by combining an
unknowable number of sources and
processing them through a mystery box of
maths and code but it and I would still
be taking the work of others and
presenting it even not as my own
than as the work of chat GPT whatever
hurt or damage this individual example
might cause however the broader
consequences of such practices becoming
widespread are even more Troublesome
because the bigger question to ask is
this in a world where anything that
someone writes and posts on the internet
including journalists can quickly be
gobbled up by a generative AI tool
regurgitated back out and republished
elsewhere that's not only going to lead
to a handful of individual writers or
news Publishers being short changed it
has the potential to make original
writing or indeed video production or
podcast development completely
financially unsustainable journalism in
particular can be really expensive to
produce I can tell you firsthand from my
experience making videos for this
channel that the cost of researching and
writing and editing and arranging
interviews and traveling to any
necessary locations to report on events
adds up incredibly quickly I'm also
pretty lucky in this regard my work and
that of most other creators and
Publishers who make journalism adjacent
content for YouTube largely revolves
around analyzing topics and events which
other far more qualified journalists
have already reported on producing
breaking news is endlessly more
expensive it requires reporters to have
the time to go to press conferences and
knock on doors and interview politicians
and visit crime scenes and submit
Freedom of Information requests and
monitor email inboxes in case anyone
gets in touch with a lead on a story
which no one else even knows about yet
it's not even particularly reliable in
terms of producing a monetizable end
product a reporter might spend ages
working on a story only for it to not
really go anywhere of course the
discursive nature of Journalism and
current affairs commentary means that no
writer or publication is ever able to
monopolize every single penny of the e
iic value that each of their stories
generates even when a reporter has the
honor of breaking an entirely new story
or when an opinion writer offers a
particularly spicy new take on a topic
that story or analysis is often quickly
picked up by other journalists and
Publications who want to discuss it too
that's all an accepted part of the game
but an AI fueled media economy in which
any article video or audio piece can be
instantly sucked up by an AI tool Reg
itated into a new form and then
republished elsewhere is going to place
the very Financial viability of all
forms of Journalism into question at
best such a shift will likely mean that
even the most well-meaning journalists
and writers will have to cut Corners
they'll have less time to dig beneath
the surface of a given story to see What
Lies Beneath this would only further
embolden politicians and PR companies to
fill their announcements and press
releases with more questionable claims
knowing that overworked and underpaid
journalists won't have the resources to
fully investigate whether or not they're
true at worst it has the potential to
kill off small independent news outlets
entirely leaving behind only the handful
of large Legacy Outlets which have
dominated our political discourse for
more than a century see over the past
year news organizations have begun to
fight back against the impact AI tools
have been having on their revenues in
December 2023 the New York Times began
the process of suing open AI for
allegedly using its articles to train
the AI model behind chat GPT terrified
that it might face further lawsuits open
AI began to make deals with other
Publishers including rert Murdoch's news
corporation which owns The Wall Street
Journal and the Sun and K Nast which
owns the New Yorker Vogue and several
other titles the former deal was
reported to be worth in the region of
250
million which might seem like the
beginnings of a more Equitable model for
training AI tools whilst also better
reimbursing journalists and Publishers
for their work the reality however is
that such deals are likely to remain The
Preserve of large corporate media
organizations with both illegal heft and
political connections required to force
AI companies into making such
Arrangements there will have been plenty
of Journalism adjacent creators and
channels in the training data stolen
from YouTube and used to train Claude
ble intelligence and nvidia's AI models
but regardless of whether those
companies stealing those video
transcripts was legal or not most of
them simply won't have the ability to
act on these revelations in order to
secure a payout in short then the impact
of the AI ification of our public
discourse will not be shared equally
established Publishers will be able to
defend themselves and their revenue
streams from The Fallout whilst without
much broader legislative intervention
independent creators Publishers and
smaller Outlets will largely have to
accept their work being routinely stolen
of course some writers podcasters
creators Etc might be Saved By Their
audience having enough of a personal
connection to them as personalities that
they continue to engage with their work
even if it could technically be found
elsewhere but this in itself presents
new challenges a popular discourse based
on personalities and
parasocial rather than ideas isn't
necessarily a great one others might
continue to publish for fun or out of a
sense of civic duty nevertheless their
ability to grow the scale of what they
do and improve its quality is likely to
be severely hindered the result is that
the more negative aspect of the New
Media revolution in which intermediary
companies skim revenue from writers and
Publishers will be
turbocharged while at the same time the
more positive outcomes relating to Media
plurality are rolled back we risk once
again finding ourselves in a position
where our Collective social political
and cultural conversation is dominated
by just a handful of corporate Outlets
owned by an Ever diminishing and merging
number of companies and Proprietors we
might read their articles directly on
their we sites or through an AI chatbot
or articles plagiarized through their
use but it will be those corporate media
Outlets who be the only ones with the
means to do the original reporting which
Powers these tools and therefore who
will still be shaping the assumptions
and perspectives which these tools spit
out that such a scenario would be
devastating for our ability to think and
engage critically with the world around
us barely needs saying a healthy
journalistic ecosystem needs more voices
not less but if AI companies continue to
be allowed to steal the work of
independent writers journalists and
creators of all Stripes without
permission or as importantly
compensation the ability of anyone
without considerable financial and
institutional backing to contribute
meaningfully to our Collective discourse
is going to be severely constrained
thankfully some companies are beginning
to reject the generative AI Invasion
just last month the team behind the
graphics app procreate pledged never to
add generative AI capabilities to their
software or to use their software to
steal users work which seems like a
ridiculous statement to have to make but
Adobe found themselves in hot water in
February and their new terms of service
seem to imply that they would be doing
just that another company which Has Come
Out Swinging against a ey theft is
nebula the Creator own streaming service
that I've been a part of for some years
now the publication of the proof news
article that I mentioned at the
beginning of this video was a real
wakeup call for many creators on the
platform and so the team opted to make a
stand by decisively declaring that none
of the platform's original Productions
will use generative AI tools and what's
particularly exciting for me at least is
that the next of those original
Productions to be released as of the
uploading of the this video is my
featurelength nebula original
documentary Boomers if you're a regular
viewer of my channel you'll probably
heard me talk about Boomers already
perhaps you've seen the announcement
video which went out a couple of weeks
ago it's a featurelength documentary
which Dives head first into the
Generation War which sometimes seems to
have taken over our politics Boomers has
been about a year in the making at this
point and has involved me traveling to
various spots around the US the UK and
over to France in order to interview
experts ordinary folks and even my own
mom my goal has been to try and shed
some light on the lives and Legacy of
the baby boomer generation I wanted to
understand why it is that the Boomers
often seem to have soaked up all the
wealth and power in our society and why
everything seems to be so much more
difficult for the generations which have
come after them housing University
tuition pensions the climate crisis it
covers a lot and by some weird twist of
fate also ended up involving me driving
a golf buggy around a fake Spanish Town
in Florida you'll have to watch the film
to understand that one the fact that
Boomers is a nebula original production
has allowed me to be so much more
ambitious with this project than
anything I've ever made before this is a
giant leap up from making these little
YouTube videos into making a proper
fullscale
documentary I've worked with a hugely
talented team of producers and camera
operators and editors and production
staff to make the whole thing look and
sound absolutely gorgeous and I cannot
wait to share it with you all extremely
soon Boomers will be available to watch
exclusively on nebula and if you're not
signed up already now is a fantastic
time to get on board over the course of
this year we've really upped our game
with an incredible slate of original
films and series which like Boomers
aren't available to watch anywhere else
just recently we released Abigail Thorne
of philosophy tub's fantastic new short
film Dracula's ex-girlfriend we also
recently announced a featurelength
documentary by Bobby Brockley called 17
Pages which covers the Baltimore Affair
a massive scientific Scandal retold
through interviews and some really cool
original artwork this is just a taste of
some of the fantas fastic stuff which
has been coming out on the platform
lately all of which is allowing creators
like me to push ourselves beyond the
limits of YouTube and to make full
professional films and series that we're
really passionate about if you want to
sign up for nebula you can get a cheeky
little discount on doing so by using my
personal discount Link at go.
nebula.com Nicholas that will give you
40% off an annual plan allowing you to
watch Boomers and all of that other
exclusive video goodness for just $3 per
month that's so much cheaper than any
other streaming service out there it's
basically a no-brainer or if you don't
want to add another monthly subscription
to your budget we've also recently been
experimenting with lifetime
subscriptions which have proven really
really popular these naturally cost more
up front but give you access to nebula
and all the great new stuff that we're
making for as long as both you and the
platform exist sign up using my personal
link really really helps to support my
work I'd love for Boomers to be the
first of many large scale documentary
projects that I'm able to work on and if
lots of people sign up early then it
helps to signal to the team at nebula
that folks are interested in seeing what
I make and will help me make the case
for them to throw more time resources
and money my way for some of the cool
projects that I've got planned in the
future that link again is go. neb. V
slom Nicholas I'll see you over on
nebula and we'll look forward to sharing
the trailer for Boomers with you very
very soon thank you so so much for
watching this video I hope it has given
you some food for thought around AI
theft and let me know your thoughts uh
down in the comments all that's left for
me to do right now is to thank my top
tier supporters over on patreon those
supporters are agent Maxwell Alexander
blank Alan Gan Amit sing paraha Bill
Mitchell Christopher Cowan dickon Spain
Fiasco Linguini Gabriel KO Gary Glenn
sugden jaraba Jimmy Dunn Lisa Yuan Neila
bugard paulus edicus Richard Richard
rapoon Sergio Suarez Sophia R strange
weekend yilson zedy Reese and Zoe Alden
if you want to join them in getting
copies of the scripts to these videos uh
my weekly Blog the Friday update some
early sneak peeks at stuff that we're
working on and a bunch of other stuff
stuff then you can find out how to do so
over at
patreon.com slom Nicholas thank you for
watching so much once again and I'll see
you in the next video
