stoicism is changing you know I've been
reading Marcus aurelius's meditations
wow I listened to it in the sauna it's
really intense because you're thinking
the these are the the writings the
direct writings that we have from a guy
who lived 2,000 years ago was running
Rome stoicism a stoicism as someone who
has covered and studied stoicism for
years now I've noticed something strange
happening if it was just another
celebrity Trend then it's whatever but
what's happening is much worse than that
this ancient philosophy that was once a
guide To Living a good and fulfilled
life has been co-opted by the manosphere
and turned into snake oil sold as the
magic pill of Fame Fortune and
everything in between Andrew you need to
be more misogynistic this woman just
spilled my coffee
 bring some paper towels we're
doing a  podcast stoicism is not not
feeling emotions it's feeling the
emotion and going okay stoicism stoicism
stoic my question is why stoicism out of
all the other philos philosophies out
there why this one in fact why
philosophy at all why do a bunch of
Macho men who laugh in the face of
intellectualism cling on to the most
intellectual ideologies to find out how
stoicism became this billion dooll scam
we interviewed experts took a stoicism
course and watched more AI generated
stoicism videos then I'd like to admit
what I found out is that the rabbit hole
goes far deeper than you could ever
imagine for example you see you see a
woman getting for example and you are
stoic the purpose of broism isn't to
educate Inspire or Enlighten but rather
to trick and exploit impressionable
viewers men are being conditioned to be
weak and you know you're being told yeah
it's good to be emotional young men
should be emotional they should show
that if you want to become successful
masculine if you want to make a lot of
money if you want to date or sleep with
a lot of girls being emotional is not
going to help you at all be stoic but
the ultimate goal of making some very
questionable characters famous and
Filthy Rich The Matrix has attacked
me while on a voyage at Sea in 300 BC a
wealthy Trader called Zeno was
Shipwrecked along with all of his cargo
instantly this wealthy man lost all that
he had after losing everything Zeno
learned that we have very little control
over what life throws at us however what
we do have control over is how these
things affect us he realized that
although he couldn't control the weather
or the sea he could turn his loss into
something positive by using his
experience to teach others about how to
overcome difficult situations in doing
so he created the philosophy of stoicism
stoicism grew quickly across all
segments of Greek society and Beyond
from Zeno who many believe was a
foreigner with roots in modern Lebanon
through thinkers like epicus a former
slave 4 konis the first female stoic all
the way to Marcus relius a Roman Emperor
and a skilled and insightful writer
whose personal Diaries known as
meditations have become an entry point
to the philosophy for centuries of
stoics up to the present day in the
centuries following Marcus aurelius's
death stoicism largely disappeared
because of
Christianity as the Roman Empire made
way for the Holy Roman Empire everything
in the Holy gospel was treated as well
gospel and just about everything else
was regarded as primitive Pagan nonsense
at best and at worst the express lane to
hell all of that changed in the mid 20th
century thanks to largely a handful of
unrelated characters a psychiatrist a
psychologist and a
soldier but before we get to that while
working on this video we dispatched four
members of the aperture team to explore
the endless variety of stoic tools being
shared and sold across the internet of
course all the classic stoic writting
from Zeno through Marcus relias have
been in the public domain for thousands
of years and are freely available with a
quick Google search some of the other
stuff well as you're about to see that
will cost you okay so for the next 7
days I'll be learning everything I can
about stoicism and trying to apply it
into my life using only free resources
all right so this just came in I
received my stoicism uh game card 5050
prompt cards that you know contains
pretty much a lot of insights and
sayings from the great stoic all right
for my sto Journey I'm going to be
talking to a stoic coach but not just
any coach he's just some guy that I
found on fivr for like 30 bucks so I
don't expect anything crazy I'm not
expecting much from this but hey he's
selling a service and I'm going to
purchase it and immerse myself in some
daily stoic practices I chose to go to
the number one sto Superstore on the
internet Ryan holidays daily stoic.com I
went ahead and selected a course called
taming your temper the 11-day stoic
guide to controlling anger every day
beginning with today I get an email I
get a video and most importantly I get
an activity to do to try to manage and
control anger in in keeping with the
stoic tradition my day one activity is
something originated by Abraham Lincoln
something called burn letters you write
down things that you carry around with
you that make you angry over and over
you write them down you fold it up you
set it on fire and in doing so you
literally start to unburden yourself of
these things that you know we're
carrying around for no reason so here we
go with day
one during the Vietnam war us Admiral
James Stockdale survived seven
unimaginable years as a prisoner of war
and infamous Hanoi Hilton he was
Shackled and tortured his leg injured
during his initial Crash Landing in
enemy territory was cruy and repeatedly
re-broken he was paraded around and
humiliated for propaganda purposes after
his release many asked him how he was
able to survive such a gruesome
experience and his answer became what is
known today as the Stockdale Paradox it
goes something like this in Admiral
stockdale's experience prisoners of War
who held out hope that a release was
always just around the corner eventually
grew discouraged gave up and died
Stockdale believed he along with his
fellow survivors were able to endure
only because they didn't hold out hope
for Freedom instead they made peace with
the life even in the most brutal and
dehumanizing
circumstances instead of waiting for the
light at the end of the tunnel they
embraced the darkness within it and not
surprisingly throughout his ordeal he
took direct inspiration from history's
most famous slave turn sto
epicus Stockdale a medal of honor winner
and later a vice presidential candidate
published a celebrated book entitled
courtage Under Fire testing epictetus's
doctrines in a laboratory of human
behavior and suddenly James Stockdale
became the most famous stoic in over a
millennium meanwhile stoicism was also
enjoying a Renaissance in the emerging
world of
psychotherapy and this is masimo pigui
philosopher biologist and author of how
to be a stoic the history of modern
stoicism really started with the
invention of cognitive behavioral
therapy in the 1950s and early 60s
that's because the major people that
started that uh that approach to
psychotherapy you know like iron Beck
and Albert Ellis were directly inspired
by the engine sto especially marcosus
and and obus so there is a connection
there and that connection is important
because since ctive behavioral therapy
is arguably the most the best
evidence-based uh Psychotherapy
available today so in other words it
works uh it also indirectly shows that
stoic techniques work Ellis went so far
as to say that the best way to sum up
the spirit of CBT was a quote from
Admiral stockdale's favorite philosopher
epicus men are Disturbed not by things
but by the views which they take of them
although Giants in their field neither
Albert Ellis nor Aaron Beck were
celebrity gurus by any stretch if
Instagram had existed back then put
together they wouldn't have been as
popular as a single picture of Dan
bilzerian's boat but thanks to them
seeds had been planted that would bear
unexpected fruit 40 years later the
other thing that happened was there were
already millions of people around the
world who read the meditations of Mark
cilus and read senica this is Donald
Robertson a cognitive behavioral
psychotherapist and author of one of the
most influential books on stoicism of
all time how to think like a Roman
Emperor but they didn't hang out
together they didn't talk to each other
they didn't congregate in little groups
this is Jules Evans a historian and
author of another influential book
Philosophy for life and that changed in
the 1990s with the development of the
internet the internet allowed this kind
of diaspora of stoics around the world
to form online communities and that's
how it developed into a movement in a
way that it was never able to before it
was in this Renaissance that Marcus
relius became a character and one of the
most iconic movies of the last few ades
Gladiator Russell Crow is really into
Marcus aurelus and he wanted to feature
more of his philosophy in the movie but
Rich haris depicts Marcus willus in the
First Act of that movie there's little
kind of tantalizing glimmers of stoic
philosophy in it referenced actually um
and lots of people went out and read the
meditations after they they saw that
movie as the Spaniard was seeking
gladiatorial glory on the big screen the
internet age was coming into full bloom
Silicon Valley some L sleepy San
Francisco suburbs suddenly became one of
the epicenters of human civilization
Society altering Innovations email
e-commerce e everything were emerging
regularly vast sums of wealth were
seemingly created overnight people were
interested in what made this Brave new
tech World tick the Silicon Valley Life
philosophy is embodied by a bunch of
smart people who look at everything as a
system or as a machine including
themselves for every problem in life
there is a life hack
why read a book when you can listen to
it double time why get a good night's
sleep when you can chuck a coffee pass
out for 20 minutes and then get back to
work after a refreshing and restorative
nap bucino to the Silicon Valley mindset
worrying about things like finding Angel
Investors is a bug in the system that
needlessly eats up processing power and
so to manage that they turn to cognitive
behavioral therapy the ultimate brain
hack and its unexpected traveling
companion stoicism the phenomenon of
Silicon Valley CEOs jumping in the
bandwagon in some ways is is kind of
some sometimes it's sincere but
sometimes it's this kind of superficial
thing of stoicism is trendy and I want
to be a part of that or I like stoicism
because I saw this cool quote in the
internet which is perhaps completely
fabricated and not something that an
ancient stoic ever actually
said this stoic Revival might have just
been another here today gone tomorrow
silicon valy fad like hyper loops and
Juice machines that really just squeeze
packets of juice for you where it not
for one of the major characters in our
story Ryan
holiday there are entrepreneurs who've
done incredibly well just repackaging
stoic maxims when I brought out my book
in 2012 my publisher said why didn't you
bring out a book of stoic maxims and I
said that sounds boring what an idiot I
could have e I could have made lots of
money doing that and others did holiday
found bestseller success with his
stoicism self-help book The obstacle is
the way the obstacle is the way was
published with help from holidays friend
Silicon Valley angel investor and
celebrity lifestyle influencer Tim
Ferris it's hard to imagine a more
potent Duo than holiday and Ferris for
popularizing stoicism in the mainstream
who knows how many thousands even
millions of people have been exposed to
sism because of these two credit where
credit is due the obstacle is the way is
a solid starter kit that has launched
many readers on a path to genuine
stoicism I am familiar with you know
Ryan's work and I know Ryan and I've
read the obstacle is the way and I
thought it was quite basic but that's
its strength I mean he he pictures it at
a certain level as a certain Sweet Spot
which really carries and I I don't know
what percentage of his his millions of
followers go from his work to buying
Marcus aurelius's meditations or epic
titus's discourses I would think it
would be very high I mean like I wish I
was as good as at marketing as him the
issue is that the obstacle is the way
also launched an empire in which a bunch
of Millennia old wisdom was now somehow
for sale that and a bunch of shiny and
some might say tacky stoicism swag does
he sell plastic skulls or
I'm not sure one thing I found
interesting was that before becoming a
full-time promoter of stoicism holiday's
previous jobs had all involved helping
big corporations sell stuff this
previous book was called growth hacker
marketing and the one before that trust
me I'm
lying look our job is to do anything
that grows the business and holiday did
indeed grow his business opening up shop
through his website daily stoic.com
honestly at times it's hard to tell how
much of holiday's Drive comes from a
sincere desire to share stoicism with
the world and how much is just a
worldclass Salesman making a book there
is a distinction to be made there
between you know sort of selling in
general and selling and Merchandising I
think merchandising is a particular type
of selling uh it's selling of things
that you don't actually need for the
exclusive purpose of making money so to
buy a medallion that says that has a
bones and you know a skull that says
momento Mory you know remember you have
to die
that's not useful to anybody that's just
a way to make money business at the
daily Stoke is definitely booming Ryan
holiday's net worth is estimated at
between 5 and $10 million and with that
growth hacker mentality that numbers
only going to keep Rising holiday
professes a sincere Devotion to stoicism
going back to his college days and we
don't doubt that he's telling the truth
but scrolling through the store at Daily
stoic.com one can't help but wonder what
would Zeno think
influencers another online entrepreneurs
took notice not only of holiday success
but also of how his brand was
infiltrating the professional sports
World copies of the obstacle is the way
became as common in US Pro locker rooms
as sneakers and ice packs if you're for
instance a member of a competitive
sports team sure what people call life
hacks are going to be useful yes they
are but that's not stoicism those are
just the
techniques then you get these
entrepreneurs who are millionaires and
billionaires and that's massive high
social proof saying stoicism is
fantastic and so that spreads out people
say well if this NFL quarterback is is
using it that sounds good to me so so
men look to very successful men and say
what makes them great is there anything
that I could take on board gwenneth
palro hired a kind of interior designer
or something to ADV are what books to
have on her bookshelf not to read but
what ones to have in our living room and
they they recommended stoicism because
it's trending so that's how trendy
stoicism has suddenly become even the
mainstream media was getting in on the
act more and more people were coming to
the same conclusion if stoicism was good
enough for pro athletes Bill Gates and
even Hollywood actors like Michael
Douglas maybe it was the missing cheat
code separating regular guys from
achieving everything they wanted in life
so we have a lot of authors now
podcasters and YouTubers and so on and
so forth who tell you things like oh you
want to succeed at sports Embrace
stoicism you want to become rich Embrace
stoicism you want to be successful
Embrace stoicism the stoics will be
stunned uh by all of this because all of
those things I just mentioned success
money Fame and so on and so forth are
classified by the ancient stoics as
indifferent meaning that they do not
make a difference literally to the only
thing that matters which is your
character as awareness of stoicism grew
it became even more watered down turned
into a bunch of maxims and life hacks to
fix whatever life problem you had the
so-called life hacks are techniques that
are that are useful in order to practice
stoicism to incorporate stoicism as as a
way of life okay but that's all they are
they are crutches in a sense they are
they kind of useful techniques uh that
um that allows you to stay on track but
the important thing is the track not the
technique I mean life hacks an odd
phrase isn't it it's not really one that
the the stoics would use other stoic
life hacks it's very accessible it's
very DIY and that makes it kind of
attractive in the age of the internet
somewhere along the way the true message
of this ancient Greek philosophy got
drowned in the sea of life hacks when it
washed up on the other side it was a
mutant off spring something so far
removed from his Origins that if Marcus
aelius was alive today he wouldn't even
recognize it stoicism became
heroism do I remember when the
manosphere started to become a thing in
all honesty I was kind of Johnny come
lately every other people were saying
are you concerned about the stoicism
being hijacked by people in the
manosphere that are distorting it and my
initial reaction was what are you
talking about I've I have no idea I've
never seen that you know and I was
surrounded by people that are interested
in stoicism I organized and spoke at
many conferences you know I thought I
had my finger on the pulse of uh how
sism was being appreciated but I didn't
know about the red pill movement and the
manosphere until um much later really
although I guess in retrospect I'd seen
traces of it so I'd seen books earlier
um and articles by people who portrayed
sism in a way that seemed quite odd to
me
it was around the time that my book
Philosophy for life and other dangerous
situations came out which was in
2012
and some I got contacted and invited to
be on a podcast to talk about
stoicism and um I looked into the
podcast and it was a white
supremacist Southern secessionist
podcast um one of the podcast hosts was
actually one of the organizers of the
Charlottesville um
white supremacy
March and I was astounded I was like H
how did these people get into
stoicism rism in its simplest terms is
stoicism that has been hijacked and
manipulated to fit The Narrative of the
manosphere and red pill Community it's
stoicism for the Bros for the unin iated
some quick background on the quote
unquote manosphere a term by the way
coined by a former porn star known as
Ian Ironwood the manosphere is
synonymous with the red pill mentality
borrowed from the Matrix movies a
mentality notably disavowed by the
people who actually made the Matrix
conceived as backlash against the
general perception that feminism had
gone out of control and that girls were
no longer going wild in the way that
real men could get behind the manosphere
as the name implies became a catchall
term for a network of male Centric
online communities everything from alpha
males and pickup artists to involuntary
celibates AKA inels to the altright the
far right and beyond for reasons we'll
do our best to explain soas ISM or
rather rism is now running rampant in
the manosphere causing a surprisingly
contagious philosophical brain flu just
listen to Taylor's call with a supposed
stoic
leader all right so it's been about 4
days uh since I purchased this uh stoic
course on fivr but uh so far I'm getting
ghosted and I paid like 50 bucks for it
so yeah so after nearly a week my stoic
coach decided to finally respond you
your F
Miss Johanna for example there is no
reason to be F why are you telling me
this people are calling me f yeah but
you are f and I'm going to ask you
another thing Miss Johanna do you want
to continue to be fat or no
no
okay can
you take control of your diet hey it's
hot it's this is yeah but can you
actually do it for example you see a
woman getting raped and you are a stoic
like you can pass through and Fa if you
want because that's your choice and
although the rest of our crew didn't
experience the same terrible lectures
you can tell that you really can't buy
stoic teachings this is my day three
check-in I'm doing the Ryan holiday
daily stoic.com taming your temper Daily
Guide to controlling your anger every
day I get something to read I get a
video to watch and I get a physical
activity that I'm supposed to do
yesterday day two the instruction was to
look in a mirror and make angry faces
personally I would say my experience
looking in the mirror mean Muggin felt
more silly than anything today on day
three the instruction was uh drawing on
the life lessons of the Adam Sandler
movie Happy Gilmore was to learn to find
your happy space I would say I was
expecting at this point something a
little bit more substantial from from
stoic content but it's only day three we
got four more days to go it's currently
day three and after watching the videos
on the first day I started reading the
classics I've been reading meditations
by Marcos arelos and it's honestly such
an eye opener and the best part about it
is that the book is in the public domain
you don't have to spend a penny to buy
it there are also writings from
Epicurious senica and even Zeno so you
can learn directly from the fing fathers
of stoicism without paying for any C or
anything at all all right so it's been 3
days now and uh I made it a little
routine for myself so every day I'm
picking a card reading the quote uh
they're mostly from Marcus aurelus and
sakica which I have to say has been a
very interesting way to just um you know
take 10 minutes a day doesn't take too
much of your time and uh still a good
way to change your perspective a little
bit so let's continue so if we had to
Define broism in its pillars so to speak
yeah I would agree that one of them is
certainly the acknowledgement that that
we only control our intentions and the
actions that we initiate not the
outcomes and that is in fact consistent
with stoicism that's real stoicism
that's what
says right at the beginning of uh the of
his manual for a for a good life and
that actually is a very healthy way of
thinking about things that's also the
basis of of certain versions of
cognitive behavioral therapy rational
emotive behavioral therapy for instance
studied by Albert Ellis which is a type
of CBT uh starts out precisely with that
that kind of acknowledgement so that's
fine but the second thing that the BRS
seem to believe is that they need to
suppress emotions that they cannot
afford to to be seen as weak that is not
stoicism that is a dist that's a
fundamental Distortion of stoicism too
many men are being conditioned to accept
weakness you know some of my stoic
writings are used or misused in the in
the manosphere and by by this the Bro
the red Bill sto uh and I've seen that
and it's like it's you know you cringe
and you say oh I guess I should explain
myself better the next time unlike
genuine oism broism is rarely presented
as a process for becoming your best self
like a get-rich quick scheme or a
workout routine promising instant ABS
broism is all about results once
Unleashed in the manosphere broism
became a one-sized fits-all answer to
all questions of the alpha male variety
but like everything it becomes trendy
and now what you'll find is more people
become interested in stoicism because
they've read articles or read podcasts
than because they've actually read the
stoics so with that there's a risk of
dilution is many of the Articles contain
a i generated content fake quotes and
things like that so you're you're
definitely now entering a phase where
you get um a lot of people becoming
attracted to stoicism but getting a
really inaccurate uh representation of
what the stoics said this is the
unpredictability of how culture evolves
and memes evolve in uh in unpredictable
directions um someone wrote a book about
using stoic techniques to win a poker
Championship you know there was a stoic
dating app let's take money so stoicism
in that sense with the dollar sign or
the the Silicon Valley STM is a
distortion because it replaces the
actual stoic value which is your
character your judgment with things that
the sto themselves were very clear in
saying they don't matter rism invariably
presents overly Simple Solutions to
complicated questions one of the perks
of brism is that it can be easily
Twisted into just about anything an
opportunistic influencer wants it to be
it's an example of the Barnum effect a
psychological phenomenon in which vagan
General audience appears to be tailored
to a specific individual when in reality
it applies to a wide range of people
it's like horoscopes fortune tellers
psychics in other words charlatans who
make a living praying on people's fears
and insecurities by telling them vague
nonsense masqueraded as knowledgeable
insights
what prompted us to make this video in
the first place is that we saw a
Resurgence in the popularity of our
stoicism video and when I first made the
video it did really well don't get me
wrong but in the past year or two it's
gotten way more popular than I could
have thought in fact right now it's the
most popular video on the Channel with
over 11 million views the problem is
that the more popular the video got the
more comments you started to see from
people who seem to know more about rism
than stoicism people who wanted to learn
how to get Rich the stoic way how to get
over a breakup the stoic way how to turn
off their emotions the stoic way and if
you're watching this and you had those
questions I want you to know I'm not
judging you at all for that I've had
these questions myself especially when I
was younger the sad reality of today's
world is that there's many young men who
don't have a steady adult male role
model in their lives so when male
influencers who have the money the women
the power and the luxury these young
boys dream of it's easy to see why they
get drawn to them in the message of
broism is also very attractive to these
young boys the promise that you can Will
yourself to become completely
self-reliant powerful and wealthy is
obviously appealing because young men
are are often quite vulnerable uh and
insecure about their masculinity um so
they tend to look towards things that
they think can fill that Gap in their
life and if they think being tough and
having a stiff upper lip is H symbolic
of masculinity that that's something
that they can become come quite attached
to as a philosophy of life and they
associate it um rightly or wrongly with
with stoicism and Marcus with and guys
like that men are not into therapy
culture but they're very into stoicism
and stoicism is basically therapy with
gladiator metaphors sism the ethos is
quite tough love if you read epicus it's
quite tough love and I think that
appeals to to men Jules Evans believes
the modern world has unwittingly created
an opening for broism to move in I think
Western culture has moved to a different
kind of model which is blame your
environment if if you're feeling bad
blame your environment blame your uh
economy blame the actions of other
people blame uh systemic Injustice of
some form or other in other words you
are right to be miserable that's kind of
that that's a a very caricatured version
of a certain type of leftwing
argument um if you make an extreme
version of that argument um you are
going to leave a a real opening for
people on the right to just put forward
this very basic idea and win followers
the very basic idea being stop blaming
other people stop behaving like a victim
stop complaining all the time that's
weakness in fairness we do live in
challenging times people are looking for
answers and they don't have much faith
in institutions like the church or
government to catch them if they fall
there's a growing sense that it's every
man for himself some have argued that as
organized religion has faded people are
looking elsewhere for a new rule book to
guide them and just like the Bible rism
can be whatever you want it to be it's
been widely noted that many people who
believe in the Divine authority of the
Bible have never actually read the Bible
in the same way many devotees of broism
are too busy scrolling through their
phone to actually go read classic stoic
texts
that means manosphere influencers can
claim whatever they say has roots in
genuine stoicism and the odds are none
of their followers will call BS although
one does have to wonder if stoicism as
it's packaged and sold in the manosphere
isn't actual
stoicism why even bother calling it that
I think there has always been an
audience for a certain kind of male
self-help which is maybe less geared
towards healing and relationships and
more geared towards like success and
being a man of power being a kind of
great man and that kind of genre I I
think has has always kind of looked for
older traditional sources of advice
whether that's you know samurai or
whatever there is a widespread problem
of of this this this kind not only
certain communities Embrace uh
anti-intellectualism and embrace uh
certain values that are should we say
quite questionable at least but they
want to use cultural references which is
kind of ironic considering that these
these communities tend to be
anti-intellectual but they they feel the
need to have some kind of pedigree that
justifies uh their position once a
tradition has established itself as
respectable uh for whatever for whatever
reasons once it had become has become
particular you know sufficiently popular
that people recognize it and they say oh
yeah Marcus aelius oh yeah these are
this guy or that guy then inevitably
somebody tries to uh to co-opt
it so if it's not the actual genuine
content of the philosophy what is it
about the brand of stoicism that makes
it so sellable in the manosphere for
starters I think we can agree that the
word just sounds kind of cool in common
parl being stoic means the strong silent
type needless to say this image plays
well to would be alpha males the problem
is that being stoic and stoicism are two
very different things there is a
difference between what sometimes we
call Capital ass stoicism and little ass
stoicism so when you when you hear
somebody saying oh that person was is
being really stoic usually they don't
mean he's following the philosophy of
stoicism what they mean mean is oh he
has a he's poting a stiff upper lip is
is not reacting to the situation he's
he's trying to control his emotions uh
he's trying to sort tough it out
basically that is a psychological
attitude which turns out there is now
fairly good empirical evidence is
actually damaging it's not a good thing
it's it's bad for your mental health if
you try to be stoic with a little s
stoicism with a capital S on the other
hand is the philosophy although the term
stoicism is often misused and
misinterpreted the basic principles of
capital S stoicism are fairly easy to
grasp at least compared to other
philosophies ancient stoicism lends
itself to easy to remember in highly
marketable catchphrases the phrase
momento Mori a reminder of man's
mortality literally meaning Remember You
Must Die appears to be one of Ryan
holiday's bestselling
medallions but still why has sism
succeeded where other formerly trending
philosophies like say Buddhism have not
it can't just be because people think
Roman centurions look awesome in that
300 was a sick movie can it so why are
people in the manosphere drawn to Roman
stuff like what like it's like that
um Trend recently about how often do men
think about the Roman Empire like kind
of Trope um is there something about it
yeah like gosh I mean Rome was a
militaristic society um it permeated
Roman culture and
symbolism um it was uh
autocratic um and I think if you're
going to
exploit adolescent boys um which is
something people have done throughout
history um the the go-to way of doing
that is to accuse them of being unmanly
and drive that message home to them and
then offer to solve it for them and then
you know you're going to refer to
autocratic societies and strong leaders
or despots perhaps brism outshines
Eastern philosophies because Buddhism
TSM and the like have been tainted by
associations with 1960s counterculture
and its modern offshoot the touchy feely
New Age movement it's further been
suggested that the shavinism that taints
so much of the red pill altright
movements is also at play positioning
themselves in opposition to a caricature
of woke liberals bowing to the Exotic
superiority of Eastern wisdom
Western chauvinists insist that the
great forces which have civilized and
elevated man uniformly originated in the
west perhaps that has helped Drive the
rise of rism Donald Robertson disagrees
in my own case I amass myself in in
Reading uh Asian philosophy when I was a
a young guy read like the aanish
ads Shu like all that kind of stuff
right and I loved it um but then when I
found sism I connected with it in a
different way I don't think cuz I
idealized Western chauvinistic value but
because I had a kind of what I would
describe as a Deja Vu experience I
thought some of this stuff seems kind of
familiar to me you know I've heard some
of these Concepts in our own culture
other observers are more skeptical you
can see that um kind
of there's there's also kind of
traditionalist uh school or or kind of
camp who say like we should go back to
you know Western civilization's the best
uh we you know we should we should teach
like the greats we should teach uh the
stoics in high school and in
universities uh and so on that kind of
um chauvinism and you even see kind of
stoicism being taken up by by white
supremacists it definitely doesn't
hinder broisms appeal that one of the
leading names in stoicism is Marcus
celius if you're going to absorb the
life lessons of an ancient philosopher
might as well think like a Roman Emperor
right if I'd written a book about how to
think like a Roman slave and it was
about epic tius maybe we can test this
one day but I don't think anyone would
have read it um or you wouldn't I don't
think it would have sold many copies I
think a lot of people uh picked up how
to think like a Roman Emperor because
they thought Roman Emperor seem manly
and Powerful in reality Marcus aurelus
was a skilled military and political
leader but between running an Empire and
writing his meditations he probably
didn't have as as much time to hit the
gym as it sometimes appears in the
manosphere in thumbnails for videos
touting the virtues of rism Marcus
aelius often appears to be on some
heavyduty steroids and come to think of
it the beard looks suspiciously modern
too yeah maybe I'm guilty of a kind of
bait and switch strategy here like but
 unapologetically right so we kind
of rule them in because they want to be
like a Roman Emperor's powerful
autocratic figure and then when they get
there they realize it's different at the
top in Marcus Abus wasn't particularly
autocratic like and he cuz he'd seen
through the illusions of of power you
know and actually I think that's a very
compelling strategy clearly whoever's in
charge of the algorithms on YouTube and
social media knows the stuff sells click
on a bunch of broism links for a couple
days say because you're researching on a
documentary on the subject and in our
experience your suggestions feed will be
dead for weeks and it's not an accident
the cells powers that be at YouTube
Instagram and Tik Tok know it and
they're all feeding in on
it so what exactly does broism get wrong
about stoicism forars calling stoicism a
Greek philosophy that might get you some
funny looks in Greece well there's kind
of interesting trivia about the early
history of lots of things but probably
one of the main one is you sometimes
occasionally you'll hear people
criticizing stoicism as being a Phil
phos opy of dead rich white dudes or
something like that and that couldn't be
further from the truth certainly Marcus
Aurelius is a dead rich white dude he
was the last famous stoic the founder of
stoicism was not even Greek he was
Phoenician um so the Greeks saw him as a
foreign immigrant and uh so STM was seen
as an immigrant philosophy I believe for
to begin with and as for the whole stiff
upper lip strong silent type thing it is
not the case that the ancient stoics
don't talk about their emotions in fact
as as the philosopher Martha nbound said
to me no one talks about their emotions
more than the stoics in ancient
philosophy the stoics it's all they talk
about emotions let's face it no
philosophy makes it into the mainstream
without getting watered down and
distorted in the process and let's not
even get started on religion but
nowadays some online alpha male
influencers have drunk so much Kool-Aid
that they've convinced themselves that
they're the actual experts I've been
told and some of my colleagues have been
told several times by Red Bill so-called
stoes that we don't know what we're
talking about when it comes to the
interpretation of the sto text as
opposed to people who just read one
translation in English of that book and
they think that they understood it it's
very interesting phenomenon
psychologically sociologically in and of
itself the differences between stoicism
and broism let's start here to the
stoics both ancient and modern like
Admiral Stockdale obstacles were just
that obstacles life was full of them and
to think that you could will reality to
change was setting yourself up for
failure and
unhappiness you needed to accept the
inevitable and train yourself
accordingly in more modern parlament you
needed to learn how to be comfortable
being
uncomfortable but to Ryan holiday to
quote the title of his book The obstacle
is the way the way to what
in the world of broism pretty much
anything you think will make you
happy this leads us to probably one of
the most dangerous elements of
rism the BRS have a third pillar that
seems to be recurring in their writings
or their discussions every time that I
spend some time in that in those
quarters and that is a profound degree
of sexism bordering on
misogyny and I don't use the word
misogyny lightly so these are frankly
weird people who are into hyper
masculinity and tend to be seriously on
the sexist SL misogynist side of things
and so on and so forth one can make an
argument that the ancient stoics talk in
a way that we would consider sexist Sena
and epicas from from time to time say do
say things like you know don't behave
like a woman don't be don't be womanly
uh that sort of stuff right and you know
sure that's those were people who lived
2,000 years ago they were a result of
their own society and we cringe today
when we read that kind of stuff how did
stoicism ever get so far off the rails
on what basis does rism justify rampant
sexism or even worse the best
explanation the menos here can offer
mostly comes down to a bad translation
when you ask them where the hell did you
get that usually the answer is oh well
the the word Virtue remember I said that
that stoicism is a virtue at top of
virtue ethics virtues are character
traits right things like generosity
courage and so on and so forth and so
these people the the BRS the red pill
stoics U say well the word Virtue in
Latin is ver v i r and ver also meant
men so you know again manly
men and this is baffling because there
itself was actually a translation by the
Romans of the original Greek AR Arete is
genderless it doesn't have anything to
do with with genders and it just means
Excellence what does broism get right
not much really the goal of stoicism and
of life in general is emonia there's no
direct translation for emonia in English
but the closest equivalent might be
well-being basically an extended and
consistent state of peace and acceptance
with both the ups and downs in life the
goal of broism is almost the complete
opposite of that it's the idea that you
need a steady stream of success and
external validation to feel good about
where you stack up in the pecking
order the big issue isn't just that
broism gives stoicism a bad name it's by
that misrepresenting what the philosophy
actually is the exact people who could
really use stoicism are being baited and
switched and fed dangerous nonsense
instead Donald Robertson says if you
squint you can see a sliver of Hope in
the spread of brism one thing I'd say
about social media is I think you know
the people say dumb things not entirely
seriously sometimes makes it seem
sometimes I think that these views are
more prevalent than they actually are
like I get I I I'm optimistic I give
people a little bit more credit um than
the internet I think of storis in a way
as like a trojan horse you know like
people are attracted to it because
they're looking for something that makes
them even more manly than they are
already or even tougher than they are
already you know um but inside it what
they find is a bunch of tools and
Concepts that resemble those found in
modern cognitive behavioral therapy once
you discover rism and then seek to learn
more like all the new visitors in the
comment sections of our stoicism videos
hi by the way you start on a journey
that with any luck can lead you to
actual
stoicism and if you think this might
apply to you then we're happy to have
you because you're the reason we made
this video if you've only encountered
stoicism as practice in the manosphere
the truth may surprise you and speaking
of using stoicism in our lives let's
check in with our team one last time and
see how the rest of their week as
practicing stoic Pand
out all right I just got out of my call
with the uh stoic coach and like I think
when we think of broism and what
stoicism has become I think this dude is
a pretty good like representative of it
in a way just the examples he used were
bizarre like it was always
violence against you violence against
women as someone who like doesn't have a
ton of knowledge in it this kind of made
me want to stay away cuz I'm like if
this is the community potentially if
this is the people running courses then
why would I want to do this yeah I think
overall that call was just not
successful and I had to pay like 30
bucks for it so not not that
fun all right so this is day seven today
we had a check in with the team last
week and I was very curious to hear from
colleague experience with this online
course and I decided to book it for
myself as well I have to say I'm super
curious to see whether or not he's going
to adapt his talking points um also
because I'm a woman so I'm I'm going to
be paying attention to that and and see
if my experience is any different from
my colleague and uh we'll see so I just
finished my call with uh the sto course
overall very simplistic nothing no deep
learning no no no real human connection
like going deep into the subject nothing
controversial contrary to my colleague
like he didn't he didn't go into
anything completely outrageous
whatsoever so he definitely I think
adapted to his public which was me in
that case yeah just uh mix feelings I
would not say that was a waste of my
time but I don't think it can provide
any useful tips or life advices to
people and uh
there are so many other resources that
are actually much more interesting than
that but it was worth trying this is day
seven my final check-in I've completed
the taming your temper course from Ryan
holidays daily stoic and overall I would
say um I wasn't expecting a ton from
this course but I'm I'm a big believer
you can find some words of wisdom just
about anywhere but look obviously Ryan
holiday knows that if people want to
rigorously study real sto ISM there's
better places to do that than his
website that's not who he's pitching
this at and I'm sure he'd be the first
to tell you if you have like a real
anger issue it's going to take more than
a 7-Day email course to fix your
problems but all in all this felt like
something if you were going to set up a
program for school children to learn
some basic stoic life lessons this would
be a good course for for little kids
more than grown-ups I think I wasn't
expecting a ton but all in all I would
have to say I was somewhat underwhelmed
in general by my experience
with the taming your temper daily stoic
course especially considering it costs
50 bucks to get all these emails okay so
it's the last day of the challenge and I
honestly can say I've learned so so much
everything you need to know about
stoicism is available to learn for free
I've learned so much and there's still
so much more that I haven't even touched
we'll be leaving links to the best free
storym resources in the description Down
Below in conclusion the contrast between
the original stoics and the manosphere
influencers claiming to be stoics is
pretty striking really the difference is
night and day the goal is to become a
better person better person is defined
as somebody who actually cares gives a
crap about other people and does
something about it as opposed to just
talking about it and it emphasizes the
idea that our character is more
important ultimately in terms of our the
meaning of life and our quality of life
than external Goods like wealth and
reputation you know the founder of
stoicism rejected the followers who
urged him to give the movement he
started his name he wanted to focus on
the ideas not himself and he rejected
the pursuit of personal Glory as poison
for the
soul although no doubt flattered to be
acknowledged by a powerful man Zeno is
said to have declined an imperial
invitation to visit antigonous the Greek
General who succeeded Alexander the
Great it was said that Zeno avoided
large social Gatherings preferring quiet
study and that he disliked verbos and
elaborate
speeches although he had known the
pleasures of life as a wealthy Merchant
Zeno refused to make money from teaching
philosophy and instead Liv des spair and
acidic life so what would Zeno think if
he could see the world today what would
his advice be for people who wanted to
follow his virtuous path they might
surprise many of the people who invoke
the name of the philosophy Zeno founded
in their Pursuit Of Fame and profit
unlike many in the manosphere he would
reject far-right nationalism after all
sto coined the word Cosmopolitan which
literally means citizen of the world
stoicism is about cosmopolitanism it's
about considering every other human
being on the planet as literally your
sister and your brother we're all part
of one Cosmic City the Cosmopolis we're
all
cosmopolitans therefore we should treat
people whatever culture they're in you
know fairly and justly as a brother or
sister he would fight inequality in all
forms the one thing thato Zeno and early
stoics in particular thought was toxic
was this idea of becoming alienated from
our fellow brothers and sisters in the
human race so racism sexism you know all
these kind of prejudices and isms you
know really fly in the face of the the
fundamental goal of of stoicism which is
achieving a a sense of Harmony and unity
among
Mankind and what of the manosphere
itself what do you think what is the
goal of stoicism a hint is that it
probably doesn't have anything to do
with girls in bikinis to put it more
simply it's to achieve your innate
potential as a rational self-aware
thinking being Zeno arrived at the
principles of stoicism when a disaster
outside of his control forced him to
make sense of life in a new and deeper
way he was able to do so not by
rebuilding his lost wealth in
recapturing his former glory but by
developing a philosophy that would allow
him to be satisfied with nothing in the
same Spirit Marcus arelius during his
lifetime the wealthiest man on Earth
gladly parted with the substantial
portion of his fortune to Aid his fellow
Roman citizens saying the only wealth
which you will keep forever is the
wealth that you've given away other
recent real life figures provide shining
examples of the value of true stoicism
admits the worst life could ever throw
at us not just ad James Stockdale also
fellow prisoner of war turned Senator
John McCain and Holocaust Survivor
turned author Creo Levy these worthy
examples of stoicism didn't seek Glory
fame or wealth they simply did the hard
work of surviving life at its worst and
coming out the other side permanently
stronger that is the way of the sto and
always remember be wary of anyone who is
too eager to tell you the way you should
live for in the words of Zeno himself we
have two ears in one mouth so we should
listen more than we say
