welcome to current affairs my name is
aan Robinson I am the Editor in Chief of
current affairs magazine today Grace
Blakeley returns to the program her bio
on her new book vulture capitalism
corporate crimes backdoor bailouts and
the death of Freedom describes her iic
accurately as one of the fiercest anti-
capitalist Advocates of her generation I
like Fierce not just not just smart but
Fierce I would really like for you to
introduce me wherever I go I'm whatever
you just you just said I want that
recorded I want that played before I go
out anywhere just to like hype me up get
me in the mood this is what I do I'm the
hype man for the guests you know because
I got to convince people that you want
to listen to the guest so I want to it
worked I'm hyped I'm so hyped I describe
you to people Grace Blakeley as scary
smart and uh because you know everything
about the global economy you've read
everything this new book vulture
capitalism contains mountains of
research it explains the way the entire
global economy works and it also
provides a compelling alternate vision
of how the entire economy could be
structured that's what you'll get when
you pick up vulture capitalism by Grace
Blakeley Grace Blakeley welcome to C of
farit thank you so much for having me
what an intro what a description of the
book I'm so glad that you enjoyed it
yeah it's phenomenal I really do mean
that and so here's okay there's so much
in the book though so I I was trying to
think what can I start with that is
simple that is at the core of this and I
think one thing that is at the core of
it is quite simple is that we have this
popular conception that is everywhere
that is there's something called the
state and there's something called the
market and capitalism is when the market
makes decisions and people's people
choose what to buy in the market and
that's what determined what happens in
the economy and the state is this other
thing and socialism is when the state
does planning the state PL there's a
there Central plan the state owns
everything they do the planning and uh
this conception this bipolar conception
this binary State market capitalism
Central planning is very very common and
I think one of the core things you're
trying to do is blow this apart yeah
just completely blow it up it's just
wrong and I think you know the reason
that I started thinking that this was
something that I needed to write was it
was during it was at the beginning of um
the pandemic actually when in 2019 there
had been the recent loss of the general
election by the labor party conservative
one again and I was doing a bunch of
interviews in the pandemic on TV and all
the kind of news readers and the
interviewers were saying but you know
Jeremy Corbin lost the election But
ultimately you got what you wanted
because we have the state spending loads
of money and that's socialism right so
you know we didn't even need Jeremy gin
to win the election because you've got
socialism it's being delivered by this
conservative party and I just found it
so staggering every time I was
confronted with this argument it led me
to realize that the vast majority of
people even like educated people who
were like asking me these questions just
don't know the difference between
capitalism and socialism and have this
flawed understanding of what capitalism
actually is and it comes from I go into
this in the book it comes from this
divide that we've had in our politics
between like social democracy
neoliberalism between like hyek who is
the darling of the neoliberals and K
friedr vau yes freed vau hyek yeah and
JM kanes who were the kind of you know
two heroes or villains depending on
which side you're on of our economic and
political debate for most of the 20th
century really so you had Kane saying we
need a state to tame the irrationalities
of the market we need government
intervention you know we need to the the
public sector to invest and even if you
know in the middle of a crisis there's
nothing to invest in we should just pay
people to dig holes just to give them
jobs to create income and kind of boost
you know economic growth and then
there's Hayek who comes in and says this
kind of Planning by the state is the
source of all tyranny it creates
inefficiencies it undermines the
functioning of the market and we need
less State we need kind of you know a
different kind of state really one that
does less stuff basically and those that
kind of argument that one in the 1980s
right so you saw neoliberals like Bacher
and Reagan pet and Chile come to power
everywhere and they set about um
basically you know we're told that they
shrink the state but they don't shrink
the the state yes even leftists say this
yeah yeah exactly we get caught out here
because you know we've we've also signed
up to this kind of dichotomy so we often
you know say things like they
deregulated and they you know reduced
public spending and all that sort of
stuff and while some cases it's true
it's very misleading because the type of
Regulation that we have there wasn't
less regulation after the ne liberal
shift there was actually often more
because it required a huge amount of
Regulation to create markets where no
markets existed before like for example
in healthcare and areas of the public
sector and at the same time you know we
didn't see a fall in public spending we
haven't seen that over the last kind of
several decades uh we've seen massive
increases in subsidies for the rich tax
cuts the benefit for the rich we've seen
bank bailouts we've seen you know
pandemic bailouts that have channeled
billions of dollars of public funds into
the hands of private corporations so
what's happened isn't that the state has
become smaller and there's more space
for the markets that means more
socialism and less capitalism what's
actually shifted from the Social
Democratic era the postwar era to the
neoliberal era from like the you know
40s 50s 60s to the 80s 90s u0s and up to
today is the nature of State policy and
whose interests it serves there's been a
shift in the balance of class power such
that the state is now used by Capital by
the wealthy by Elites to serve their own
interests okay I want to break this down
because as I say I really do feel like
this idea that there is this spectrum
between how much the government produces
the economy and how much the market
makes economic decision that that idea
is is so so so so ingrained and as you
pointed out you brought up uh the
economists hyak and KES in the 20th
century where you ohay is writing this
book The Road to surom where he says you
know with the welfare programs and uh
health care and all that soon you'll
have Nazism in Britain or or whatever it
is you know it's kind of it's Inc
incredible that this argument was taken
so seriously because it's
insane but then but then you have as you
say on the opposite poll you have you
have you have can's this idea that in
fact the economy is going to be a
disaster unless there are unless there
are decision
made in government about how to allocate
resource okay you say that's other way
think of that's not the spectrum of
possible ideas break us out a little bit
of the spectrum give us um I don't know
is there a third person is there a third
Economist that we can bring in here that
might have some other ideas there's call
Marks now I look at a lot of what you
know I come from a Marxist perspective
basically and so what that means when
you're thinking about how to analyze
capitalism or to really like analyze a
society in general is that you start you
don't end but you start by looking at
the way that that Society produces
things so you know feudalism that was a
system of aristocrats and peasants and
land was a very important asset that was
used to produce you know basic
agricultural Commodities and the way
that their political system worked was
that there were Lords who owned the land
and PE who work the land and so the
whole nature of that social system was
organized around land and and how that
was um how that was governed and the
political system kind of flowed from
that moving into capitalism this is a
system oriented around the production of
Commodities and you know the production
of Commodities within corporations in
which there is a divide between the
people who own everything we need to
produce Commodities and those who are
forced to sell their labor power for a
living so you know you have this Insight
from the very beginning capitalism is a
class-based system where there's a clear
social division of labor between the
people who own all the stuff and the
people who have to work for a living so
the thing that really the kind of most
that shapes how capitalist Society
societies work is the balance of class
power in that Society it's not the
balance between the market and the
corporate and and the and the state
sorry those things you know are kind of
important in determining you know how
how certain actors can make their voices
known so for example you know during the
postwar period when there was a larger
state it was easier for the labor
movement to organize within the state to
make certain demands that were
ultimately realized but that power that
they held within the state didn't come
because the state was bigger it came
because they were organized enough to
have built up these powerful
institutions that were capable of
organizing uh both within the state and
within corporations as well so the whole
of society you had you know higher wages
and more public services and and all
those different sorts of things
basically that Society was structured in
such a way that it operated more in the
interest of workers than the society
that we have today now the neoliberal
assault wasn't about shrinking the state
and again you know this was a powerful
narrative and it it seized on the kind
of liberatory narratives that had been
put forward around 1968 around personal
freedom and autonomy um you know the
idea that there was this crushing
repressive State apparatus that was like
keeping everyone under its control which
of course was you know in a way kind of
true um the neoliberal seized upon that
and said we are going to shrink the
state and create space for personal
freedom within the market and there'll
be lots of small producers all creating
all the things that you need there'll be
entrepreneurship you'll be able to kind
of you know um work on these Amazing
Ideas and and bring those ideas to
Market and you'll be able to invest
however you want in stock markets Etc so
it was all really oriented around the
idea of personal freedom now that was
very deceptive and very powerful because
what we ended up with was not an economy
that kind of prioritized personal
freedom it was Eon an economy dominated
not by small individual producers and
small investors that were operating in
the market but these massive corporate
Behemoth these massive financial
institutions that have insane amounts of
power and that are also increasingly
operating within the state in the same
way that organized labor once did to get
their demand met and again that comes
down to not necessarily the size of the
state or the size of the market or
whatever it's about the balance of class
power and there are lots of reasons that
we could go into as to why that shifted
so much but it was partly because of
this you know outright battle that was
being fought on a both kind of
ideological and material Level that the
neoliberals ultimately won that
ultimately you know Capital basically
got its way and there's some examples of
this that I lay out in the book that I
think might be helpful and just
explaining what this means so like
readers might or listeners might
remember the Boeing Max disasters yeah
you talk a lot about Boeing yeah um so
that you know obviously happened a
couple years ago it's now in the news
again because there's more of
engineering failure right just come back
in time for the publication of the book
I know it was very
convenient and yeah basically you know
readers can you can read the story of
Boeing in the book so I won't go into it
in too much detail but suffice to say
the corporate culture became you know
just unbelievably financialized the
whole like the whole purpose of
Corporation shifted from kind of you
know producing planes to just maximizing
value for shareholders you could produce
planes or money yeah yeah yeah literally
so you know there was like this whole
new cast of of managers that was created
to kind of cut costs and extract value
from The Firm unions were attacked even
Engineers actually were attacked the
whole idea was just like you know make
these planes as cheaply and as quickly
as possible and it emerged later the
after the disasters that had actually SE
imagin boing had known there are these
massive flaws in this airplane that led
it to um potentially like nose dive out
of the sky and they did nothing about it
the FAA did nothing about it because
they had effectively become captured by
the very institutions they were supposed
to be regulating and the state of course
which is supposed to be this
counterweight to what's going on in the
market actually aided and abetted
goinging they were channeling billions
of dollars worth of corporate welfare
into the company at the same time so you
know this this idea that we have like
States and markets fighting each other
for influence is just completely and
utterly false most of the time public
and private interests are working not
just alongside each other but through
each other like private corporations
work through the state the state often
Works through private corporations so we
just need to like take this idea of this
big separation between State and market
and just throw it onto well as you
mentioned even socialists kind of fall
into this there was the famous you know
economic debate the the Socialist
calculation debate is after called about
whether you could have a functional as
as I understand it the whether the
economy could function without prices
and and and Market as if that's a debate
over socialism and whereas that's kind
of a separate debate the debate over
whether Central planning can work
without prices and markets is often seen
as a kind of debate about socialism
because socialism was associated with
Central planning and a lack of markets
and and prices but as you point out in
the book under the system that we call
capitalism there is tons of central
planning without markets and prices in
these giant entities called corporations
yeah so corporate like this is kind of
where I start the book really it's by
saying okay so so hyek says an economy
is far too complex to be centrally
planned there's all of this stuff that
um you know there's so many variables so
many kind of feedback loops so many
different actors interacting with one
another it would be impossible for one
institution to take control of this
whole thing and tell everyone what to do
would you say right fair enough because
you know from history that seems to be
the case but if we look at the way that
capitalism actually works that is how it
works it's a small number of very
powerful people basically making
decisions on behalf of everyone else so
you know we can talk about the
corporation and that I look at how
corporations plan how financial
institutions plan how States plan and
how Empires plan
now the state side of things is kind of
more accepted it's more accepted that
states can plan I actually look at how
state power functions and show that it
tends to basically favor the interests
of of capital but even within the
corporation you have this immense amount
of power concentrated in decision makers
at the top of the corporation precisely
because these corporations do not really
operate in a market So within the
corporation we know the way decisions
are made is based on Authority you know
managers senior managers they decide how
the firm is going to operate and then
everyone else simply has to follow you
got to do what you're told if you're at
the bottom exactly but the idea is
supposed to be that those decisions are
dictated by the market so you know the
market says produce x amount of Y
commodity and managers consult that and
then they make a decision and maybe they
get it a bit wrong so they adjust it and
that's all reflected in profits but that
feedback mechanism doesn't work at all
when you have Consolidated corporate
power which we do you know across the
whole economy particularly in the US but
also to an increasing extent in Europe
where you know a lot of particularly the
most significant kind of productive
sectors are just characterized by these
massive International monopolies that do
have some competition in the sense that
there's you know a few other firms but
generally those firms collude with one
another They Don't Really compete
overprice and more than that they have
the power to kind of operate within and
through State institutions to make sure
that they get their way regardless so
you know you don't see Sher who was
another theorist of capitalism had this
idea of creative destruction and this
was what kept the kind of
entrepreneurial Spirit Alive it's that
if you didn't compete and come up with
amazing new ideas then you would die but
that isn't the case anymore you know
these sperms survive no matter what even
Boeing right it's gone through all of
these incredibly horrendous disasters
it's basically killed tons of people and
it still exists and it's probably never
going to not exist because the American
state W allow it to collapse well yes so
help us understand a little little more
detail what that means for a company not
to be subject to Market discipline is it
that you know Boeing can up a
million times and there's no be change
in what the market does because what is
there going to be another another plane
manufacturer is just going to spring up
in the United States it's kind of it's a
lot of different factors so firstly you
know the argument that marks made as to
why what he called centralization would
increase over time under capitalism is
that production just becomes a lot more
complex so you need a lot more stuff to
start a business in something like Aeros
space like you need an immense amount of
capital to be able to buy it's so
complicated it's so complex you need a
lot of capital you need a huge amount of
expertise you need a lot of connections
and you know contracts basically with
other large corporations so basically
it's kind of impossible to really like
start an aerospace company on the scale
of something like Boeing from the ground
up you know you have two or three
established firms in that sector the
moment we've got air bus and Boeing and
they just exist they have all the
capital they have all the knowledge they
have all the expertise that the barriers
to entry are just huge and that's just a
function of the nature of capitalist
development but a second and arguably
more important factor and something
that's overlooked by a lot of kind of
pure economists is that you inevitably
when you get these big corporate VTS
they have very close links with States
and particularly with the state in which
they're headquartered so you know Boeing
has really really deep links with the
American state with the Department of
Defense with various different
administrations and like it you know can
Lobby for tax cuts it has a huge
influence over state governments you
know let alone Federal governments
because often it's a massive employer so
it's able to just you know influence
we've seen it was able to influence
regulation Lobby and kind of basically
extract value out of the American state
at all levels and it's actually the same
with Airbus in the EU you know there's
been all sorts of kind of scandals
surrounding Airbus and throughout the
Aerospace industry lots of issues around
kind of corruption and fraud and those
sorts of things precisely because these
relationships relationships between
senior Executives and members of the
state a particular state or
International institutions or whatever
are so important to ensuring the
survival in this of this firm which is
something that investors pay attention
to so when there's a scandal nobody
seriously thinks that Boeing's going to
collapse because the American state
isn't going to allow it to that so
Capital doesn't flee the money just
keeps flooding in and we've seen this
you know Boeing share price you know
wasn't until recently like wasn't
dramatically affected by the events that
took place several years ago with the
max disasters and you know we saw like
it got tons of support from the state
during over the course of the pandemic
so yeah you know it's just that markets
don't operate the way that they are
theorized to operate according to your
average mainstream Economist and
basically this comes down to the fact
that we our world viw kind of is based
on this idea that there's big this big
separation between politics and
economics so there's like economics
which is numbers and companies and
finance whatever and then there's
politics which is like messy arguments
and like you know not numbers and and
these two worlds are are kind of
incompatible but actually they are part
of one system which is capitalism and
you know the relationships between
allegedly separate institutions Within a
capitalist economy have massive
implications for the way that that
system works you're listening to the
current affairs podcast from current
affairs magazine in New Orleans
Louisiana current affairs is a
registered 501c3 nonprofit organization
and we depend entirely on reader
subscriptions and donations you'll
notice we have no ads no mattresses no
recruiters no sports betting if you can
help us in our mission to build
independent Progressive media please
visit current affairs.org donate to make
a donation or current affairs.org
ssubscribe to subscribe to our beautiful
print magazine thank you so much for
supporting our work now back to the
program now I want to put to you what do
you say when you meet someone who
describes themselves as a free market
libertarian you lay out what you've just
laid out for me and they reply to you
and say well what you're describing
that's not capitalism that's crony
capitalism this is a this is a
Libertarian buzzword term and they say
of course I don't believe that the state
should be doing Special favors for
corporations I believe that we should
have a free market the things you're
describing they're very bad but they're
not real pure capitalism those people
have no theory of the state they have no
working or functional or even
comprehensible theory of power really
because you know the state isn't just
the thing that exists out there that you
know you get into government you pick it
up and you do things with it it is a
very complex set of Institutions that
exists you know outside of just what we
would usually refer to as kind of the
the institutions of governments so
governments can change but the wider
State apparatus in a lot of ways Remains
the Same and the way that those
institutions function reflects the
balance of power in society as a whole
now that sounds complicated but it's
actually very simple you know the
companies and individuals often
institutions that are able to wield
power within State institutions or over
particular politicians are the ones that
are able to get their way they have
those policies that they want to see
enacted enacted and you know it kind of
goes back to what I was talking to
before like back in the postwar period
there was a more equal balance of power
and both the US and the UK and and most
of the developed World between
corporations and workers workers had
their institutions that would Lobby
within the state for their interests and
private corporations had their
institutions that would Lobby within the
state for their interests what happened
after the 1980s was that the workers
basically were crushed and so the scales
began to tilt just extremely unevenly in
favor of of of of capital basically and
so what you see you know in the in the
book I use the example right of the like
the fossil fuel companies right you get
a president like Biden who is elected
and a big part of his platform is saying
I'm going to C up emissions I'm going to
really do something about climate
breakdown and even assuming that he was
even vaguely sincere about wanting to do
something about that which I know is
debatable like what ultimately ends up
happening is that he puts through a
number you know some legislation that is
designed to curb climate breakdown at
the same time as different parts of the
state continue to you know say expand
offshore drilling or provide massive
subsidies to fossil fuel companies and
you see what looks like on the surface
these really contradictory sets of
policies like the American state on the
one hand is saying we're going to help
decarbonize on the other hand it's
giving loads of money to fossil fuel
companies and you're like you know
what's going on but actually when you
understand the state not as a kind of
coherent entity that does things as an
individual but as this complex set of
different institutions all of which are
influenced by social relations by
lobbyists by you know corporations it
becomes more comprehensible because many
of these powerful institutions are able
to get their way often through the back
door so it's fantasy this idea that you
could still have the giant powerful
corporations but somehow with no
influence over State policy are they
imagining when they think of the state I
think they are imagining this idea of
like a nice institution that's very
simple that just you know everyone in
the institution does exactly as they're
told by the people at the top and it's
like no organization works that way all
organizations are complicated they rely
on these kind of like you know difficult
institutional hierarchies and you know
weird ways of getting things done anyone
who's worked in an organization knows
that the idea that the state is just
this neutral tool that you can just kind
of pick up and get to do stuff is just
absurd now let me put one more kind of
counterargument to you or something
someone might say in response to you
where they might say well yes they're a
giant entrenched corporations for
example in the United States we have the
major car companies we have Ford and GM
but look in recent years the market has
worked its magic because an upstart
competitor Tesla under Elon Musk
disrupted the industry and the car
industry was precisely the sort of
Industry that nobody would have thought
that could be done in because of those
very barriers to entry you described is
extremely extremely costly and difficult
to open a new car factory but it was
done which shows that the power of
creative destruction under capitalism is
not dead yet as you say it is Grace
Blakeley how do you reply to that
well it's an interesting question and I
think it requires us to look at the
development of the auto sector in the US
over a slightly longer period of time um
because you know the auto manufacturers
are just again these massive
corporations that are also you know they
have a significant amount of Market
power and that is something that you
know Ford was kind of one of the
original monopolies really and like I
look in the book at the example of the
Ford Motor Company how the Ford family
really tried to just like Dominate and
control their workers and succeeded in
doing that from the very Inception of
the company obviously that begins to
check that begin begins to change as you
start seeing much more competition from
abroad um and so the only way that most
of the auto manufacturers particularly
Ford actually managed to survive is
through getting most of their profits
not from selling cars but from basically
becoming little mini Banks so the Ford
Motor Credit Company became um
substantially more profitable than the
actual car manufacturing side of Ford in
the run up to the financial crisis of
course that required it take on loads of
debt of course that eventually meant
that it became kind of financially
unstable and of course that meant that
it went to the government for a bailout
through the back door so Ford survived
got a bailout it's not often included in
the companies that that are listed as
having received bailouts but it got
money through this kind of this loan
scheme provided by a different
government Department not through top
then obviously the other car
manufacturers did get tons of money
through top the entire us automobile
sector is saved through a massive
bailout from the state it's not
particularly healthy it's not
particularly competitive but it
continues to exist despite Market forces
saying that it likely shouldn't exist
then of course you do get this kind of
like upstart company that is allegedly
going to kind of revolutionize the
production of cars in the US and does to
an extent kind of begin to like compete
with those entrenched Giants but again
with support from the state like all of
these companies rely on support that has
been put in place by the T State whether
that's tax incentive R&amp;D incentives you
know all these different sorts of things
and and ultimately you know we have a
market an auto market in the US that
does look pretty irrational and has
looked pretty irrational for a while now
but basically limps on because of the
massive support that is you know
continued to be provided by the US state
now you know I'm not saying that is
necessarily you know the worst thing in
the world because there are obviously
lots of workers in those sectors if they
didn't have jobs would just kind of be
out on the streets because there's no
functioning kind of plan to transition
the US economy away from
sectors like auto manufacturing but it
is also just demonstrates the mythology
of this idea that like capitalism is a
free market system the US is like the
center of global capitalism and there
are huge suedes of that economy that are
basically entirely dependent or like
significantly dependent upon both like
Market power so corporate power over the
market and also the relationship between
corporations and the state yeah it
strikes me that one major takeaway of
your book is that simple fables about
the economy just Overlook how incredibly
complicated the world is and that you
can't you know if you start to conceive
of it in uh Lemonade Stand terms you're
not really going to understand how the
world works just to conclude here in
terms of where we can start in our
better conception of how the world works
it does strike me that one of the things
that you draw our attention to over and
over is instead of thinking I mean we
should think a lot about the questions
of planning and prices and markets and
institutions and how they work but one
thing we should really zero in on if we
want to understand what kind of economy
we live in is that question of power who
has it who doesn't and if you want a
socialist system don't look at what the
size of the state is begin with the
question who is in control of what where
are are decisions made and how are they
made so tell us a little bit more about
how we can begin with an analysis of
power to illuminate a lot of things
about the world yeah exactly and I mean
you know you said it was complicated and
it is complicated but in some ways it is
kind of simple it's like who gets to
make the rules who gets to determine who
gets what and at the moment that is
basically just corporate Executives
politicians that are in the pockets of
corporate executives unelected
technocrats you know high levels of the
state and that kind of system of like
capitalist oligarchy which is basically
what we have you know we have this
Fusion of public and private power lot
like a small number of very influential
people at the top who get to decide how
the whole system runs and the opposite
to that isn't a bigger State because
then you just get a kind of different
constellation of interests that are
basically making decisions that serve to
reinforce the status quo and continue to
give power and wealth to those at the
top or indeed you know more Market
because again you get the same sort of
thing the question is how do we create a
real democracy how do we make sure that
the decisions that are being made about
people's lives aren't being taken by
corporate Executives or technocrats or
politicians but are actually to the
extent that it's possible being taken by
them and so that really requires a
thorough democratization of the economy
it requires a thorough democratization
of society so yes it means things like
having Collective ownership of the most
resources in our society so you know
workers should own the firms that they
work in people say oh that's impossible
it wouldn't work well I highlight in the
book A lot of times throughout history
where it has worked and where workers
have actually come together and shown
that they have the expertise to be able
to govern the firms in which they work
and actually often to do so better than
the managers that came before them in
the sense of running the firm more
efficiently and more effectively so you
know that requires as I said a kind of
shift in ownership but it also requires
a real transformation and how we think
about decision making so like you know
if you take politics for example the
idea that we're just going to you know
change the way that the political system
works by voting for a different set of
politicians all of whom are basically
still in the pockets of like big
businesses of financial institutions and
who are going to go into a state that is
already substantially weighted in favor
of the interest of one class it's just
kind of crazy to think we could just
change everything just by voting so what
is really required is to think about how
we organize in our workplaces in our
communities on the streets to try and
create a a kind of counterpower from
below that is capable of resisting the
power that is exercised over people
whether that's in the state whether it's
in you know corporations wherever and to
start to build some Alternatives and the
Alternatives I think are the most
exciting part of this because I think
the big challenge that the left faces
isn't that people don't think the system
doesn't work everyone knows the system
doesn't work right like the challenge is
that people can't imagine a different
world and I think the reason they can't
imagine a different world is because
we're so focused on individualism it's
always like what can I do how can I
change the world and it's like you alone
cannot go up against all these forces
that are immensely powerful but you as
part of a collective can start to shift
things and in the book there are all
these examples that I look at of like
literally just communities who have come
together and said we're going to do
things differently and created like
massive change in their local area yeah
you go from London to India to Australia
to Chile and you look at and you explain
various experiments and how they have
worked and so I think that is one of the
the best parts of the book is part three
where you know because it's possible to
read this and think well okay so I am up
against massive institutions that I
can't possibly fight you show that that
is not in fact true and that's inspiring
and I think that people will come away
from the book Feeling a sense of
determination I hope so if they manage
to make it to the end yeah I do
encourage everyone who picks it up to
stay through part three if you feel
yourself losing hope yeah or just skip
to part three you can start with part
three if you want nothing stops you from
Reading part three before you read Parts
one and two exactly so pick up vulture
capitalism corporate crimes back door
bailouts and the death of freedom Grace
Blakeley thank you so much for returning
on current affairs thank you so much for
having me
Nathan the current affairs podcast is a
product of current affairs magazine if
you are not subscribed to current
affairs magazine visit current
affairs.org ssubscribe today and get our
glorious print edition the current
affairs podcast is released regularly
every week on patreon.com/crashcourse
