the only real test of intelligence is if
you get what you want out of
life there is a science to intelligence
but most people get it wrong because
they think intelligence is about book
smarts and Performing cognitive tasks
and while those play a major role in
success of course there is much more to
the story people who score well on IQ
tests usually land in the conventional
stages of psychological development
which we're going to go over all nine
stages at the end of this video but
little do they realize because lower
stages can't understand higher stages
you can think of a higher stage as a
point of view so from a higher point of
view you can view everything below but
if you were at the lower point of view
let's say the bottom of the mountain you
can't see the same view as the top of
the mountain so the high IQ people who
are at this lower stage we're using
lower and higher they're not bad or
Worse they're just lower and higher it's
a distinction the low lower stages are
still in the bottom 80% of quote unquote
intelligence but the thing with these
people that score high on IQ tests or
just very smart people all around is
that they are still like most of the
population where they are broke
unhealthy and angry at the world and
especially they are lonely because very
few people can match their intellectual
capabilities they can think through
complex problems but they can't solve
the bigger more holistic problem of
creating a rich life Chris Langan the
man with the highest IQ says most high
IQ people have the magnification but not
the aperture in other words and as we
will learn having a high IQ is not the
be all and all of intelligence if your
mind is a camera there is more than the
ability to zoom in so now if you want to
achieve the articulation of Jordan
Peterson or the thinking ability of Alan
Watts give yourself to the end of this
video because it will make sense how
they have achieved that articulation and
thinking the other thing is that you
have to commit to this you you aren't
just going to watch this video and see
five jumps and stages it takes years to
get through the stages of development so
you have to have some kind of practice
you need to study an hour a day you need
to build something and apply what you
learn and that isn't much to ask to
develop a trait like intelligence which
determines much of the enjoyment and
success in your life the ability to
navigate your mental health the ability
to make as much money as you want the
ability to understand reality and get
what you want out of it that's what
we're going to learn intelligence can't
be summarized in a 1 to 5 minute YouTube
video so if you aren't here to watch
something that is long and indepth
please go and get your cheap dopamine
hit somewhere else but if you stick it
out and you stay with this video it will
radically change the direction of your
life I can promise that for most of you
watching this we have a lot of good
stuff to talk about where do we start
the definition of insanity is doing the
same thing over and over and expecting a
different result we've all heard that
quote before from Einstein if he
actually said it Einstein is notorious
for having quotes assigned to him as if
he said them but either way that doesn't
take that doesn't take away from how
smart and revolutionary of an individual
he was so if Einstein said that that's
the quote we're going to talk about
because it reflects cybernetics we need
to talk about cybernetics cyber comes
from the Greek word kynos or kuber
nticos which means to steer or good at
steering in other words cybernetics
illustrates the properties of an
intelligent system it measures the
intelligence of a system so to start out
we can consider intelligence from one
perspective from the cybernetics
perspective as your ability to steer or
correct your steering toward a goal and
cybernetics is also known as The Art of
Getting what you want so if the first
quote that we talked about at the very
beginning of this video from nval that
intelligence is your ability to get what
you want out of life if you understand
that then you understand that
cybernetics is the science or the way
that you can study in order to do that
so here is this graphic of a boat
steering right and steering left to get
to the lighthouse cybernetics is pretty
much to have a goal to act toward that
goal to sense where you are to compare
to the the goal and act again based on
that feedback so it is listening to the
feedback mechanism of making mistakes or
just getting blown off course Say by
life so if cybernetics illustrates the
properties of intelligent systems and
your mind is a system that houses many
complex systems your mind is the meta
system from which you operate and act
within life it's the operating system
for life then by having a goal acting
toward it noticing okay I'm over here
and this is where the goal is what can I
do to start to get toward the goal
rather than continue going in the wrong
direction like most people are in life
and they just don't have the awareness
like oh I need to get towards the goal
they don't pay attention to that they
set the goal and then they head off in
One Direction and then they either quit
or they end up in this trap that they
can't get out of that is unintelligent
you can judge intelligence based on the
system's ability to iterate and persist
with trial and error a ship blown off
course that corrects towards its
destination a thermostat sens a change
in heat and turning on the pancreas
excreting insulin after blood glucose
spikes cybernetics is a frame it's a
worldview it's a perspective that you
can adopt to understand quite a bit of
the world so what does this have to do
with getting what you want out of life
everything acting sensing comparing and
understanding the system from a meta
perspective is fundamental to high
intelligence High Intelligence is the
ability to iterate persist and
understand the big picture the mark of
low low intelligence is the inability to
learn from your mistakes low
intelligence people get stuck on
problems rather than solving them they
hit a roadblock and quit like a writer
who fails to build a readership and
quits because they lack the ability to
try new things experiment and figure out
a process that works for them to think
that there isn't an effective process
you can create is verifiably false no
matter you're limiting beliefs hence
being low intelligence in other words
there is a path to achieving your goals
you just aren't aware of it you haven't
done the thing you haven't taken the
step that reveals the next step and then
the next step and then the next step and
when you take the wrong step you don't
have the awareness that you did take the
wrong steps so you can course correct
and if you can't achieve a goal or you
just realize that the goal or vision for
your life was wrong in the first place
then you iterate and you pivot rather
than quitting if you start a business
and realize that you didn't want to be
in that business in the first place then
change it so if you want to become more
intelligent start with the goal you're
pursuing doing goals are what determine
the system in other words the
destination is what determines the
journey the goal and destination are
vastly more important than the system or
Journey because they create it sure you
can argue that the end of a Melody isn't
its goal as n would say but the goal of
the artist was to create the melody
anything you do from watching this video
to moving your eye a fraction of a
centimeter to taking one step forward to
scratching your nose to building a
billion- dooll business is the act of
pursuing a goal creating the melody or
Journey or process in its path the
destination is a point of view that
allows you to appreciate the journey in
other words do you ever notice that
people say it's all about the process or
the process is the only thing that
matters after they've achieved the goal
after they have the perspective you
aren't you usually aren't sitting in the
suffering that the process is that life
is thinking oh this is great you can
have gratitude for it but if you don't
achieve the goal you're just stuck in
this Perpetual Loop of suffering and
that's just the thing you rarely enjoy
the process until you reach the goal and
that's okay that's how it's supposed to
be that's that's reality pushing you
toward achieving the goal you're not
supposed to enjoy everything you need a
bit of suffering to appreciate the
periods of Peace if you were happy all
the time it would become normal to you
happiness would stop making sense all
true happiness stems from a perspective
of previous sadness in other words the
journey and the destination are
inseparable now I talk about goals a lot
in the importance of goals like I am in
this video and I have in some of my best
performing videos about my daily routine
but I'm not talking about goals from
your typical self-help lens of oh you
need to set a goal for the sake of
productivity and this and that I'm
talking about it from a
teologicos in reality and a purpose is a
goal what what I'm trying to say is that
everything is a part of a greater whole
and if you lose that connection you lose
a lot of meaning in your life
spirituality is connection to something
greater than yourself so if you don't
have a goal or a purpose that is
Meaningful and chosen by you in
alignment with reality and you making
mistakes and correcting those mistakes
because reality will not tolerate those
mistakes you will feel the pain so
correcting from your pain is what allows
you to live in alignment and with
meaning so goals in this sense that
people think are very practical are not
anti-spiritual they are spirituality you
can think of goals from the self-help
lens as finite games which is get this
much money go to school get a job do
this purpose or goals from theological
lens is that you are a part of a greater
hole and that hole is a part in and of
itself that is a part of a greater ho
that's the structure of reality and so
by connecting to that to maintaining
this relationship with reality you begin
to play the infinite game and that is
the house of all of the finite games
that you are playing that allows you to
bring meaning to those things that you
thought were superficial and shallow
before like making a lot of money or
doing whatever your desires are man is
by nature a goal striving being and
because man is built that way he is not
happy unless he is functioning as he was
made to function as a goal striver thus
true success and true happiness not only
go together but each and enhances the
other that's a quote from Maxwell maltz
he's the author of psycho cybernetics
which is in line with what we're talking
about cybernetics but he wrote it in a
more self-help lens for the mind for the
psyche goals are so much more important
than we think in a world where people
can't stop regurgitating programming
from their new school systems over goals
goals determine how you see the world
goals determine what you consider
success or failure you can try to enjoy
the journey but if you pursue the wrong
goal you are making it 100 times more
difficult to enjoy the journey your mind
is the operating system for reality that
system is composed of goals for most
people those goals are assigned to them
programmed like lines of code in their
psyche go to school get the job get
offended play victim retire at 65 a
known path that doesn't work so to
become more intelligent you must reject
the known path dive into the unknown set
new Higher Goals to expand your mind
embrace the chaos and allow for growth
study the generalized principles of
nature and become a deep generalist we
will learn how to do all of the above as
we continue in this
video now we need to talk about how your
mind interprets reality how your goals
frame how you perceive situations
because that determines most of the
decisions that you make most of the
choices that you make and if you are the
culmination of your past choices then
your choices today that you're going to
learn how to make better choices are
going to create your future future so we
will start with a quote from mihi chiet
mihi the optimal state of inner
experience is one in which there is
order in Consciousness this happens when
psychic energy or attention is invested
in realistic goals and when skills match
the opportunities for Action the pursuit
of a goal brings order and awareness
because a person must concentrate
attention on the task at hand and
momentarily forget everything else that
is from the book flow now the mind has
two key purposes for survival that align
with cyber gentics that we talked about
earlier the first is achieving known
goals and the second is discovering
unknown goals this is what your mind
wants to do the mind is an information
processing and pattern recognition
machine that we have a certain amount of
control over based on our level of
development the mind is a system
containing a complex set of systems that
accepts Rejects and uses information to
Aid in the goals you feed it so if
you're always focused on negative
outcomes they will become reality and
you'll blame everyone but yourself for
The Misfortune in your life life the man
who conceives himself to be a failure
type person will find some way to fail
in spite of all his good intentions even
if the opportunity is dumped in his lap
the person who conceives himself to be a
victim of Injustice one who was meant to
suffer will invariably find
circumstances to verify his opinions so
in other words cybernetics if your goal
is to fail or your subconscious or
unconscious goal not even something that
you're really paying attention to or set
yourself one that was conditioned into
you by parents or a society that wanted
you to fail if you have the goal of
failure you're going to fail if you have
the meta goal of success that houses the
other goals that you're holding you're
going to notice the opportunities for
Success you can have the goal of
starting a business but if in the back
of your mind the thing encapsulating
that goal is a negative intention to
fail you will fail at the root of your
mind like a puppet master is your
identity or ego your ego is a system of
ideas beliefs values and standards that
shape your perspective and contrary to
popular belief the ego is not the enemy
it's the story teller The Interpreter
your job isn't to get rid of it your job
is to develop it to expand it to remove
the condition limits keeping you in a
narrow-minded perspective that makes
life reactive and negative we're going
to talk about this in the next section
when we talk about the stages of ego
development your perspective is like the
lens of a camera you can zoom in and out
you can focus on one part of the scene
while the background is blurred or focus
on the detail of the entirety of the
scene your perspective influences your
perception of situations meaning your
identity will limit the information it
can perceive and if it receives
information that does not match its
beliefs values or standards it will
reject it your mind automatically
accepts or rejects information to
achieve the goals that are programmed
into your head if you want to get a job
dopamine will signal the importance of
information and opportunities that help
you get that job your book highight
lights will reflect that goal how you
approach conversations with anyone will
reflect that goal and the algorithm will
help deepen the roots of that identity
by showing you more of that information
for better or worse so if you're trying
to go to school get a job retire at 65
then the conversations you have are
going to you're going to interpret them
from the lens of that goal they may not
directly be about those things that
you're conversing about but you're going
to pick up information for them you're
going to be talking with this person
let's say your parents friend and you're
going to be thinking the whole time hm
what are they doing for work do I want
to end up like that what did they do for
schooling what major did they go through
how much do they make do they seem like
they enjoy their life and it's going to
shape your actions in the pursuit of
that goal but you're probably not going
to leave that goal unless they challenge
those beliefs of yours now if you want
to quit your job dopamine will do the
same thing like Hunters that notice new
berries on a bush dopamine signals
information that is important for the
survival of your top- of- mind goal so
you are more likely to remember and
utilize that information humans both
attempt to survive and reproduce the
information in their DNA like animals
and the information in their
Consciousness their identity their
psychic body their mental body and if
your goals and perspective are what
frame that it's the shape of your body
when that thing is threatened or if
you're just trying to achieve a goal
you're going to your emotions and your
suffering are going to reflect that when
you feel pain it's usually because you
are out of alignment with a goal or it
threatens the goal and when you notice
something exciting or good that's
something you need to double down on and
go to to actually achieve that goal to
solidify your identity so that it
doesn't fall apart so if we take that
into account and your goal is to quit
your job then something like your Google
searches are going to change from best
careers to go into in 2024 to best
business models to start in 2024 and
you're going to start to go down the
rabbit hole and you're going to start to
follow new people on social media if you
actually want to achieve the goal again
if you are bound to fail or you want to
fail you're not going to do these things
or you're going to interpret them from a
skeptical lens and program your mind in
the opposite direction to stay
comfortable and if you have the goal to
quit your job maybe you feel more
compelled to check out digital economics
with the link in the description where I
help you deconstruct your identity and
turn yourself into the business let's
recap that section very quick because
your mind is a cybernetic system Society
is a behavior system and there are three
big goals gos that they injected into
your mind right when you learn to
comprehend the language you speak one
school 2 job 3 retire 99% of people are
only interpreting everyday situations in
a way that leads to those goals they
study what they're told to study for the
sake of status and survival thus closing
their mind off to things that really
matter in life they become a specialist
slave who's dependent on those who need
that specific knowledge they don't have
the Deep generalized skill set that
allows them to pursue their own path a
writer who only learns writing doesn't
have a chance at making an independent
income 99% of people are practicing the
skills focusing their attention and
programming their minds to live a
mediocre life without even knowing it
because they failed to question and
Revolt this is a realization that people
make way too late Success is Not planned
it is automatic successful people
whether they were conscious of it or not
had a mind that was programmed to
achieve the goals that led to their
success they saw life through the
perspective of their goals and that
allowed them to store the right
information in their subconscious
influencing their choices that compound
into achieving that goal your identity
perspective and perception of situations
are all systems that feed into and
reinforce each other in that order with
that said 80% of living the life you
want boils down to creating your own
goals While most people are Mindless
slaves to society's goals the last thing
here and a very important thing is that
you can't become aware of a problem
unless you have the goal and if you
don't invest energy into the goal you
won't feel the pain or identify the
problem of not reaching that goal as an
example I will occasionally go out and
have a few drinks at dinner and in my
past I would drink a lot more in college
days and that was until I realized how
much it took away from my goal at the
time of cutting weight for the summer
and I was also writing my book at the
time so I never saw the drinking as a a
problem because I never had anything to
dedicate my time and attention to in the
morning so when I realized hey I'm
waking up I'm a bit more foggy I only
had two drinks three drinks last night
and I'm just foggy ideas aren't coming
to mind writing this book I'm literally
sitting here for an hour staring at a
screen when I'm supposed to be getting 5
to 10 pages for my book done and that's
not happening and that feels terrible
because I'm not making progress then
second to that when I'm supposed to run
first thing in the morning and I try to
power through I to have the discipline
and I go out go outside start running
and it's just so much harder it's so
much harder to achieve the goal and lose
the weight and not to mention how
alcohol interacts with your body so it's
different situations as well where
that's not a goal of mine I don't have
those things to pay too much attention
to in the morning I'm not a fan of a
static and permanent lifestyle or
routine I like the change I like being
able to learn I like being able to
identify and loot back to problems from
a higher level of development so now at
this point in my life maybe for the next
few months I like going out and having a
few drinks on the weekend with my
friends but the point is that problems
aren't problems unless you have a
corresponding goal if you don't have any
worthwhile goal you aren't able to see
the plethora of problems that once
solved lead to a better life so if you
don't have these goals that you're
investing energy in and feeling the pain
of not making progress towards them you
can't see the problems that are in your
life right now now if you were to
condition yourself with new stimuli
constant self-education to the point of
having an identity that couldn't survive
without achieving new goals you would
inevitably achieve whatever they are
with ease if you want a successful
business relationship or anything that
is out of the norm you must
fundamentally change the goals your mind
operates on by changing who you are to
change who you are you must educate
practice and experience new information
to reprogram your mind's faulty wiring
that was installed by Society
now finally we're going to talk about
the stages of psychological development
or ego development so we can understand
what it takes to reach the top 1% of
intelligence and we can understand what
stages people like Jordan Peterson or
Alan Watts or your average everyday
individual falls into so here is a
graphic that I got from slow.com all of
the graphics I think all of the graphics
from here on out are from slow SL o
ww.co but this is what we're going to be
going over so you can screenshot this or
just keep these things in mind this is
what we're going through but first I
want to share another quote that
Einstein supposedly said you can't solve
a problem from the same level of
Consciousness that created it so if you
remember everything that we just talked
about in terms of cybernetics and goals
and how those frame situations how your
goal determines the process or the
journey how your goals if they are a
part of who you are or a part of of who
you are becoming are what determine your
success what you need to understand now
is that there is another layer to this
you have the goals of your level of
development of your level of
psychological development those are what
are important to you so you have to
understand that these goals evolve once
you achieve one or as you're achie as
you are pursuing one that goal May
evolve in perspective so you're viewing
it from a different lens so by
increasing your level of development
over the years by doing what we're going
to talk about you slowly refine what
your version of success is and are more
able to achieve it because you have the
skill and knowledge and development to
match if you want to become more
intelligent you need to expand your mind
to see the bigger picture to tell a more
holistic story to view situations from
all perspectives to not decapitate your
thinking by conforming to one
perspective one religion one business
model one area of study that is
verifiably nontruth because of its
one-dimensionality when you have a
higher goal you can think more
intelligently toward that goal but you
can't expand to a higher level of Mind
in an instant in fact it takes an entire
lifetime to reach the highest stages who
knows how much further human development
will go when technology allows us to
live until we're 500 don't die we are
going to dissect ego development theory
in relation to intelligence and what
we're talking about so uh I'm going to
link a PDF to Suzanne cook gr's 90 plus
page uh dissertation on ego development
theory it's very insightful it's
definitely worth reading save it read it
later but understand that there are some
nuances and things that we're leaving
out because cybernetics we are writing
towards a specific goal and how we get
there is going to be determined by the
goal so there is going to be some
information from her paper whose goal is
to Accurate accurately explain every
aspect of ego development theory there's
going to be some things left out so just
keep that in mind here but along with
this I would also recommend that you
study spiral Dynamics and Ken Wilbur's
aqal model and when you connect the dots
between all three it's pretty incredible
uh how your mind starts to think in ego
development theory there are three
directions of movement or growth or
development there's horizontal which is
lateral expansion at the same stage so
you're developing new skills in adding
information and knowledge there's
vertical up which is transformation so
growth to a new stage or perspective and
then there's vertical down so temporary
or permanent regression due to life
circumstances environment stress and
disease we can think of it like this we
can think of horizontal development as
filling one's cup with skill knowledge
Etc and then we can think of vertical
development the thing that we're aiming
for a new level of Mind as expanding the
cup the capacity of the cup the water's
still in there but you need to fill more
you need to be you need to do more
horizontal development as your vertical
development goes up that's increasing
and expanding your complexity of self
that's becoming a more unique individual
another fun fact here is that stress
alone can cause you to regress into the
past version of yourself or into a lower
stage of development so when you feel
very spiritual and open at times when
you are in a very stressful life
situation you can regress back down to a
more dogmatic and singular perspective
point of view very reactive and negative
and argumentative the point is that the
higher you develop yourself the lower
you regress under a stress situation so
if you develop yourself very high over
the years then when you do get stressed
you're still regressing to a rather
well-rounded stage so here is a graphic
again from slow SL ww of horizontal
development and vertical development and
this reflects the spiral Dynamic stages
colors so in spiral Dynamics it's very
similar stages but they're represented
in colors like red Amber orange green
teal now with spiral Dynamics think of a
spiral right rather than circles what
the spiral represents in development
this is how you develop is like a spiral
is that you sometimes loop back around
to the same problems or the same it's
kind of like deja vu or the same
patterns in that cycle of development so
you can think that it's like hm it feels
like I'm not making much progress but
you're an entire stage above where you
were reaching new stages of development
requires an evolution of your
perspective you need time understanding
and horizontal development in that stage
so new skills challenges and goals you
need awareness of and open-mindedness to
explore a perspective different from
your own you need a fundamental change
in who you are through education and
conscious conditioning a commitment to
deeper understanding and seeking truth
and last you need cybernetic trial and
error to have a goal that resides in a
new stage of development and solve
problems in the way of that goal and
self-correct when you realize you didn't
solve the right problem now pain is
sometimes a necessary requirement for
reaching a new stage of development and
even if it's not a prerequisite to it
it's usually the byproduct of
transformation you will feel the pain or
suffering that comes along with that
it's like how I talk about with tactical
stress where you either launch yourself
into a very stressful situation and
force yourself to evolve I do this by
moving or I did this by moving to a
place that I couldn't afford forcing me
to do better in my business and grow and
expand through those negative emotions I
was experiencing but that's not for the
faint-hearted many people can't handle
that with that understanding the stages
of development helps you see what lies
ahead it helps you Orient your
development towards them and it can
change your life so first we need to go
over the preconventional stages which is
about 5% of the population and usually
takes place in early childhood and
because of that most of you aren't in
these stages so we're going to keep this
very brief the preconventional stages
symbiotic impulsive and opportunist are
characterized by egocentrism in other
words they can't adopt another person's
perspective they haven't been socialized
or they have towards the end of the
phases so you can think of a kid who is
born and is uh dependent on his parents
and his parents are just giving machines
they're just survival machines it's like
me me me just give me what I need to
survive and then you go to something
like kindergarten and you start to
realize oh I'm not the only person on
this Earth I'm not the center of the
universe and then by the age of 10
you're usually out of these stages so
we'll move on to the conventional stages
so there's preconventional conventional
and postconventional we're into the
conventional now which is 75 to 80% of
the population and this is where most
high IQ people test we can think of the
conventional stages as monkeys copying
other monkeys in the attempt for status
and becoming the top of the food chain
usually this is from my own observation
when you talk to someone who is in a
conventional stage of development you're
usually talking to a TV or a YouTube
channel or a social media feed you
aren't talking to the actual person
you're talking to their regurgitated
condition beliefs from their environment
so stage three the first stage of the
conventional stages is the conformist
stage in the conformist stage their
identity is defined by their
relationship to a group as some examples
you can think of high school students
who are focused on popularity corporate
employees that stick to the rules like
attending all mandatory meetings or
something like military or religious
adherence in other words conformists
obey the authority and conform to the
group and you can easily observe this in
Bible Thumpers which is pretty much
people who just the ideology of whatever
religion that they subscribe to is Law
and that's all that comes out of their
mouth they don't have a logical argument
or any ual argument against the religion
or for the religion they're just that's
their mind and another helpful model
here is Ken Wilbur's
pre-transaction rational and
post-rational and in the sense of
religious beliefs that can be
characterized as bible thumper to
atheist to Mystic which is really
interesting and it shows a lot of
people's Evolutions it's like Jordan
Peterson who was raised in a heavily
Christian household and then he kind of
left and became agnostic and now
obviously now he's looping back around
to God he's writing a book we wrestle
with we who wrestle with God and he
approaches things from a more symbolic
or metaphorical point of view now we all
have our own thoughts about Peterson but
this is true for myself where I was
raised in a Mormon household and then I
turned into an atheist after challenging
those beliefs and I've looped back
around to a deeper understanding of the
nature of reality and while most most of
the time I don't call the Ultimate
Reality God I do understand that it is
there and I I don't really like calling
it God because that for me that's too
reminiscent of the bible thumper or the
pre- rational stage and people begin to
mistake my beliefs for that when I don't
want that to be the case at all it's
misinterpretation but if God were the
term that's the term I would use now the
next stage after the conforming stage is
the expert stage the expert stage is
characterized by self-authorship
personal growth tackling complex
problems self-reflection and complex
problem solving professionals live in
the stage engineering types skill
Centric scientific materialists who
think everything can be explained
through modern science or reductionism
they are good at doing tasks but bad at
knowing if they are doing the right task
they can't see if what they're doing is
important for mankind the experts are
the know-it-alls they think they know
everything and that everything should be
done their ways they're still in a
singular perspective and they think that
that perspective is absolute truth now
the next stage or stage four and these
stage numbers are a bit off they go
stage three stage 3/4 and now stage four
is the achiever stage most of Western
education and schooling are geared
toward creating Achievers this is the
Pinnacle stage of where people can end
up in their mind this is the definition
of Western success it's making a lot of
money having a beautiful partner or
spouse having a nice car having a nice
house it's the American dream embodying
as a a perspective and then in this
stage there is a shift from employee
mindset to entrepreneur mindset a shift
from I have this individual skill to how
can I use this individual skill to
utilize it in society so in our space
this is the dominant Paradigm of social
media it's a lot of business videos it's
a lot of self-help you can think of
Hamza or horoi as people in this stage
it's the self-improvement or business or
masculinity or relationship accounts the
health wealth relationships happiness
accounts that are examples of achievers
that have the occasional glimpse into
postconventional stages now a lot of
them could be intelligently putting on
an act to attract people in this stage
this is kind of often what I do with my
YouTube titles sometimes my YouTube
titles are very superficial and shallow
and focused on making a lot of money or
getting a specific desire end result but
inside the video itself I try to raise
people to the next stages of development
and sometimes you see this in Hamza who
talks about the way of the superior man
which is a very spiritual book but it's
often times interpreted In This Very
like red pill masculinity frame so those
are the conventional stages and now we
need to go over the postconventional
stages which is the top 15 to 20% of the
population and I say top but you have to
understand that these are just stages of
development vment that people go through
just because you're born into a
preconventional stage doesn't make that
stage any worse it's just how you
develop they're higher and lower and if
that doesn't tickle your Peach then
don't consider it higher lower just see
them however you want but that's how it
is each stage has different goals and
worldviews meaning their idea of success
evolves so the system their mind runs on
evolves with it if we would consider an
efficient system to be ordered we can
understand why chaos disc comfort and
pain are a part of development it's
because you are ordering your mind and
then you realize something new and you
have to change your perspective or
embody more and you're exposed to chaos
you're exposed to the unknown you're
taking steps into the unknown and you
need to create order out of that
intelligence is questioning your beliefs
realizing deep generalized patterns and
realizing that all is relative except
for those deep generalized patterns that
can be universally applied the
postconventional stages are where we
start to encounter system thinking that
holes are greater than the sum of their
parts that reality is more like an
organism than a machine that can be
dissected and studied the big step
between tier one conventional and tier 2
postconventional Thinking is just that
it's
multi-perspectival it's not just about
your business model self-help ideology
or religion you begin to notice the
properties that compose them all like
how Christianity and Buddhism point to
the same identity of reality God even
though they would disagree on that
because lower stages don't understand
higher stages but higher stages
understand lower of course
non-ideological Buddhists are a
different story but most hippies blindly
adopt those beliefs without
understanding so in these stages you
begin to collect more perspectives and
the higher you are on a mountain the
more you can see the multiple paths you
can take to get there so you have the
desire to help more people because of
that so the next stage stage 4/5 is the
pluralist stage this is where a fourth
person perspective is discovered
pluralist begin to to step outside of
the system they grew up pluralists begin
to step outside of the system they grew
up in the status quo and question their
beliefs and values the most prevalent
example would be a hippie who has a
vision of everyone becoming a hippie but
they can't yet see the development
others have gone through so that Vision
Falls flat you can think of this as the
evolution from bible thumper to atheist
to a hippie who first discover
spirituality but they still haven't loot
back or integrated the truth from the
bible thumper all of this all Evolution
especially the stages of development are
transcend and include you transcend the
last stage and you integrate its
principles or its truths so to think
that you are just transcending survival
mode and you will never experience that
or have to utilize that again is false
or to think that most of your childhood
impacts what you do and what you think
right now is false you have to integrate
it and leverage it now the next stage
stage five is the strategist I
personally resonate a lot with this
stage I believe you never actually know
I don't know I'm kind of just like
guessing here because I resonate with
this stage is that uh the past few years
of my life were spent in this strategist
stage strategists realize that intuition
is more powerful than logic and
rationality found in conventional stages
to think that something has been
formally proven is silly and close to
Impossible in other words you're kind of
realizing that the reductionist
worldview just doesn't work again your
systems thinking you understand that the
whole has emergent properties that can't
be found in the parts so when you take
let's say a uh Pig like one of the ones
you dissect in Biology class they give
you this dead pig and they're like oh go
dissect it look at it study the organs
all of that cool stuff maybe look at
things with a microscope but you're not
taking into the you're not taking into
account the ecological or the Zoological
effect of that thing and how everything
in the universe has to be taken into
account in order to in order to come to
the highest truth about whatever it is
that you are studying with that specific
little pig and you are also
understanding that there is the Observer
as a part of that hypothesis or equation
as well that my mind at a specific stage
of development with specific goals is
going to interpret the findings
different from the next person that is
extremely important now in the
strategist stage exploration and
Discovery start to become more important
than achiev achieving a goal or making a
lot of money which can often lead to
achieving more goals and making more
money counterintuitively the strategist
has a vision of what the world needs to
move forward in the evolutionary process
and understands the generalized
principles of reality if I could give
you one thing to read to understand the
generalized principles of reality it
would be the cabalion but of course most
biblical texts or scripture help
understand these as well they're just
interpreted in a different way and to be
quite honest helpful for the stories and
understanding of history or uh perceived
history but you they also speak a
different language that you may not
understand so you may reach a higher
level of understanding just by
researching that topic from more modern
texts but that does strip a bit of the
magic and soul from it if it's approach
from that scientific lens so read both
actually
one one book I would recommend the
systems view of life um kind of dense
kind of scientific there isn't much of a
story it's kind of just like information
but if you're just looking for
information then it's worth reading the
strategist is a value Creator their main
concern is self-development other
development self-actualization
integration and owning their Shadow
truth can be approximated but higher is
better a higher perspective is more
truthful than not now the next stage
stage 5/6 is the construct aware stage
and in my eyes Jordan Peters falls
mostly between the construct aware and
the strategist stage but in terms of
religion and his doubling down on
Christianity and what seems to be a
regression he may not be there anymore
or he may just have this conventional
stage Shadow Of course that is unless he
is using that as an act to introduce and
help more people develop in other words
he is helping the people or attracting
the people in that conventional stage
with the Christian worldview to see it
from a more metaphorical or higher lens
but one interesting thing is that if we
have to go through these stages of
development I'm curious to see how he'll
do that without first turning them
atheist or agnostic like the development
that he went through or if there's just
a different pattern that people can go
through is very interesting to me like I
wonder if they can turn away from
Hardcore Christianity into not so
hardcore Christianity and then loop back
to a more holistic
view of it I don't know if the Mind were
a computer construct aware people would
understand that conventional stages play
one app or video game on that computer
they're on one site or browser
postconventional stages can start to
navigate the full desktop they can play
the most meaningful games and even
create their own so the construct aware
you start to gain this programmer
mindset you understand the inner
workings of the computer itself if
reality is the display of the computer
and people people in the conventional
stage or one perspective are simply
operating within one browser tab or one
app that they refuse to leave the
construct aware tap into a fifth
dimension of thinking the cognitive
Dimension they can see how the mind
constructs reality and meaning they can
see that most people find solace in a
perspective but they can't zoom out
Beyond those perspectiv themselves to a
now larger ho they can't adopt a meta
perspective that houses other
perspectives this is where the
generalized principles of reality really
start to click and connect unity and
division creation and destruction
entropy and wealth they begin to think
about the world from a new abstract
layer that can bring them pain as they
are constantly battling with the
question of so what what does this
supposed mental masturbation do to help
me in other words they often get so lost
in abstractions or that meta perspective
that they can't ground it in reality or
connect it to their decision-making
right now I've experienced that quite a
bit and I'm sure many of you have too
with just intellect sexualizing all day
and not being able to really understand
what the point of that is or philosophy
so maybe this is the stage where well
there's probably a bunch of different
stages but this is one of the stages
where it's like like oh but that's
that's just philosophy it doesn't mean
anything now the Transcendent stages the
top 1% of psychological development and
intelligence because of that because
intelligence can only expand to the
level of your mind the stage in this
Transcendent stage is called the unitive
stage now this is as far as we're going
in this video but um and I think it's
the furthest studied But Ken Wilbur has
like further stages that he is dabbled
into or hypothesized about so we'll see
if those come about as the general
stages of the population increase like
they have over time most people are in
the conformist stage now but what about
in the tribal times when people couldn't
speak and everyone thought the world was
about them they were all in this lower
stage of development and as we move
through Evolution more people are
reaching higher stages this is where I
would put Alan Watts or Terren McKenna
this is actually kind of fun I think
it'd be fun to have the nine stages of
ego development and do like a tier list
of philosophers and where I think they
land that would be pretty cool the thing
with those thinkers Alan Watts Terrence
McKenna is that they tap into Source
it's just infinite intelligence you can
just tell that by the ways that they
speak you're like that is true so a
description of the unitive stage from
Suzanne cook grer the person who uh
wrote her dissertation on ego
development theory reality is now
regular ly experienced as the
undifferentiated phenomenological
Continuum or the creative ground of
unified Consciousness every object word
thought feeling and sensation every
theory is understood as a human
construct separating out creating
boundaries where there are none the
Quest for meaning and connection is an
essential aspect of the Human Condition
giving names to experience and making
distinctions is necessary for human
growth study interaction and
communication but at the source there is
nothing to distinguish so in order to
reach the top 1% or get to this unitive
stage of development you have to go
through the rest and that's going to
take a lot of years it's going to take a
lot of years in development and I'm not
there yet Mo it's 1% of the population
most people aren't there yet and with
that you're going to have to go through
a lot of pain you're going to have to
have your mind set and with the
intention to move through the stages and
continue looking toward the next stage
rather than getting trapped in one
specifically but it does help to
understand the traits of Any Given stage
so that you can notice and work towards
that thing so some traits of this uni of
stage the truth is imminent in the
universe but can't be grasped by Logic
or rationality they adopt a universal or
Cosmic perspective as the organizing
principle and a steady place from which
to derive meaning most definitions of
Enlightenment are achieved they
metabolize experience in a completely
new radically open way they understand
the need for a personal ego to survive
while also recognizing the illusion of
the desire for permanence the ego is
useful as a perspective or lens when
needed that is extremely important where
a lot of people hippies mainly in the
like beginning of the postconventional
stages is that they reach that stage and
they're like oh I figured it out I'm
just going to go off at live in the
woods become a monk not talk to anyone
cut off my connection from the world I'm
going to absolve myself of purpose when
the people at the unitive stage remember
you transcend and include they've
integrated
all of the truths and principles from
the past stages so they know that they
can adopt the ego as a lens to act and
help and contribute to Mankind in the
world next dualities and conflict are
witnessed without tension or the desire
to change them they live in a creative
ground and lean into an ongoing Humanity
fulfilling their Destiny of evolution
life is seen as a form of temporary and
sometimes voluntary separation
bodhisatwa from the creative ground they
are grounded in so they can come down
from this higher perspective to adopt
that lens of an ego to act within the
world and that's kind of the middle way
the path of the bodhisatwa it's like
Alan Watts he's talked about that
multiple times and last they aren't
passive like conventional hippies assume
Instead The non-personal Stance allows
for more conscious powerful and direct
action when it is needed so to recap
intelligence isn't about book smarts or
magnification it's about expanding your
mind towards truth it's about holistic
pattern recognition and a your ability
to zoom out so far that all boundaries
and limits are dissolved through
conscious development and having the
awareness of when you're closing
yourself off to growth and getting
trapped in any stage you can reach the
unit of stage in fact my book The Art of
focus which I haven't talked about in a
good amount of time does exactly this it
kind of covers my steps to reaching uh
to moving through most stages at least
from what I've learned so thank you for
watching that's it if you want to learn
a high income skill to our writer that
allows for more me meaning in your life
as well if you want just everything
given to you for how to create your
life's work check out digital economics
other links in the description check
them out thank you for watching bye
