today is one more of those uh last five
episodes of the uh it's not what they
told you uh series it's not just one
more episode it's uh it's with someone I
hold very very dear uh someone that I
consider a teacher in very interesting
ways she didn't know that uh she only
knew that when I met her right now
because I do spend a lot of time
following her work and uh and I think
she's fabulous honestly in her out
outlook on life and the way she analyzes
topics uh and then I met her in person
and I was right so uh that's uh that's
um you know it's actually quite
rewarding when you you know they say
don't meet your Heroes no no I'm happy
with this one uh my my guest today is uh
Grace Bley who is an avid Economist
journalist uh uh an author uh she wrote
three books uh on uh the uh topics of uh
capitalism and how capitalism is
affecting the world her latest is
vulture capitalist which I have to say
having lived in California for a while
is such an you know an appropriate title
for the entire genre of venture
capitalist if you want and um and I
think uh uh you know in my attempt to
get you to understand our world a little
differently than what they tell us our
world is like uh I think Grace truly was
the one guest that I wanted to uh to
sort of conclude our conversations
around the economy with uh so without
further Ado I'm going to uh enjoy my
time with my guest today thank you for
being here thank you so much for that
absolutely lovely introduction Mo it
means a huge amount especially coming
from you it's uh quite true so uh I no
pressure okay yeah I'm hoping I won't
disappoint you now let's see I don't
think you will I I love the way the the
take you you take on the topics that you
you analyze and I and I I said several
times on this podcast I am a
recovering uh capitalist uh you know in
rehab basically uh because for many many
many years I believed the promise I
drank the Kool-Aid uh you know I had
many startups I basically embraced the
promise of
Freedom that you know if you if you
think to the to the to the history of
capitalism and the idea that pre
capitalism there was only royalty and
feudalism and you know there were
peasants and Lords and you know everyone
had to pay to work for the peas for the
Lords and and the Lords worked for the
royalty uh and and capitalism sort of
sneaked in
you know with the British Empire and the
trades of spices and so on where some of
the peasants somehow found ways to make
money and and you know and you sort of
take that story as like this is true
Freedom everyone now is
free uh I've then realized actually
partially through your work that that's
not true at all that we're the furthest
thing as as the subtitle of your latest
uh book says you know this is the death
of Freedom that the promise is not at
all what was delivered so that's all I
will say today the rest of the episode
is for you great I'll try and take up as
much time as I can no I mean it's so
interesting hearing you say that because
in a lot of ways I kind of wrote the
book for someone like you who was uh in
one way or another taken in by the very
seductive narrative that we have around
capitalism and freedom and it's a
seductive narrative in number of ways um
I think for those who succeed under
capitalism it's very seductive because
the idea that we're all free and that
the market sorts us into the best down
to the worst and wherever you end up in
the hierarchy it's a reflection of your
natural talents your natural
capabilities it's seductive obviously
for those at the top because it kind of
legitimizes your power and authority and
wealth um and even for those not at the
top the idea the the way things are is
somehow rational and
Justified and fair yeah it makes you
almost less angry it kind of makes you
just take things the way they are and
just accept them because you think oh
well you know I'm not Jeff Bezos or Elon
Musk I'm not as intelligent as those
people so no wonder you know I'm earning
a tiny amount of money and can barely
afford to pay my rent because I'm just
worth somehow less as a person um so
this narrative that we are all free
we're free to shape the conditions of
our own existence we're free to work as
hard as we like and if we do work as
hard as we like and succeed and apply
ourselves then we will inevitably rise
to the top it's seductive for a lot of
people the only issue is that it's
completely and utterly not true um and
the way I like to talk about this you
know we we're told this I this kind of
story about the way that Society works
is it almost being like a game so you
know you're competing against other
people to win in the game and the
rewards are money and wealth and power
and esteem and those who are better at
the game get to the top and those who
are worse you know fall to the bottom
but the issue is that we're all playing
this game most of us and then there's a
very small category of people who are
kind of outside of the game and instead
of playing the game they're making the
rules they're the make the game else
exactly yeah um and these are the people
who basically plan capitalist economies
the institutions and individuals who
have so much power over the way that the
world works that they're able to
basically shape the conditions of life
for so many people and that power is
generally unearned it um you know comes
from whether that's a position of
inherited wealth often it comes from
corruption and influence of that kind
that people are able to exert um and it
allows a small number of people to to
undermine that idea of
freedom um and to enclose the world and
shape the world in the way that they
would like to to see it and then we're
all forced to play the kind of the game
that they've set for us um I use quite a
lot of examples to illustrate this point
um that you know this idea that we live
in a free market capitalist economy
doesn't really work in practice because
of all this kind of centralized planning
that takes place Within These free
market economies and the one I'd just
like to quickly talk about because it's
very relevant at the moment is the
example of the company Boeing oh yes um
yeah so you might have seen Boeing uh in
the news quite a lot recently one of the
doors blew out of its planes mid-flight
there's been all sorts of engineering
issues with the company um and actually
if you look back to 20189 there were two
crashes involving Boeing planes the 737
Max disasters um in which nearly people
yeah nearly nearly 350 people died yeah
um and initially Boeing tried to kind of
blame the pilots uh for for both of
these crashes but investigations later
revealed that it had been a software
flaw that was kind of built into the
plane that caused it the the plane's
nose to dive down and the pilot could
not really do anything to rectify the
issue um and subsequent investigation
from both regulators and journalists
looking into this showed that a big fact
in uh kind of demonstrating why Boeing
had allowed this basically unsafe plane
to go to market was that it had shifted
towards this um corporate culture of
basically denigrating engineering
expertise lionizing Senior Management
inserting layers and layers and layers
of management whose role it was to cut
costs Crush unions kind of subjugate
workers ignore whistleblowers and just
deliver um cheap planes that could be
sold to Boeing's various network of
contract that exists with governments
all over the world not least the
American state and make massive profits
and they did that they were able to
achieve massive massive profits
distributed loads of money to
shareholders um and it was kind of you
know a classic taale of of corporate
greed in which you didn't see any kind
of competitive pressure from the alleged
free market because Boeing was in this
position of basically kind of oligopoly
power no exactly and equally you know
you have other people who might say oh
well if the government was able to kind
of step in and uh you know make the
market fairer or subject this firm to
regulation then this never would have
happened there's only one issue with
that which is the the government was
helping Boeing at every step yeah so it
was one of the biggest recipients of
corporate welfare that means it it got
money from the government from the US
state in terms of taxes subsidies it had
huge numbers of contracts with the US uh
with the US state it was a very integral
part of the military-industrial complex
in terms of Regulation at the time of
these disasters uh the airlines so the
Aerospace manufacturers being regulated
in the same way as the banks in the
runup to the 2008 financial crisis this
is self-regulation yeah and Boeing was
being regulated by a unit of the Federal
Aviation Authority that sat inside
Boeing and workers were being paid by
Boeing yes uh Congress had just passed
another round of deregulation for the
airline industry saying that no uh
manufacturer would ever release a plane
that was um you know unsafe because it
would damage its position in the market
capitalism would never allow such a
thing to happen because we have free
market competition and then even after
all of this had come to light and Boeing
was charged uh because of uh all of
these failings it's still got a massive
backd door bailout during the covid-19
pandemic so that you have this kind of
cabal of senior Executives wealthy
shareholders politicians individuals
within a powerful State um who are
brought together in something like the
military-industrial complex and who are
entirely insulated from free market
competition and also actually quite well
insulated from democracy as well so they
exist in their own little bubble at the
very top able to make these massive
decisions that have huge effects for
everyone else and yet we're told that we
live in this free market system Boeing's
workers were subject to this ruthless
Market yes but the executives are the
top not the top of course you know
Boeing has a um a very uh um privileged
not important position let's say for the
US economy because the competitor is
Airbus which is not American which
basically means that if boing fails the
US economy fails or the US position in
Aerospace fails and according or
commercial Aerospace fails and
accordingly the U the American
government would never let them fail if
you want right it's very very similar to
the analogy of 2008 the big Banks right
too big to fail if you want now the of
course the the interesting side of this
is that basically it means that we are
asking The Regulators we we want the
government if if you want to say
capitalism is freedom because everyone
can do what they can to succeed without
government regulation The Regan uh
economics if you want the what you know
what Tater allowed to uh to to to do you
know tried to do here in the UK or
pretended to do here in the UK is
basically saying hold on no regulation
from the government it's freedom for the
market economy uh and at the same time
now when we ask the government to
regulate uh by the definition there is
really none of that because the benefits
are there is a conflict of interest for
around the benefits so that's a very
very um there is really no Freedom if
you want when you think about how uh we
end up in places like this so so we we
we constantly hear the words around you
know those big influencers somewhere who
own all the money or own all the weals
who are making all the decisions you
know uh in a way that basically affects
every single one of
us how do how does that actually play in
reality I mean is there really like a a
backdoor meeting with where people worth
less than 100 million dollar are not
allowed in that meeting and the others
come together and say okay from now on
we're going to start another pandemic
and you know that's going to right is
that how it happens no generally not um
although there are moments
of generally crisis when um you do see
uh powerful people come together often
in a room and make really big decisions
about what happens next so the example I
always think about is um the financial
crisis when um the the central banks got
together with the the heads of the major
Banks um and basically made a plan for
the world economy um and there was a
study that was done after that that
showed that those banking institutions
that had the closest links with the
American state ended up doing better
from the bailouts than um than those
that didn't um so you know occasionally
and I think this is where the kind of
conspiracy theory stuff comes from you
do see powerful people coming together
and actively making those decisions in a
collective way but the vast majority of
the time the cooperation is Not That
explicit and it's not that open it is
the subject of a kind of networked
organization that allows people with
similar interests to come together to
lobby and to influence politicians and
political power now there's nothing
inherently wrong with that this is how
democracy works you know you have
different groups of individuals who
organize within Civil Society to make
their interests known and try to apply
pressure on politicians or whoever else
they're trying to pressure the issue is
is that we live in a world in which only
one set of people have the ability to do
that and the vast majority of people are
actively denied the capacity to organize
in order to demand things of politicians
and are basically repressed and and
crushed and beaten down when they try to
demand things explain so um we talked
about neoliberalism right about the
Thatcher and Reagan and they're coming
to power saying we want to deliver free
markets right um what's very interesting
is that the first things that neoliberal
leaders do when they come to power is
basically go to war with uh any
organizations that manifest Collective
power particularly the unions so in the
UK the first thing that Margaret
actually does when she come to power is
go to war with the country's unions and
she wins she crushes the miners who are
trying to fight for their jobs hold on
one second so let's define new NE
liberalism for everyone oh sorry so new
new new Liber liberalism in my in my
understanding is government will not
regulate this is free market economics
every everything happens with the
freedom and Justice of free market
government is a is a is a burden uh
let's leave everything to Nature if you
want the nature of economic free markets
exactly that's so so so of course Reagan
on in the US thater here were basically
the leaders of that idea go let's go
back to the unions bit which I think is
fascinating when you really think about
it no that was immensely well explained
because that's exactly how they
presented their ideology exactly that's
how they so the ideology yeah exactly um
and it was really powerful I think
because people bought into that idea of
of Freedom individual Freedom exactly
yeah um but what's interesting is the um
contrast between that promise of Freedom
which is we will come to power and we
will promote individual Freedom we will
give you control over your life your
pions exactly yes and then the actual
actions of these governments when they
come to power and the first thing they
do as I've said is um yeah literally use
the power of the state to beat back and
divide people who are organizing to try
and defend their interests first on the
list are the unions so uh Reagan
famously goes to war with pacco in the
US uh thatcha goes to war with the
miners in the UK and then all of this
anti-union legislation is introduced to
make it much harder for workers to
organize to defend their interests and
so you see union membership decline
quite substantially over the course of
the next several decades um they
also uh dissolve other forms of
collective power that existed in the
economy at the time so Thatcher for
example shut down the GLC the greater
London Corporation and she had been in
this kind of battle with the GLC because
there were lots of kind of left
politicians that were organizing in uh
this London Metropolitan Authority uh to
try and do things like um you know
Thatcher wanted to build the London
docklands right where we now have Canary
Warf and all of these big financial
institutions the people living there at
the time said we don't want this they
actually put together a a document
called The People's plan for the London
dockins with the support of the GLC and
they said our children deserve to be
more than lavatory attendants for
passing businessmen we want a different
vision for this space which is where we
live um and partly because of its
involvement with Community organizing
like that that just shut down the GLC so
you know any form of community power
that it had been helping to support was
then crushed as well um so you see these
these politicians come to power and
their first aim is to crush any
resistance any resistance that comes
from the V mass of ordinary people right
at the same time they deliver
unparalleled freedom for those of the
top so suddenly you can literally move
your money anywhere in the world because
you have the removal of capital controls
and exchange controls tax especially the
the taxes that have been levied on those
at the very top of society um were
slashed um you saw a transformation in
regulation and again this is often cast
as
deregulation which implies that the
state is shrinking and stepping back but
that isn't what it was really like it
was actually a proliferation of
Regulation but regulation that benefited
those at the top particularly the big
Banks Banks need lots of Regulation
because you know they need an
environment of certainty Banks always
need to know that ultimately if
anything's going to go wrong then the
state there to bail them out exactly so
that's why regulation is important to
the banking system and you got in many
ways lots of new regulation but instead
of Regulation to protect workers or
protect the environment it was
regulation to protect the banks so what
all this shows I think is that
neoliberalism was never really about
Freedom it was about freedom for some
those at the very top and in order to
protect the freedom I.E the wealth and
power of those at the top they saw it as
necessary to constrain the freedom of
everyone else and particularly their
freedom to organize and you see this
today with demonstrators being put in
prison for years for peaceful protest
this is a continuation of the same logic
which is we're putting people in jail to
protect Freedom whose Freedom the
freedom of those at the top which is
quite fascinating when you really think
about it because that becomes today
really the um the underlying current of
everything that you see online
everything that you see I mean in a very
interesting way since the rean Tater
year
individualism we spoke about this
briefly before we started becomes truly
uh the dream of Every Now consumer not
human Okay the the idea is that as a as
a human now in this uh Fair world where
dog eats dog but dog can become very big
and I can be je you know Jeff basos if I
really worked hard enough suddenly you
start to believe that you're competing
with any everyone else rather than
cooperating with everyone else which I
have to admit in my in my blurry years
uh you know I used to because I'm raised
in the East and and and you know
educated in the west I used to think
that this is something wrong with the
West that individual freedom is highly
prioritized above societal and Community
benefit okay but but now I can get it I
can get that this is an agenda that BAS
basically says hey if all of you guys
fight okay and argue and be rude to each
other which now is explosive on social
media then you're never going to
organize and annoy the rest of us up
here in the penthouse trying to just
make a little more money here exactly I
literally couldn't have put it better
myself it's thank you uh my my teacher
said I was so where where does that put
the politician then because
interestingly You' you'd look back at
the Thatcher years and say oh my God
it's the best thing that happened to the
UK you know the she was the politician
that came and saved all of us right and
you could actually back that up with
years of prosperity in the city of
London if you want where so much money
was being made for so many people and so
many Bentleys started to show up on the
streets so there are signs that things
are improving
was was Margaret trer or or Ronald
Reagan actually working for the people
uh were they governments of the people
or governments of the
elite Thatcher and Reagan and Thatcher
in particular actually had this
ingenious strategy um and that just said
the method is economics the object is to
change the soul she wanted to transform
the way that people related to each
other in exactly the way that you said
in the the 60s and 70s it was in some
ways the peak of organizing you know you
had a strong labor movement you'd had
you know um in the US the peace movement
the protest against Vietnam the
anti-apartheid movement that was
spreading around the world and spreading
through uh through the student movement
you had the environmental movement you
had all of these people coming together
to make their power known and it was
starting to disrupt the operation of
capital ISM because these people were
gaining political power um they were you
know able to um really yeah present a
threat to to vested interests and
neoliberalism was what undid that and it
did so through a two-pronged approach
the first one was to create an
ultimately unsustainable Financial boom
um the benefits of which would be used
to incentivize people
to behave in a certain way and that's
the second prong which is this project
of
societal sociological and fundamentally
psychological transformation that
underpins this transition which is as
you said about how do we stop people
from organizing together in these
movements that are threatening us and
get them to start competing against one
another um and I I'm I'm kind of writing
a book proposal at the moment that looks
at this exact thing I'll publish it
great uh but the the three trends that I
think were most
pronounced were the shift from workers
to
entrepreneurs the shift from citizens to
Consumers of public services and the
shift from communities to
households so rather than seeing
yourself as a worker as you might have
done in the the postwar years Thatcher's
aim was to encourage you to see yourself
as an entrepreneur an investor
entrepreneur benefit um and the the
reason that that is particularly
beneficial is because
workers organize yeah they all have the
same interests often if they're not paid
well they'll talk to their peer exactly
and say hey are you unable to put food
on the table too right yeah exactly um
and that was a problem because these
workers were coming together and they
were organizing and they were saying
we're not getting paid enough so let's
go on strike but if you're an
entrepreneur and you know this better
than anyone you're competing against all
the other entrepreneurs it's your job to
um you know use your Savvy as an
investor to invest in your human capital
so this comes out with education
education is now something that you pay
for and you take out a loan to invest in
it because it's investment in capital in
your human capital wow you um you know
you take out a loan to make sure that
you're able to purchase your own home
and that again can provide a source of
wealth that insulates you from life's
risks you um again get your own private
pension and you have to invest that in
the stock market and when the stock
market does well which means wealth is
um increasing at the top you then think
oh well wealth is being created at the
top but I'm getting a little bit of it
as well so why would I resist even if
your salar stayed the same if you have
assets then you're much more likely to
identify with the interest
of those at the top because if the value
of your house the value of your pension
is going up then that means your
interests are aligned with with those
kinds of people um so that shift is is
really important and then on the flip
side it's the the kind of proliferation
of asset ownership is accompanied by
this dramatic expansion of debt now debt
is the key here because the unleashing
of the financial power of the banks is
what brings us this boom that creates
all of this Prosperity this alleged
Prosperity that we get from the 1980s
onwards it's all largely driven by the
removal of exchange controls and the
removal of capital controls so money is
now free to flow all over the world and
Banks can now create much more money
through lending than they had been able
to do in the past a lot of that lending
goes into mortgages it means that you
can now take out a massive mortgage and
use that to buy a home what happens when
you have more money
chasing the same amount of stuff you
have more liquidity chasing the same
number of houses house prices go up it
creates a massive Financial boom we know
what happened from the 90s onwards that
boom ends up taking over the whole
global economy creating massive economic
growth and prosperity for lots of
different people but ultimately that was
unsustainable and in the process you
have this Beast of debt that is released
and debt is a really powerful discipline
inning tool for people because you know
on the one hand you might have some
assets but on the other hand you now
have to manage your liabilities as well
so if you're relatively wealthy then you
always make sure that you know you try
and have more Equity say in your home
than than your liabilities um you kind
of manage your debt and your assets
you're a good kind of mini capitalist
who makes very healthy financial
decisions but if you're not paid very
well um you might find that suddenly the
value of your liabilities is higher than
the value of your assets um and instead
of saying oh well you're not being paid
a high enough wage to be able to afford
the things that you need to survive
people will instead say you've been
irresponsible you've made bad financial
decisions and that's how you've got
yourself into debt even though they'
taken out the debt just to be able to
pay for things they needed to survive so
it's you internalize that you think I'm
a failure because I'm in debt you don't
think I need to organize with people to
try and have a higher wage and actually
today you know Financial issu isues are
driving a lot of people particularly
young men to self harm and suicide
because they internalize that blame they
think it's my fault because they they
look at the the the lifestyle of the top
guy uh who is you know who seems to be
so clever and in a very very interesting
way for men that means he's very
masculine right he he he managed to
succeed and become the best hunter in
the tribe right and and I'm not able to
do this so it's not just that I'm not
able able financially it's basically an
identity issue that would lead to that
it's quite interesting as well when you
when you it doesn't matter as a matter
of fact if you're gaining Capital you
know in your assets that you bought in
debt I think the sentence that you said
there which is so interesting is thatb
is a very powerful disciplinary
instrument so so in a you know where I
grew up in you know a developing economy
you get you keep the people busy with
football and putting bread on the table
right uh in in more advanced economies
like here I think the idea is if you had
given people enough which was really
what was happening post World War II
with the you know baby boomers creating
so much GDP it seems that in my mind
that basically meant they had so much
time to start pondering yes stuff that
could actually harm the government
interes or the top players right or the
you know the the the ones that the
government works for really and and in a
in an interesting way to keep people
busy then student loans other loans
mortgages car loans and everything
becomes you know the the the shackles
that basically keep us uh restrained I
have to say what I've never really
discussed this in public maybe we should
have it over coffee but I'll ask you
anyway one of my
experiences which most people have never
had is I was witness because of my
position at Google and because of you
know uh at the time and because of my
history of being a very prominent
businessman in the Middle East for a
long time so I was very much entangled
into what was happening with the Arab
Spring um not that I had any views on it
because I had not lived in my home
country uh Egypt for maybe 20 years at
the time but you know i' i' I'd been in
a position of I know the internet really
well so almost everyone was constantly
reaching out to me the previous
government the transition government the
you know the opposition everyone was
just talking to me all the time saying
what's happening right and and I have to
admit in my mind I think the Arab Spring
seems to have been a glitch in the
system where where you know somehow
because Arabs at the time were so
offline if you want you gave them a tiny
bit of online
community and suddenly they go like this
is right and and they they organize
and they explode okay and I have to say
I you know I feel that leading after the
Arab Spring into 2019 2020 there were
there were start you could see quite a
bit of organized opposition around the
world Hong Kong here in the UK and so on
and so forth and it I I don't think that
this is the reason for Co I you know I'm
not into that conspiracy at all okay and
I know you wrote about you know the
covid economy if you want but it seems
to me that somehow governments found a
massive opportunity to say okay everyone
stay home right let's not organize in
the streets anymore no more Arab Spring
and you could actually recognize very
quickly that post
everyone's silent everyone's like yeah
what was that right and let's talk about
that era a little bit no conspiracy
theory here but but two things happened
with Co one is actually Society at large
was disciplined yes everyone was ordered
to sit home uh nobody had freedom to Ed
to do anything but at the same time
massive amounts of money were funneled
into the system through printing money
basically more debt right uh and I think
that completely
shifted I think this was a you know the
one big nail in the coffin of Freedom if
you think about it what do you think of
that I think yeah that is a very
interesting and well thought through
analysis because you're right it's not
conspiratorial um to say that
governments in particular but also big
multinational corporations took
advantage AG of a crisis to strengthen
their position and you see this
happening over and over and over again
you know Naomi Klein um talks about the
shock Doctrine and disaster capitalism
the way in which the powerful are able
to take advantage of moments of Crisis
and uncertainty to embed and strengthen
their control uh one example that uh she
uses which I find really fascinating um
is the example of the tsunami um and the
crisis and Devastation that took place
in the Maldives and the way in which
that was used to remove people who had
been living on the islands in the
Maldives for a very very long time
settled them all in a very very small
area of the capital and ultimately sell
those islands off to big hotels so that
they would become centers for you know
luxury tourism basically now no you know
no one's saying the government caused
that natural disaster but they took
advantage of it to basically kind of uh
redistribute power and wealth within
that economy and I think that you can
say the same about the pandemic um and
that that takes place both within
individual societies and at the level of
the world economy now you mentioned
there um you know having uh been born in
the Middle East and been a businessman
in the Middle East for a while and that
that idea of debt as a disciplining tool
resonates with you
now you can see that at the level of
kind of individual consumers but you can
also see that at the level of whole
states Nations at large of course so the
name for my book vulture capitalism
comes from um this uh vulture fund
basically which was just after the 2008
financial crisis Zambia which is a you
know relatively small African nation big
copper producer had nothing to do with
the financial crisis but because of the
collapse in world GDP after 2008
um copper prices fell its export
revenues kind of dried up and its debts
started to look unsustainable so there
was an Irish fund that bought Zambia's
debt knowing that Zambia was going to
default on that debt so that it could
sue the government of Zambia for failing
to pay its debts and take vast amounts
of money out of the pockets of ordinary
zambians and suck it back into the rich
world now this is the kind of what you
might call kind of law
it's like warfare using international
legal systems that you see all the time
in the world economy um and debt is a
very powerful tool for basically
crushing um entire nations and
particularly Nations where you're
beginning to see some resistance to the
Dynamics of global capitalism and I
think you're quite right that we did
start to see that in a really big way
before the pandemic I think part of the
reason for that was that we were moving
from a a unipolar world into a
multi-polar world now you know you can
say what whatever you want about the
Dynamics that underpin that but
ultimately when you have two
superpowers all the other countries in
the world's economy have a little bit
more leverage a little bit more room
basically because they're able to choose
exactly put them put them off against
each other before it was the Washington
consensus which is you know you follow
the rules laid out by Washington or you
don't get any money and you're kind of
ostracized for the world from the world
economy now these countries have more
than one uh superpower to pick from they
can maybe go to China if they want
lending for infrastructure that's going
to come with a lot of strings attached
and a lot of problems but ultimately
there is this this choice now what you
see over the course of the pandemic is a
lot of Nations being really kind of
beaten down using the tool of debt uh
because um a lot of countries as soon as
the pandemic hit basically found
themselves unable to repay their debts
through no fault of their own the global
economy had been shut down you know the
factories that were using the resources
that they were exporting were no longer
operating suddenly they were unable to
pay their debts we had a debt moratorium
so a pause on debt repayments but the
the debts themselves kept increasing
because of of Interest exactly yeah um
and that has continued to this day
except for the fact that it's getting
worse because of climate breakdown so
you see you know natural disasters
Cyclones hurricanes we've just seen in
the Caribbean recently that caused
massive Devastation and Caribbean
Nations come forward and say you know we
as the International Community have
agreed that small island countries
countries at risk of desertification all
of these problems that going to come
from climate breakdown we shouldn't be
the only ones that have to bear the
burden yeah of climate breakdown so we
would like some of these debts that
we're going to have to take out to
reconstruct after this natural disaster
that we didn't cause that basically you
in the global North caused we're going
to ask for some Grace on that debt and
what they get is so tiny it's barely
enough to allow them to recover let
alone put in place the conditions for
sustainable long-term economic growth
it's again I I I will probably repeat
your sentence for a very long time it's
a it's a disciplinary instrument right
so so the idea of the fact that someone
can go to Zambia and take out literally
imagine walking into a country and
taking $10 out of every citizen yes when
their income is $2 a month right uh you
know how evil is that when you really
think about it but that's not the issue
the issue is debt is used to discipline
a country so that they follow the agenda
and and become a peasant as a country
right and and I think the idea of how
the World Bank and the international
monetary fund you know and so on and the
IMF and so on basically used that
instrument in favor of Western agendas
uh you know it's un it's it's not it's
not a secret now I think in the last
year a lot more uh truth coming out
about how many decisions globally that
would benefit the entire world would be
vetoed because of Western interest
sometimes of because of a certain
nation's interest and basically that
those instruments then put the entire
country and its leaders Under Pressure
to comply yes right um the the thing
that kills me though and you repeated it
several times is
that Thatcher would then promise Freedom
yeah that Reagan would promise
Prosperity that you know uh the the IMF
would promise form MH that it's almost
consistent that what the promise is is
the opposite of the objective that that
you're walking in to sort of break down
unions and the the very very final bit
of Freedom that the worker has and
you're promising the the worker Freedom
it's it's very skillful the way they do
that and I think it comes back to what I
was saying at the beginning about how
alluring This Promise of freedom is and
the air of that promise comes from again
it's the American dream it's like sure
they're promising freedom and that
freedom is going to come with inequality
it means that we're going to have a
market basically some people are going
to rise to the top and some people are
going to fall to the bottom but we all
convince
ourselves I'm effective I'm talented I'm
resourceful why should I not be able to
rise to the top and Achieve things and
and you know become a millionaire within
this system and within this economy and
I think in some ways it speaks to the
fact that we all know that we as
individuals and
groups have immense skills and
capabilities and talents that are
constantly being exploited by someone
else and taken advantage of by someone
else which by the way is the actual you
know definition of capitalism it's
basically you know everyone is a
commodity let's just buy them for the
for the lowest possible price to produce
use for the capitalist exactly yeah um
and because we we know that we know that
we have these talents and skills that
being exploited by someone else we're
sucked in by this idea that if all the
external stuff is taken out of the way
then we will rise to the top the problem
is is that the whole game is rigged you
know as I said there's this class of
people who are insulated from um from
markets basically because they're you
know in monopolies or they're working uh
within governments to kind of get their
own way um and then even you know within
this
hierarchy there's a brilliant statistic
from Oxfam that says that onethird of
billionaire wealth is inherited and
onethird of billionaire wealth comes
from crony connections to government so
basically 2third of billionaire wealth
comes from either inheritance or
corruption so the idea of the self-made
billionaire is just kind of absurd but
that other third it comes from
exploiting workers exploiting the
environment you know God knows the
Privileges that we afford to
billionaires because we basically say
well they have all the wealth we better
give them what they want and you know it
just it really brings home this point
that um the freedom that you're promised
is really the freedom to kind of be
exploited unless you are one of those
very few lucky people who is basically
able to adopt a position at the top of
this hierarchy and sit around making
rules for everyone else um so and I
think um there's another Point here that
you mentioned earlier which was about
the implications of this for people's
understanding of their own masculinity
and identity right because if you buy
into this philosophy for understanding
the world which is that you know life is
a market there's a clear hierarchy the
capable ones go to the top and the
useless ones sink to the bottom but you
aren't aware of the fact that this game
is rigged that actually it's not the
good that get to the top it's the lucky
that get to the top and they stay at the
top or or or the the one of the team
basically if if you align with the team
at the top then you get to the top yeah
yeah um and people at the top never fall
down to the bottom yeah that's a key
thing about social Mobility it's not
just that those at the bottom are able
to go up if they're effective it should
also mean that if you're very wealthy
and capable and you fail that you should
fall to the bottom you shouldn't be
bailed do you ever see that happening
absolutely not so if you don't
understand that this game is rigged you
internalize those feelings of Shame and
powerlessness and you think I'm not a
millionaire so I must be worthless you
know I've been working really hard but
I'm not succeeding that must mean that I
am not intelligent that I'm not capable
um and you see I think particularly
among young men today where the idea of
masculinity is as you say tied to your
ability to provide to have a home to
have a good salary to feel secure to be
able to provide a sense of security and
you are unable to do that because we
live in an economy that kind of
manufactures
insecurity as a way of exploiting people
you feel like a failure and your
response to that could be a number of
different things it could be that you
feel hopeless and depressed and that's
definitely something that we're seeing
with the rise of severe mental ill
health but it could also make you very
angry correct it can make you feel like
you want to burn the whole system down
like the only reason you're you're not
getting to the top is because there's
people in your way it's the women the
feminists or it's the migrants and the
refugees who are getting in your way
which we can see so much noise around
now exactly yeah so that response to
this competitive hierarchical
individualistic culture that we've
created makes us sick or it makes us
angry and it makes us sick and we've
just seen that with the riots that we've
had across this country and and of of
course that's playing to the agenda of
what is the design in the first place
it's like yeah let the let the you know
the Savages sort of you know mingle
among themselves and fight and disagree
and you know and and and comment badly
on each other's social media posts let
them not never get together and say it's
the whole game design that's working
against me fascinating what do we
do I'm glad you asked um I think you're
exactly right the this Division and this
individualism plays into the agenda that
we're we're kind of all playing under
because The Narrative of those at the
top is ordinary people are too stupid or
too selfish to be trusted with any real
political power we have to have all the
power up here because if we really had a
democratic economy if we gave workers
power in their workplaces if we gave
communities power then they would abuse
it and what's the evidence for this well
it's people's response to living in a
competitive individualistic Society
where they're encouraged to fight one
another and they do fight one another
and then because they're fight they're
fighting one another those are the top
say you don't deserve power you have to
be controlled and policed right and
actually there is another way so
throughout history across time across
space there are constant examples of
people coming together doing that thing
that I mentioned earlier of recognizing
that they have these skills and
capabilities that are being exploited by
someone else but instead of trying to
use those skills to compete against each
other they pull their capabilities and
they come together and they cooperate
and they build movements or institutions
or organizations that become really
powerful and
influential um and the example I like to
use because I think it's a really good
contrast with the example of Boeing is
the example of the Lucas plan in the UK
now you might not have heard of this
this was Lucas Aerospace was an
aerospace company in the UK in the 1970s
um and it came into all sorts of
difficulties because Rising competition
from abroad the workers were unionized
they were paid higher wages so it wasn't
competitive and they the the workers uh
went to the labor government at the time
and said we need you to nationalize us
because you know otherwise the firm's
going to go under and we're going to all
lose our jobs but Tony Ben who is my
personal political hero a Democratic
Socialist um replied to the workers why
don't you come up with a plan as to how
you can save this Corporation and so the
unionists went back to the workers and
initially they tried to ask all sorts of
experts and academics how they could
design a plan to transform this company
that didn't work very well so instead
they asked all the workers in in the
company you know all of these Engineers
all of these you know people in in
various different positions throughout
the company to provide ideas as to how
they could change it and what they put
together became known as the Lucas plan
and these workers had basically taken
stock of the resources within the firm
and they had said rather than producing
weapons which is what they were
producing at the time they said we can
use this organization to produce
socially useful technology
that will be of benefit to society so
things like wind turbines Healthcare
Tech kidney dialysis machines this was
in the 1970s so it's very forward
thinking and here's a plan as to how we
can get there they were saying there's
layers of management that are telling us
how to do our jobs and what to do we
don't really need that we can work
together and manage ourselves we can
have a democratic publicly owned company
where um you know there are worker
representatives making decisions where
there's you know political
representation societal representation
so that we can have this company that
produces socially useful Technologies
and this plan was greeted by everyone as
this amazing thing you know all of the
everyone on the left was like this is
brilliant but even like the financial
times was like wow this is a really
powerful document we had no idea that
workers had so many ideas so many
capabilities so many resources that they
could use in imagining a different kind
of world and it a kind of lightning rod
for activists everywhere ultimately the
guy who um LED spearheaded these efforts
Mike Coley was fired for his Union
activity um and he ended up going to
work at the GLC the greater London
corporation which I was talking about
earlier and he was put in charge of
their kind of Community Technology
Outreach and this was a mechanism for
bringing together businesses Community
organizers and local government to say
what technologies can we develop that
will help your community that will help
your business how can we kind of create
a supportive environment for you to be
able to live better lives basically and
using the power of local government to
be able to do that now Thatcher crushed
the unions and uh Lucas went under
Thatcher crushed the GLC and the JC went
under and what I think is really
fascinating is the Lucas era space
shutdown it was carved up in the
shareholder value revolution of the
1980s turned you know sold from one
company to another to another and part
lots of what was once Lucas Aerospace
end up ended up being purchased by a
corporation that produced the faulty
sensors that went into the Boeing 737
Max planes that crashed killing all of
those people and I think that provides
us a very clear indication of the choice
that we have in terms of the kind of
economy that we create on the one hand
we have workers coming together to
produce socially useful technologies
that are of benefit to Society on the
other hand we have a massive
monopolistic Corporation working with an
imperial government to produce planes
that fall out of the sky
wow
wow you know it's it fascinates me
because again if you would look at e
East and
West the way we create barriers between
people to work together while saying
that this is for their benefit is
really really what's killing everyone
yeah I mean in a very interesting way
when you know when when the 2008 crisis
hit the world my home country my you
know where I was born Egypt was
unaffected because we didn't have any
debt instruments at all you know it
wasn't it wasn't part of the economy for
us to borrow to buy anything right we
borrowed from friends when we needed
money we borrowed from family members
and then paid back and so on and so the
crisis hits were unaffected right when
when the you know when you think of the
evolution of how the Egyptian Society
for many many years we didn't have
pensions we didn't have health care we
didn't have anything right but we had a
community and the community was
basically saying if my cousin is in
trouble I'll help them out there is no
need for insurance for that because my
cousin will help me out if I'm in
trouble okay and I see more and more now
as I go to Egypt that this is
disappearing that de is everywhere right
that that everyone is now going trying
to say it's
externalize the dependencies outside the
community to others yes and that
basically is the beginning of where
everyone is as as we are so what you're
saying is the answer to all of this is
don't count on the government don't
count on the capitalist system connect
and create a community so that you as
the people actually govern your own life
exactly I will end it here
I think this uh I admire your thinking I
think you're fascinating I think you're
really on a very important Mission and I
really support what you're doing so
grateful that you came it's been such a
pleasure talking with you it's been
really fantastic thank you for
everything you do yeah for all of you
listening I am so grateful for the
opportunity as I always say to speak to
amazing people because of you uh this is
my episode before last uh on before I
take a break on slow-mo I will leave the
entire body of work for you to revisit
uh with so many incredible speakers and
so many incredible thinkers uh so so you
have 320 episodes to go back and listen
to uh meanwhile I think this
message truly is probably the core of
what slow-mo is all about okay that what
we need as people is to realize that
most of the time what we're told is not
for our benefit it's for our belief so
that the benefit of someone else is
delivered and that the true benefit uh
is for us to organize together the true
benefit if we wanted to create the world
that we want is to create it ourselves
is to stop playing to the narratives and
actually connect to others I love you
all for listening and I will see you
next time
