have you ever wondered why societies
sometimes seem to lose their Collective
Minds why seemingly rational people can
suddenly Embrace irrational beliefs in
masses these phenomena have puzzled
thinkers and historians for centuries
this dangerous social phenomenon is
called Mass psychosis but before we
discuss this consider this quote from
the renowned psychologist Gustaf Lebon
the masses have never thirsted after
truth they turn aside from evidence that
is not to their taste preferring to
deify error if error sedu them whoever
can supply them with Illusions is easily
their Master whoever attempts to destroy
their Illusions is always their victim
this sobering observation sets the stage
for our exploration of how entire
societies can descend into madness you
probably think that surely the greatest
threats to civilization are natural
disasters diseases or external conflicts
but what if I told you that according to
the famous psychologist Carl Jung the
greatest danger lies within our own
minds Yung argued that our inability to
deal with the forces of our own psyche
poses the most significant threat to our
civilization it's as if we're our own
worst enemies or as the Latin proverb
puts it man is Wolf to man Yung
considered this a sad yet Eternal truism
but when does this wolf-like nature come
to the Forefront Yung observed that it's
most prominent during those dark periods
of history when mental illness becomes
the norm rather than the exception in a
society he term ter this disturbing
phenomenon a psychic epidemic in his
work the symbolic life Yung writes
indeed it is becoming ever more obvious
that it is not famine not earthquakes
not microbes not cancer but man himself
who is man's greatest danger to man for
the simple reason that there is no
adequate protection against psychic
epidemics which are infinitely more
devastating than the worst of natural
catastrophes it's a chilling thought
isn't it so what exactly is a mass
psychosis simply put it's an epidemic of
Madness it occurs when a large portion
of society loses touch with reality and
descends into delusions now you might be
tempted to dismiss this as mere fiction
but history provides us with all to real
examples consider the witch hunts that
swept through America and Europe in the
16th and 17th centuries during this
period thousands of individuals mostly
women were killed not for any crimes
they actually committed but because they
became scapegoats in societies gripped
by Collective Madness Francis Hill in
her book a delusion of Satan writes that
in some Swiss Villages there were
scarcely any women left alive after the
frenzy had finally burned itself out or
think about the rise of totalitarianism
in the 20th century millions of people
embraced ideologies that in hindsight
seem obviously destructive and
delusional yet at the time entire
nations fell under their spell the
results of a mass psychosis are nothing
short of devastating Yung studied this
phenomenon extensively and observed that
when a society succumbs to Madness its
members become morally and spiritually
inferior they sink unconsciously to an
inferior intellectual level becoming
more unreasonable irresponsible
emotional erratic and unreliable but
perhaps most terrifying of all Yung
noted that crimes the individual alone
could never stand are freely committed
by the group this explains how
ordinarily moral people can part
participate in atrocities during times
of mass psychosis what makes this
phenomenon even more Insidious is that
those caught in its grip are often
unaware of what's happening just as an
individual experiencing psychosis can't
step outside their own mind to recognize
their delusions there's no archimedian
point from which those living through a
mass psychosis can observe their
Collective Madness so what causes a mass
psychosis to answer this we need to
First understand what drives an
individual to Madness while there are
many potential triggers such as drug
abuse brain injuries or other physical
ailments we are particularly interested
in psychological or psychogenic causes
these are the most common culprits
behind Mass psychosis the most prevalent
psychogenic cause of psychosis is a
flood of negative emotions particularly
fear or anxiety that drives an
individual into a state of panic now
imagine this Panic spreading through a
population like a contagious disease
that's the starting point of a mass
psychosis when in a state of panic it's
natural to seek relief it's mentally and
physically exhausting to remain in such
a hyper emotional state while there are
healthy ways to cope with panic such as
facing and overcoming the fear inducing
threat another Escape Route is a
psychotic break now contrary to popular
belief a psychotic break isn't a descent
into greater disorder instead it's a
reordering of one's experiential World
it Blends fact and fiction reality and
delusions in a way that helps a the
feelings of Panic it's a coping
mechanism albeit a maladaptive one
silvano arti one of the 20th Century's
formost authorities on schizophrenia
outlined the psychogenic steps that lead
to Madness first there's the phase of
panic where the individual starts
perceiving things differently becomes
frightened appears confused and can't
explain the strange occurrences they're
experiencing this is followed by what
arietti calls the phase of psychotic
Insight during this phase the individual
EDS in putting things together by
creating a pathological way of seeing
reality this allows them to explain
their abnormal experiences arietti calls
it Insight because the patient finally
sees meaning in their experiences but
it's psychotic because it's based on
delusions rather than a realistic
understanding of the situation in
essence the delusions allow the
panic-stricken individual to escape from
the flood of negative emotions but at
the cost of losing touch with reality as
arietti puts it a psychotic break can be
viewed as an abnormal way of dealing
with an extreme state of anxiety now
let's scale this up to a societal level
if a flood of negative emotions can
trigger a psychotic break in a
vulnerable individual then a mass
psychosis can result when a population
of vulnerable individuals is driven into
a state of panic by threats real
imagined or fabricated but here's where
it gets interesting because delusions
can take many forms and Madness can
manifest in countless ways the specific
manner in which a Massy osis unfolds
will differ based on the historical and
cultural context of the affected Society
in our modern era one form of mass
psychosis stands out as particularly
threatening The psychosis of
totalitarianism Arthur vers Lewis
defines totalitarianism as the modern
phenomenon of total centralized state
power coupled with the obliteration of
individual human rights in the totalized
state there are those in power and they
the objectified masses the victims in a
totalitarian Society a disturbing
transformation occurs the population is
divided into two groups the rulers and
the ruled both groups undergo a
pathological change the rulers are
elevated to an almost Godlike status
which stands in stark contrast to our
nature as imperfect beings who are
easily corrupted by power the masses on
the other hand are reduced to dependent
subjects of these pathological rulers
taking on a psychologically regressed
childlike status Hannah arant one of the
20th Century's preeminent Scholars of
totalitarian ISM describe it as an
attempted transformation of human nature
itself but this transformation doesn't
create a Utopia it turns sound Minds
into sick ones as a Dutch medical doctor
who studied the Mental effects of
totalitarianism observed there is in
fact much that is comparable between the
strange reactions of the citizens of
totalitarianism and their culture as a
whole on the one hand and the reactions
of the sick schizophrenic on the other
the social transformation that unfolds
under totalitarianism is built upon and
sustained by delusions think about it
only diluted individuals would regress
to the childlike status of obedient and
submissive subjects handing over
complete control of their lives to
politicians and bureaucrats only a
diluted ruling class would believe they
possess the knowledge wisdom and Acumen
to completely control Society in a top-
down Manner and only under the spell of
delusions would anyone believe that a
society composed of power hungry rulers
and a psychologically regressed
population could lead to anything other
than Mass suffering and social ruin the
mass psychosis of totalitarianism has
been induced many times throughout
history as ju miru explains in his book
the rape of the mind it is simply a
question of reorganizing and
manipulating Collective feelings in the
proper way the method by which the
ruling Elite accomplishes this is called
menticide which literally means killing
of the Mind miru describes it as an
organized system of psychological
intervention and judicial perversion
through which a ruling class can imprint
their own opportunistic thoughts upon
the minds of those they plan to use and
Destroy so how does this process of
menticide unfold it begins with the
sewing of fear placing the population in
a state of panic that primes them for a
disent into delusionary beliefs one
particularly effective technique is the
use of waves of Terror under this method
periods of intense fear-mongering are
interspersed with periods of calm but
each period of calm is followed by an
even more more intense spell of fear and
on and on the process goes miru explains
the psychological impact each wave of
terrorizing creates its effects more
easily after a breathing spell than the
one that preceded it because people are
still disturbed by their previous
experience morality becomes lower and
lower and the psychological effects of
each new propaganda campaign become
stronger it reaches a public already
softened up while fear primes a
population for menticide the use of
propaganda to spread misinformation and
promote confusion regarding the source
of threats and the nature of the crisis
helps break down the minds of the masses
government officials and their Lackey in
the media can use contradictory reports
nonsensical information and even blatant
lies the more they confuse the less
capable a population Becomes of coping
with the crisis and diminishing Their
Fear in a rational and adaptive manner
confusion in other words heightens the
suscep ability to descend into the
delusions of totalitarianism as miru
puts it logic can be met with logic
while illogic cannot it confuses those
who think straight the big lie and
monotonously repeated nonsense have more
emotional appeal than logic and reason
while the people are still searching for
a reasonable counterargument to the
first lie the totalitarians can assault
them with another in our modern world
the means to manipulate Society into the
psychosis of totalitarianism have never
been more effective smartphones and
social media television and the internet
all in conjunction with Bots that spread
propaganda and algorithms that quickly
censor unwanted information allow those
in power to easily assault the minds of
the masses what's more The Addictive
nature of these Technologies means that
many people voluntarily subject
themselves to the ruling Elites
propaganda with alarming frequency miru
observed this trend even in the early
days of modern technology modern
technology teaches man to take for
granted the world he is looking at he
takes no time to retreat and reflect
technology lures him on dropping him
into its wheels and movements No Rest no
meditation no reflection no conversation
the senses are continually overloaded
with stimuli man doesn't learn to
question his world anymore the screen
offers him answers readymade but there's
a further step that would be
totalitarian rulers can take to increase
the chance of a totalitarian psychosis
isolating the victims and disrupting
normal social interactions when alone
and lacking normal interactions with
friends family and co-workers an
individual becomes far more susceptible
to delusions for several reasons firstly
they lose contact with the corrective
force of positive examples not everyone
is tricked by the machinations of the
ruling Elite and individuals who see
through the propaganda can help free
others from The mdal Assault if however
isolation is enforced the power of these
positive examples greatly diminishes
another reason isolation increases the
efficacy of menticide is that human
beings like many other species are more
easily conditioned into new patterns of
thought and behavior when isolated miru
explains this in relation to the work of
physiologist Ivon Pavlov on behavioral
conditioning Pavlov made another
significant Discovery the conditioned
reflex could be developed most easily in
a quiet laboratory with a minimum of
disturbing stimuli every trainer of
animals knows this from his own
experience isolation and the patient
repetition of stimuli are required to
tame wild animals the totalitarians have
followed this rule they know that they
can condition their political victims
most quickly if they are kept in
isolation alone confused and battered by
waves of Terror a population under an
attack of menticide descends into a
hopeless and vulnerable state the
never-ending stream of propaganda turns
Minds once capable of rational thought
into playhouses of irrational forces
with chaos swirling around them and
within them the masses crave a return to
a more ordered world this is when the
wood be totalitarians can take the
decisive step they can offer a way out a
return to order in a world that seems to
be moving rapidly in the opposite
direction but all this comes at a price
the masses must give up their freedom
and Seed control of all aspects of life
to the ruling Elite they must relinquish
their capacity to be self-reliant
individuals responsible for their own
lives and become submissive and obedient
subjects in other words the masses must
descend into the delusions of the
totalitarian Psych Tois miru describes
this descent vividly the totalitarian
systems of the 20th century represent a
kind of
collective
psychosis whether gradually or suddenly
reason and common human decency are no
longer possible in such a system there
is only a pervasive atmosphere of Terror
and a projection of the enemy imagined
to be in our midst thus Society turns on
itself urged on by the ruling
authorities but the order prom by a
totalitarian world is a pathological
order by enforcing strict Conformity and
requiring blind obedience from the
citizenry totalitarianism rides the
world of the spontaneity that produces
many of life's Joys and the creativity
that drives Society forward the total
control of this form of rule no matter
under what name it is branded be it rued
by scientists and doctors politicians
and bureaucrats or a dictator breeds
stagnation destruction and Death on a
mass scale so perhaps the most important
question facing our world is how can
totalitarianism be prevented and if a
society has been induced into the early
stages of this Mass psychosis can the
effects be reversed while one can never
be sure of the prognosis of collective
Madness there are steps that can be
taken to help affect a cure this task
however necessitates many different
approaches from many different people
just as the mdal attack is multi-pronged
so must be the Counterattack according
to Carl Yung for those of us who wish to
help return sanity to an insane world
the first step is to bring order to our
own minds and to live in a way that
provides inspiration for others to
follow it is not for nothing that our
age cries out for the Redeemer
personality for the one who can
emancipate himself from the grip of the
collective psychosis and save at least
his own soul who lights a Beacon of Hope
for others proclaiming that here is at
least one man who has succeeded in
extricating himself from the Fatal
identity with the group psyche but
assuming one is living in a manner free
of the grip of the psychosis there are
further steps that can be taken firstly
information that counters the propaganda
should be spread as far and as wide as
possible the truth is more powerful than
the fiction and falsities pedal by
wouldbe totalitarian rulers so their
success is in part contingent on their
ability to censor the free flow of
information another tactic is to use
humor and ridicule to delegitimize the
ruling Elite as miru explains we must
learn to treat the demagogue and
aspiring dictators in our midst with the
weapon of ridicule the demagogue himself
is almost incapable of humor of any sort
and if we treat him with humor he will
begin to collapse a tactic recommended
by VAV Havel a political dissident under
Soviet communist rule who later became
president of Czechoslovakia is the
construction of what are called parallel
structures a parallel structure is any
form of organization business
institution technology or creative
Pursuit that exists physically within a
totalitarian in society yet morally
outside of it in communist
Czechoslovakia havl noted that these
parallel structures were more effective
at combating totalitarianism than
political action furthermore when enough
parallel structures are created a second
culture or parallel Society
spontaneously forms and functions as an
enclave of freedom and Sanity within a
totalitarian World hav explains in his
book The Power of the powerless what
else are parallel structures than an
area where a different life can be lived
a life that is in harmony with its own
aims and which in turn structures itself
in harmony with those aims what else are
those initial attempts at Social
self-organization than the efforts of a
certain part of society to rid itself of
the self-sustaining aspects of
totalitarianism and thus to extricate
itself radically from its involvement in
the totalitarian system but Above All
Else what is required to prevent a full
descent into The Madness of
totalitarianism is action by as many
people as possible just as the ruling
Elite Do not sit around passively but
instead take deliberate steps to
increase their power so too must an
active and concerted effort be made to
move the world back in the direction of
Freedom this can be an immense Challenge
in a world falling prey to the delusions
of totalitarianism but as Thomas Payne
noted during another dark period of
History tyranny like hell is not easily
conquered yet we have this consolation
with us that the harder the conflict the
more glorious the Triumph it's important
to remember that the battle against
totalitarianism is not just a physical
or political one but a psychological one
the ruling Elite understand this which
is why they focus so heavily on
controlling the narrative and
manipulating emotions to combat this we
must become aware of our own
psychological vulnerabilities and work
to strengthen our minds against
manipulation one way to do this is
through education not just formal
education but self-education we must
cultivate critical thinking skills learn
to question authority and develop the
ability to recognize propaganda and
manipulation when we see it this
includes understanding logical fallacies
being able to fact check information and
maintaining a healthy skepticism without
falling into paranoia another crucial
aspect is maintaining our humanity and
connections with others totalitarian
systems thrive on dehumanization and
isolation by fostering genuine human
connections practicing empathy and
refusing to see others as mere
abstractions or enemies we resist the
totalitarian mindset we must also be
vigilant about protecting our privacy
and personal autonomy as technology
advances
it becomes easier for those in power to
Monitor and control the population by
being conscious of our digital footprint
supporting privacy protecting
Technologies and resisting the urge to
trade privacy for convenience we can
make it harder for wouldbe totalitarians
to exert control it's also crucial to
support and Protect free speech and
freedom of the press these are often the
first casualties in a totalitarian
takeover even if we disagree with what's
being said defending the right to say it
is crucial for maintaining a free
Society this includes supporting
Independent Journal ISM and alternative
media Outlets that challenge the
official narrative furthermore we must
be wary of the creep of authoritarianism
totalitarianism rarely appears overnight
it often Creeps in gradually each small
step making the next seem less
outrageous we must be willing to draw
lines in the sand and say no further to
encroachments on our freedoms even when
they're presented as being for our own
good it's worth noting that art and
culture play a significant role in this
struggle totalitarian regimes often seek
to control art and suppress creativity
because they recognize its power to
inspire and unite people by creating and
supporting art that celebrates Freedom
individuality and human dignity we can
help keep the flame of Liberty alive
even in dark times in conclusion the
struggle against the mass psychosis of
totalitarianism is one of the most
crucial battles of our time it's a
battle fought not just in the halls of
power or on the streets but in the minds
and hearts of of every individual the
path is not easy and the outcome is
never guaranteed but as long as there
are those who value Freedom who think
critically who maintain their Humanity
in the face of dehumanizing forces there
is hope in the words of the philosopher
Albert kamu the only way to deal with an
unfree world is to become so absolutely
free that your very existence is an act
of rebellion let us then commit
ourselves to this rebellion of Freedom
let us be the beacon of Sanity in an
increasingly insane world the choice as
always lies with each of us will we
succumb to the comfortable delusions
offered by wouldbe totalitarians or will
we embrace the sometimes difficult but
ultimately liberating path of freedom
and individual responsibility the future
of our societies and indeed of human
civilization itself May well depend on
how we answer this question
