humans live with our nose absolutely
pressed up to toxicity we eat fruit and
vegetables in particular covered in
toxic pesticides designed to kill
insects plants and fungus everything
around us carpets Etc and the dental
floss we use everything is dripping in
toxins the plastic we wrap our food in
leeches toxins into our food so we have
a special problem and it's showing up in
our fertility
today I am pleased to introduce for a
second conversation on the great
simplification Jeremy Grantham Jeremy is
perhaps best known for co-founding the
investment and asset management company
GMO in
1977 and for his widely uh read GMO
quarterly newsletter which has been
ahead of its time for a long time on
issues like climate change resource
depletion phosphorus limits and and many
other topics related to the biophysical
systems that underpin human economies
Jeremy is also known as an active
philanthropist championing issues and
causes related to the environment and
for livable human Futures in this
episode uh we dive into the topic of
toxicity and
population uh specifically how endocrine
disrupting chemicals uh impact human
fertility and what that could mean for
the human population in the future the
findings Jeremy presents in today's
episode uh come from uh his research
that he funds but also a new white paper
he has out on toxicity and its threat to
capitalism what he said uh in this
conversation was largely new to me um
many of us in the environmental field
have been concerned about a growing
population and Jeremy is laying out a a
pretty good argument for a declining
population in the not too distant future
due partially to Lifestyle Changes and
increasingly due to drops in sperm count
testosterone uh and the inability of
humans and non-humans to actually get
pregnant and and have
Offspring um I plan on having a round
table on this topic shaas Swan and I are
doing an in-person podcast next month to
discuss this research this is an
important topic uh really important and
I will uh address it further in the
future but for now please welcome Jeremy
Grantham Jeremy Grantham welcome back to
the show hi I met with you briefly in in
New York and uh I'm going to I'm going
to put you on the spot and embarrass you
um you uh uh gave many talks during
climate week on many issues and Jane
Goodall came up to you and gave you a
hug and thanked you for all your
important work on behalf of the
environment I thought your response was
uh was precious you just kind of blushed
um but seems appropriate but for people
that know you you have been uh a long
time champion on behalf of the systemic
environmental ecological systems things
going on in the world and one thing um
per our conversation which you mentioned
in our original podcast is toxicity uh
the impact of endocrine disrupting
chemicals and chemical pollution on our
society now and into the into the future
uh specifically on human fertility sperm
count and the like so you have uh in the
years since you've been on the podcast
been continuing to work on this topic um
toxic chemicals that mess with the
hormone system of animals including the
human animal um can you describe a broad
overview of your recent uh findings in
these studies and what you're currently
focused on I've spent a big chunk of my
life looking at neglected
long-term problems and including the
stock market and I decided long ago that
humans do that pretty well
we neglect pretty well every important
long-term issue we simply don't do
long-term I think a lot of people on
your
podcast make the point that pretty well
every every living creature has
developed over millions of years to to
survive to to grab now to be as ruthless
as you have to
be and uh they have not developed to
worry about five or six Generations into
the future I'm sure it was a tough
process learning to put some aside for
the winter and eventually we did that
but I think that's about it um
everything from the start Market
onwards I.E the trivial
topics we worry about now and not too
much about the
future and uh that was certainly true of
climate change which I started proing
izing on for 25 years ago very hard to
get people to take it seriously there
was plenty of eye rolling and only in
the last two or three years did it begin
to get serious
traction and compared to
that toxicity is remarkable it is more
dangerous traveling faster and utterly
unrecognized by almost anybody even the
people who can't M the baby bust will
write you know otherwise Splendid books
the empty planet or
um that Economist from
lsse um Good how or something like this
uh on on the economic effects of the
population change um all of
them forget to mention or don't know
about toxicity there was an important
article 3 weeks ago in the New York
Times about the problem with women uh
not having children and toxicity did not
feature in the article or or the
comments quite remarkable um Foreign
Affairs had a serious article finally um
but no one realizes the role that
toxicity is already playing and will get
to play possibly to uh ruin effect in
the next few decades and And yet when
when we're at a conference uh with
Scientists working on this everyone is
apoplectic about the risk and they're
like this is so clear the signal to
noise is unequivocal we have declining
sperm count probably declining
testosterone levels impacts on our on
our behaviors maybe links to autism uh
obesity and all the other things so that
is it a is it is it an information
deficit between the scientists and the
general public or I mean this is why I
wanted you back on the show because I
agree with you there's lots of
constraints on the human uh Enterprise
right now climate change being a big one
energy depletion politics geopolitics
but Plastics isn't there why is it and
and then let's get into the details of
of what's going on we have a remarkable
ability not to dwell on unpleasant
topics and this one apparently
takes the ticket because uh everybody
avoids it but it's had a lot of
publicity there is simply no legitimate
excuse for having
reached election day 2024 without
realizing that this isn't this is an
important
issue it is clearly existential and not
existential in 200 years existential
pretty soon the leading The Cutting Edge
is South Korea I would say that South
Korea has moved so fast in the direction
of fewer children that it has passed the
point of no return I don't think there
is even odds that it will survive as a
viable
economic stable Society let me ask you a
a question based on on my work uh which
you probably understand this stat as
well as anyone a barrel of oil uh has
around 1,700 kwatt hours worth of work
potential and you and I working are
0.6 so in addition to the 5 billion
human workers on the planet the machines
that power the world power powered by
fossil hydrocarbons are around 400 some
billion worker equivalents so if if
there's that much of an energy subsidy
work subsidy from machines powered by
fossil fuels so what if population goes
down 10 or 20% the machines can make up
for that shortfall what what are your
thoughts on that my thoughts are a bit
like Ai and uh intelligent cyborgs
wandering
around they don't uh consume they don't
go into the supermarket they don't buy
product and without product capitalism
as currently configured
disintegrates and that's it it's a
pretty simple story so you can have lots
of production no consumption and um I
see you have to retool everything so
it's not the worker part that's it's not
the work that we're worried about it's
the consumption and the demand
well I suspect that the work that we're
going to be short of is looking after
old old folk that ratio is moving by the
year it's moving so fast there's never
been anything like it particularly in
China Japan South Korea but China being
the important one the r at
which South Korea is having
babies at at today's rate if it didn't
get any
worse it would mean you'd have eight
grandparents for every grandchild just
think of the burden that that represents
one grandchild attempting to help and
look after eight grandparents and they
will all be old you know they'll all
need help and there'll be no labor there
to do it so how is that possible because
I have four well I used to have four
grandparents Oh you mean one person
would have four grandparents and then
there would be another four grandparents
that didn't have any grandchildren if
you like that's right on average they
have a half each got it got it wow and
uh do you know what that number is like
in the United States right now roughly
no I don't uh China it's one for four
okay which is already impossible Society
will disintegrate pretty darn fast if
you keep going at that rate the other
thing too South Korea it's not only came
into this year with the lowest fertility
rate in the world but it declined at
6.1% this year I mean it's just
ridiculous 6.1% will have your baby
production in 12 years in 24 years it
will quarter it it is already half of
what it
was so in 24 years at this rate it will
be a quarter of a half or an eighth of
what they used to have and with an
eighth of the babies you cannot have
anything approaching the society that
you
had you simply go out of business and
and not
slowly if it's not 24 years then it's 36
years you cannot decline at these rates
so how how much and I I don't think
there's a way to actually prove this but
what does your research uh and
scholarship on this suggest how much of
that is our volition and desire uh to
either do the act of having babies or
consciously try to have a baby and how
much of it is these endocrine disrupting
chemicals disrupting our hormone system
and and reducing our sperm count in Men
in South Korea and end in the world so
let's assume for a
second there was no toxicity there were
no endocrine disruptors there was just
modern capitalism with all its
incentives it's been so
successful at selling its image of high
consumption High success to women now as
well as men that they want to have the
same life that the guys have and if they
get
married they can't do that their career
suffers they don't get paid as much they
have to do more work at home it is
simply not a Level Playing Field and in
a chauvinistic Society like South Korea
and
Japan you can really sympathize why they
wouldn't want why they wouldn't want to
do it and they don't just a a word on
Japan Japan started counting babies in
1888 it has fewer babies today than it
did in
1888 and it has three per year today we
have fewer babies per year babies fewer
babies per year than the year they
started keeping records even though the
population of Japan has
tripled okay part two 50 years ago they
had two million
babies 10 years ago they had a million
babies last year they had 700,000 babies
this year they declined at 5% less than
South Korea at 5% which doubles oh high
s every 14 years so in 28 years they
will have a quarter of
700,000 or
170,000
170,000 babies in 24 years down from
2,50 years
ago that's how fast it's going on people
don't seem to worry
because they're happy to lump in
increasing armies of 60 to 90 year old
Japanese and South Koreans which so
Mellows the data that it hides the real
trouble for about 20 years this is
something that really snuck up on or or
is sneaking up on the environmental
narrative I mean Paul erck in 1969 wrote
the population bomb this wasn't on his
radar and it sounds like what you're
describing is 50 years on this is more
like a a population implosion in the
other direction due to at least in part
maybe largely from endocrine disrupting
chemicals and some of the cultural uh
you know reasons you mentioned I'm sorry
it's a complicated issue and full of
paradoxes but basically looking back
toxicity is a rounding error it's
overwhelmingly Choice buying into the
capitalist image wanting equality higher
education etc etc it's a pain having
children it's an income venient now in
the long run it's a great pleasure but
in the short run it's a real pain in the
bottom but what if we um do have a great
depression or uh by my lingo a great
simplification where the capitalist
pulse uh based on hydrocarbon inputs
wanes and declines wouldn't this Dynamic
reverse then and we would want to have
more children because it's the economic
equivalent of of child mortality is we
we want to springboard in the other
direction I mean it is
conceivable and I hope quite possible
that we will change the culture in the
long run if in the short to intermediate
term we get poor um we will have fewer
children it is clear that income plays
the crushingly largest role uh today and
looking backwards uh in the choice the
things that you really need when you
have children you know housing and
health and education have all gone out
way above the average rate of inflation
the fact that televisions are a bargain
does not really help you when you're
when you're having children it's just
brutally expensive also the culture has
shifted to make it worse the the modern
certainly modern middle class and and
and
Rich uh have incredibly high standards
for looking after their children they
nurture them at every turn they don't
leave them too much on their own they
feed them exciting activities sporting
and
intellectual and they fret about whether
they are going to be amongst the most
competitive desirable Highly Educated
Etc specimens on the planet it it's a
very stressful full-time activity and we
see it around us every day if we look
for it so you have not only much more
expensive but much more timec consuming
much more stressful much more
competitive process the few children you
have you want to be all at the top of
the class at Harvard basically so let me
ask you this Jeremy uh in the same way
that if you um observed the uh median
and mean income in the United States you
might get very different ANS
uh I think median is is 50,000 and mean
is is 70,000 or something like that when
you look at population and total
fertility rates in the world um I think
half of the world population lives in
countries that the total fertility rate
is under 2.1 or the replacement rate but
the global North is most of that
population whereas Africa um has a much
higher uh total fertility rates so is
the story that you're saying a global
one or is it is it confined mostly to
the rich industrialized countries The
Cutting Edge is the rich industrialized
countries plus China but everybody is
moving in the same direction and in fact
technically Africa is losing babies
faster than anywhere else it's just from
a much higher base but in the last 45
years they have dropped 2.1 babies per
woman
if they do that in the next 45 years and
my guess is they will and it may be 35
or 40 they will be at 2.1 so all we have
really is a 30-year window say where
there is a reasonably generous uh excess
of babies in Africa the population of
babies in the world is dropping 1.2
million a year over the last 10 years we
peaked at 142 million baby a year we're
down to 130 and that minus 1.2 a year
contains within it plus 400,000 in
Africa so the rest of the
world which includes a few poor
countries over 2.1 the rest of the world
is is falling at 1.6 million a year
obviously from 130 million you can't
keep that up too long but even Africa in
30 years will be no material help to the
global baby situation but for 30 years
they are an in interesting potential now
the irony one of many ironies here is
that in 20
years you will easily notice even if
you're not trying to look that there
will be competition for immigrants
immigrants I am immigrants yes people a
lot of countries will be so desperate
that they will be competing for
immigrants on that note um your staff
was kind of enough to send me a draft of
a paper you're writing on this topic and
I I pulled out a quote uh if I could
read it to you and then maybe you could
unpack it uh it is worth noting here
that in 20 years or less many other
countries will be competing for
immigrants which is what you just said
in the countries with the most inverted
population pyramids soon to be three or
four grandparents per worker as
countries hit a fertility rate of one
smarter youngsters will immigrate to
less bad countries in a self-reinforcing
process that will surely cause some
governments to try and forbid
immigration what an iron irony this is
in the face of today's growing political
resistance to immigration so this is
this is quite a statement Jeremy um can
you unpack that a little more first of
all let me say I don't think there's any
material chance that that is going to be
wrong it's moving so fast let us take
Japan they are beginning to increase
their rate of immigrants in the
countryside
which as you know is getting to be
denuded by the year there are
nevertheless lots of old family
businesses you know the 17th generation
the 12th generation of the greatest
paper makers in the world or the great
greatest saki makers in the world they
have a simple Choice everywhere they
will close down and dishonor their 12
ancestors or they will bring in four or
five Filipinos or Indonesians the 37
people left in the village May hate that
that but they're not the ones with the
jobs the guys with the businesses who
owe a debt to their ancestors they're
the ones making the decision and they
are making it increasingly to bring in
immigrants it is in the last result
better than closing shop and it's
happening very very fast the same in in
South Korea and other places well what
you just described if you're right could
be a microcosm for many things in our
world in the next couple decades yes and
let me just say in passing because I I'm
a nerd I can't resist these things Japan
is is very interesting in that even
though it's shedding people for years
now uh aggregate population the
population of Tokyo the biggest city in
the world is still Rising as is Osaka so
when the country folk go into Tokyo
their productivity Rises so Japan is a
very interesting case where the
productivity has hung in remarkably well
they don't get enough credit despite a
chronic lack of babies and a chronic
decline in the population and just for
the record their population of 20 year
olds entering the workforce is half of
what it was at the peak if America was
down 15% we would be freaking out they
have managed to have their entry Force
into their Workforce and and they still
maintain a reasonably stable effective
reasonably productive Society it's quite
amazing and they have reasonably healthy
older people there which is kind of not
the case in our country as much and
they're beginning to work a bit longer
which is going to be essential
everywhere and we simply the bottom line
is it's not about lock boxes and Social
Security set aside every everything you
give to pensioners comes out of this
year's GDP pi there's nothing you can't
move income across time you can't take
nursing skill and move it two years into
the future or take it from the past it's
what you have this year and the piie is
simply going to be divided more for the
nonproductive old and less for the
productive young and that's all you have
to say about it nothing can change that
and that's going to on top of all the
other risks we face that's going to
happen to some degree globally is your
prediction absolutely is my prediction
we have no experience with population
bust with the possible exception of the
Black Death we have no economic
experience with managing downwards and
now everywhere it's beginning to seep in
into economies everyone is learning how
to deal or trying to learn how to deal
with declining growth rates America is
currently very pleased with its
productivity what it's really saying is
they're doing less badly than the
Europeans right by our own standards our
productivity is way down it is steadily
declined no it has irregularly but but
the trend has been pretty pretty
obviously downwards for 50 years when I
arrived in the 60s productivity here was
3% Workforce increase was 1 and a half
GDP was 4 and a half who be practically
Japanese now the population increase in
the next 20 years will be essentially
nothing from internal purposes and
unknowable few basis points from
immigration and productivity has wended
its way down from three to about one and
a half so we will be aspiring to about 1
and a half% growth not the old three or
so that the oecd and the boys all
predicted as recently as 20 years ago
you're predicting this not due to oil
depletion or leaving the stability of
the hallene on a route to 2 degrees
Celsius world or lack of mineral
availability or international trade
agreements you're just predicting this
based on fertility Decline and
population decline in our economies yes
and of course if you add pressure from
resources beginning
uh to hit
boundaries of availability it makes it
worse if you add climate change damage
by the way last year was really the
first year where Global Climate damage
amounted to something uh that mattered
to Global GDP in developing countries it
is arguably over half a percent moving
towards 1% of GDP and on a global basis
not far short of a half a perc hit last
year and it is not on average getting
less so this is not an easy
environment to solve the problems that
we're talking about I have so many
questions so just on the leaving the the
magnitude of productivity and GDP
aside um does this potentially create a
brain drain of talented young people in
in countries that are struggling with
population and have like you said a
disproportionately um High older
population that they move to the less
bad countries and and then this creates
a spiral effect if you have a country
like Japan with an incredibly High
strong social contract my guess is it
will help a lot they will feel that it's
dishonorable to immigrate because their
country is in trouble if you have an
ordinary country with a squeeze Hungary
Italy
Spain China when you're looking at a
particularly 20 years from now you're
looking at a horrific burden of looking
at after your your three or four
grandparents
single-handedly uh why wouldn't an
attractive well-educated
recently minted engineer Etc why
wouldn't they go to the more promising
countries that are less bad humans are
are
pretty interested in their own
well-being I think it's an irresistible
urge to move and I think they they would
and they will
and as they do it's self-reinforcing the
the less bad countries become better the
worse countries become worse until
Hungary will as Ukraine does today will
forbid young people in in in in
Ukraine's case young men from
leaving how can they not unless you want
to stand by and watch your local
culture economy Society disintegrate how
can you not try and protect Europe and
the other thing is they've spent a lot
of money educating their doctors and
Engineers are they not owed in a sense
at least repayment for that coming from
you uh this is quite profound um because
you're you're not a chicken little sort
of
person um but I don't hear this at the
environmental conferences um that I go
to or the energy resource uh convenings
um
I what impact does this have on
um on GDP then by the way I recommend
the L that they have been ahead of the
curve on everything interaction of
climate change on medical
problems toxicity and medical problems
and all the interactions and
consequences and they once again are the
least bad the most advanced commentary
on on on these topics what about the
environmental movement of which you and
I are are card carrying members this
flies in the face of some of the
narratives that we need to have reduced
population to have reduced pressure on
ecosystems yes I mean doesn't isn't this
a good news for the environment I I kind
of preface all these conversations by
saying this is a super complicated issue
full of paradoxes and and so on but I
don't think we have any material chance
of reaching sustainable living happily
ever after stage without ending up with
two to three billion people so we've got
to get there what are the chances if we
backed up to 1960 where the average
mother was having four children average
woman was having four children what are
the chances of us deciding
whoops we're growing too fast Club of
Rome is correct
we have to downsize the population what
is the chance that democracies would do
that the answer is nil of course they
would freak out they would take to the
streets instantly but the inverse is not
nil the inverse is we have a declining
fertility crisis upon us go out and have
babies uh to help your country that is
not a nil response right I'm not sure
what that means Nate well if there was a
public like there is in Sweden I think
they give uh
um they they give stiens to go on
vacations to have sex because they
realize that there's a fertility decline
I I showed those ads as a joke in my
class to make fun of it but I wonder if
that's coming do it for your country uh
of course it's coming yeah and and you
could make a list for your class of 200
different tricks that the hungar and
South koreas and swedens have already
played and one can say with a pretty
clear conscience if ever a bag of 200
tricks had failed this is it really they
have been unbelievably
unsuccessful I didn't know that so South
Korea has been aware of this and trying
to combat it with marketing and
communication and trick South Korea will
be spending this year probably about as
much of their GDP as any country on the
planet to stimulate uh baby production
Sweden has has tried notably and
occasionally you get a fiveyear 10year
pickup and then it starts to drop again
France has been very successful but
still it's decently below 2.1 and for
the last 5 years has been falling again
a few countries have had a modest
success for a modest number of years but
in general they have failed badly and
surprisingly okay so um what we've been
talking about is the momentum of the
total fertility on the planet that has
been
happening and you've been evidencing
this and describing it um but what about
now let's set this aside for the moment
and we'll come back to it what about on
top of what you just
discussed the reduction in sperm count
that seems to be ongoing and possibly
accelerating and the impact on male is
there any impact on female endocrine uh
reproductive system from from chemicals
what what role does does toxicity have
on the story that you just laid out the
big issue which we're wending slowly
through is that without toxicity we have
a serious problem because women are
choosing not to have children okay uh
and looking
backwards We Believe toxicity has not
played that big a role however in recent
years we do believe toxicity is finally
beginning to bite and it's biting in two
ways
endocrine disruption messing with your
hormones clearly reduces your sex drive
point one and point two clearly
interferes with your ability to have uh
children easily so on the point one do
we know how it reduces your sex drive
hormones are basically your sex drive
and you you screw around with them
it is very easy basically like changing
my uh 28-year-old self although I'm a
man uh into my 58-year-old self uh
overnight with with endocrine disrupting
chemicals that sort of impact on your
drive as an example yes and they you
know you can test this with mice and
rats and so on but my the my favorite
horror story it happens to be one of the
few peer-reviewed articles on on this
topic in Japan 8,000 young people full
between 20 and 40 or 20 and 50 and and
they U among many questions they asked
how many of you have had no sex of any
kind unquote in the last 12 months 45%
of the men and approximately 45% of the
women but 55% of the young men between
20 and 29 to which one can only say holy
cow 55% of 20 to 29 year olds in Japan
Jaan had not had men men had had no sex
of any kind for 12 months it could be
contributed to by Massive increases over
the last 40 years and in their parents
by the way these are uh epigenetic
effects that pass through to your
children and it's just been accumulating
at a dreadful rate
for really for the best part of a 100
years and but massively since world War
IO so this has been the sleeping
ticking population implosion that's been
happening for a long time we were we're
now just becoming aware of it so you
were saying setting aside the desire
like the economic reasons why women
don't want to have children we talked
about that earlier and now on the
endocrine disrupting toxicity side
number one is it changes your hormones
to want to have sex and want to have
children and then two it actually limits
your ability to have children which is
what the sperm count drop yes and um the
sperm C drop is about the future in the
past I I
reckon back in hunter gatherer days we
probably had 140 units and by the time
they start to academically measure these
things in
1972 it's down to about a 100 today it's
100 units of what
of of sperm per milliliter okay it's a
lot you know we produce massive
quantities like 50
million sperm right okay right right uh
but they have to run an obstacle cost
which is fairly prodigious and it has
never been that trivial for many people
to have children at the drop of a hat
but the more you have the easier it is
the other thing that comes down with the
sperm count which I believe has come
down from probably 140 to 35 it's to a
quarter of what it was first of all we
were over engineered Nate so I like to
say like a good Victorian Bridge you
know they didn't know quite the breaking
stress so they they made them really
really strong and they still stand today
and we don't need that much we don't
need 140 units until you get to 50 it's
completely academic so it's only in the
last 15 20 years it began to have any
effect at all but in the last 15 20
years we have quickly gone from almost
no couples having a problem a few
technical problems the way people are
constructed slightly off kilter a
handful to 15% of all young couples
needing help according to the World
Health Organization however they didn't
say because they're not looking for
political trouble they didn't say and
this has kind of sprung out of the
ground in the last 15 20 years in other
words it's moving very fast and of
course it's moving very fast our sperm
count is dropping at 2.6% a year
according to shaana and LaVine okay so
that 15% is of couples that separate
from the first part of this conversation
these are couples that actually want to
have sex and want to have children and
are having trouble and are having
trouble and people who wanted to have
children before basically got them and
now 15% do not but with the sperm count
down to a quarter and still falling at
at technically an accelerating
rate the decline rate this century is
2.6 the decline rate in the 30 years of
the last century was about 1.5 or 1.6 so
we're actually declining at an
accelerating rate at a rate
2.6 that will
um have your sperm count in 26 years now
so in 26
years the the median will be will be
down to 15 17 18 units maybe 20 at that
level it won't be 15% it may be 50 we
have no way of calculating this but it
stands to reason that this is going to
be a power law doesn't
it that you can easily stand a drop from
your hunter gatherer levels you can take
some increased trouble now but as you
get
towards chronic
deficiency you rapidly approach zero
ability to have
unassisted babies so have you seen the
movie Children of Men yes of course is
is this the sort of future that you're
envisioning
potentially no it's not going to be
abrupt like
that and um it's not going to be
inexplicable like that we are going
to understand exactly what's going on as
we can do now we're going to see it
working through at different rates
through more or less every country as we
can do
now we will obviously take technical um
responses our ability to do better and
more
frequent IVF
techniques fertility clinics Etc will
become I suspect a very big
deal and uh so we will not kind of go
out on that on that level uh without a
struggle but we will go out in my
opinion unless we do two pretty
straightforward easily understood things
detoxify the environment and
detoxify capitalism it may be difficult
politically but it is very easy you have
to
ban all seriously toxic industrial
chemicals and toxic Plastics not
difficult we lived quite well without
most of these and you have to find
substitutes that are acceptable you have
to find bioderived
materials uh even if you engineer
microbes and bacteria to take it out of
the air um I am sure that will happen in
the time we have available you can do it
now whether we'll do it or not is
another matter and how quickly we do it
is the ball game but this is not like
climate climate is a global we're all in
it together one guy's bad behavior is
everyone's bad behavior but toxicity is
local the guys who behave well will have
healthier lives and will live longer the
guys that behave badly because they're
capitalist uh um hyper capitalist that
won't give an inch they will have less
healthy lives and they will live shorter
I now have so many questions so I will
give you my word I'm going to ask them
one at a time so as you know Shauna is a
friend of mine I spoke with her recently
and asked her what is her new thinking
around fertility and toxicity uh in the
last few months and her answer was one
world one Health in other words the
number of species that are being
affected by fertility drop is roughly 2%
a year which tracks Humanity's problem
and there's no significant different
difference in geography so if humans are
impacted this way
Jeremy what about every living thing on
the planet uh how is their fertility
impacted do we have any thoughts or
knowledge or research on this yeah I'm
sadly we
do I have to have to reluctantly confess
that having dealt with these kind of
semi- painful factors for my entire life
it they they never got to me so only in
the last couple of years I begin to be
periodically somewhat disturbed by our
complete disregard and and also the
speed at which the damage is increasing
and and the problems are moving but if
we take insects it turns out that humans
and insects are particularly
sensitive in insects just because biolog
ially that's the way they're made the
slightest little trace of a nicotinoid
in the water system and they die by the
millions humans because although we may
be fairly rugged we uniquely amongst
species live with our nose absolutely
pressed up to toxicity we eat fruit and
vegetables in particular covered in in
toxic pesticides designed to kill
insects plants and fungus hardly
surprising it would do a job on us and
actually the great majority of them
dripping in
pasty the the the chemicals that never
go away in in in
nature and everything around us carpets
and Etc and the dental floss we use
everything is dripping in toxins uh the
plastic we wrap our food in leeches
toxins in into our food in case we need
it anymore so we have a special problem
and we it's showing up in fertility
insects are particularly sensitive and
it's showing up in their fertility and
they have lots of other problems
dividing up the nature into little
patches little islands is a killer for
them and and other animal life and so on
and and climate change will also pose a
bigger problem to them than it does to
us but insects play a particular role
and my colleague Jamie and I spent three
hours with IO Wilson not that long
before he died and it was a I must say a
wonderful experience but all the insect
experts completely believe that without
insects we run a risk of the whole of
nature losing the plot of just
disintegrating and leaving no material
chance of survival for humans the
problem is they couldn't prove it it's
infinitely complex and they never had
any money and uh but they all profoundly
believed it as he did that's the problem
with a lot of the issues that we're
discussing on this podcast and in your
research is by the time we can
absolutely prove it without a doubt
it'll be too late to mitigate it and
change it and it's game over as you said
yeah so let me ask you this sh shaa uh
believes that much of the endocrine
disrupting chemical problem that causes
the infertility crisis and the hormones
is from plasticizers like phalates that
make things soft um and pliable but when
you were on this show last year you
suggested it could be more from
agricultural chemical residues and our
food have you two placed a friendly
wager on that and is there any new
information either way and and by the
way there is probably a third group I
understand who who think that past play
a very big role and and I'm somewhat
sympathetic to all three groups however
I base mine on a couple of small
terribly insufficient studies an
insufficiency RS Havoc with academics
less so with me I I try and just look at
the data for what it is these two
studies were done by Harvard and Mass
general which has a reasonable claim on
being the best hospital in America and
they were small studies and they were
done quite recently 10 15 years ago and
in study one they Got U a few hundred
that's all a few hundred I think
800 men and for 6 months they
self-reported on the toxins they add on
their fruit and vegetables at the end of
the six-month window the sperm count of
the worst eating quarter was half of the
of the least bad quarter none of them
had fully organic which I wish much
harder to do by the way but I wish they
had because they might have been 50%
higher than that but in any case two to
one the following year or I think
actually two years later they did a a
very similar study looking at women who
presented themselves to the fertility
clinic and there really wasn't many
maybe
120 they self-reported on the toxicity
of the food fruit and veggies they at
and the best quartile the least bad
quartile had I think it's 67 % quote
successful live births the worst
quartile 37 and in all cases the
quartile order was the one you would
expect and the same for the guys that is
shockingly powerful data and when you
think of what these damn chemicals are
and when you look at them individually
you have to say why wouldn't they be
lethal pregnant women are em
bibing these
pesticides these
killers why would it not have that
effect so I am inclined to believe it's
logical that they would have an effect I
have been taught by people like shaana
that the sensitivity in the womb is many
multiple sometimes hundreds of times
more than when we're rough and tough
outside the womb it's exactly the result
I would expect and it's the result these
two little studies show the fact we live
in a world where they can't afford to
study the most important things in life
it seems is is a separate topic well
it's it's so I mean I can't remember the
the numbers but I'm guessing you do um
in in your draft paper on toxicity and
and the future I think you referenced
that there's
250,000 different chemical compounds
that are potentially toxic and like
hardly any of them have been tested for
risks to humans let alone the
combinatory when you have multiple
chemicals in the same in the same
formula is it is it along that those
lines absolutely as far as we know
they've tested none in in
combination but for example all we know
is that Roundup is much more toxic than
glyphosate I thought Roundup was
glyphosate no no absolutely not Roundup
has the active ingredient the official
active ingredient is glyphosate but it
has additives mixes and so on
which are several of them ferociously
toxic and the net effect is Round Up in
total is much more dangerous than
glyphosate on its own that is absolutely
typical and and the EPA does not require
you to test Round Up in total it
requires you to test glyphosate the
quote active ingredient the fact that
other additives also happen to be toxic
and active is not required for testing
is toxicity a threat to capitalism
itself in fact I am think I think I had
that title we changed the title at the
last minute and I sent you a rough draft
and and U my title is increasing
toxicity and the threat to
capitalism uh and um and life itself but
um of course a threat to capitalism for
capitalism to prosper you need
2.1 children and you need them to be
healthy ideally well educated and hard
charging and ambitious and we do some of
those things but not all of them but my
my argument in the
paper and from now on in life is
that you not only have to
detoxify the planet which is
theoretically easy but you have to
detoxify capitalism which is going to
take generations and will never be easy
and by that I mean you have to end up
with the culture capitalism or whatever
recognizing that we live on a finite
planet we can't have wasteful growth or
massive growth in anything for extended
periods of time that is simple math and
that we have certain Commons without
which we fail we must have ful
clean fresh water
non-toxic we've got to have non-toxic
air that doesn't also warm our
environment and kill us off that way
we've got to have clean soil that is
full of bacteria full of life of all
kinds which guarantee higher quality
food more nutritious and absolutely
non-toxic generative uh will do that
and of course in the end we need it to
be sustainable I don't think it's on The
Cutting Edge like toxicity is although
they overlap a bit but I think uh we
have to save ourselves on toxicity first
and look after some of these second
derivative problems as we can so you
come from uh uh you famously come from a
financial analysis background let me ask
ask you a very Financial bottom line
question in in the coming decades and
Beyond can you envision corporate
balance sheet that evidences that we can
have healthy bottom lines on a sick
depleted Planet I mean at what point is
there an inflection and awareness from
the business sector on these issues out
of their own necessity for survival of
of of profits I mean h how soon do
toxicity and climate start to impact the
bottom line of Corporations of course
they're impacting the bottom line now
we're we're it's costing us hundreds of
billions on a global basis uh both um
climate change and toxicity already it's
ruining our health and the health costs
are mounting at a ferocious rate um and
as I say the the the terrific thing the
one advantage about toxicity is that
it's local and if if the EU or what Mark
or China One Day really start to move
fast and ban all the toxins they will
very very quickly get the benefit of
Better Health and and Better Lives I say
in the paper which you notice no doubt
that that if you go back um 35 years or
70 years the swedes live two years
longer than Americans they live a
healthier Outdoors outdoorsy life but
today it's six years and um as I semi
joke my estate is willing to bet anybody
by 2050 it will be eight or
longer um because we are diverging and
we will diverge rapidly if we defend
every toxin because we make a lot of
money as we do with say nicotinoids
banned almost everywhere in the world
but not banned in America uh and a
teaspoon of which will kill you know
literally millions of bees um we will
pay a very high price
but at least we'll be able to see it so
I think Grantham Foundation should get
behind the best people so that they can
set an even better example whatever
barriers they have let us think about
how do we get over those barriers this
is not the case in climate change you
have to go for the aggregate problem but
in toxicity I think you should go for
the best example because the best
example will break the intellectual Bank
won't it if they're living 12 years
longer and their health budget this is
capitalism if their health budget and
government and politics has fallen to
half
hours and falling fast that is awfully
attractive and that may in the end move
us in time except in the United States
over 20% of our GDP is health care so
both Health Care worsening Health
outcomes and worsening climate
disasters on in a society with Surplus
are actually good for GDP yes yeah and
America ha
has is really dominated by hyper
capitalism and um we we have a a near
Monopoly of the super aggressive
fast-moving infinitely Rich
organizations and we have Far and Away
amongst the
uh amongst the free rich economies
faring away the greatest influence of
corporations in government and
particularly in regulatory bodies which
basically they tend to control so those
institutions designed to uh
help agriculture behave itself now help
major agricultural companies make the
most money and some of it is inadvertent
but some of it is not some of it is
blatant influence and if we move very
slowly we will pay the price an
environmentalist might say okay big deal
so you want to behave badly on toxicity
you'll tend to die off they want to
behave better they'll do better now
China is very interesting obviously very
big and very different China came quite
slowly to certain issues including
General pollution and and including
climate change they were not quick I
once wrote a quartly letter jokingly
addressed to them but when they picked
it up like a lot of things they move at
China speed and they flash past
everybody until today where they make
you know 80% of this 90% of that on and
on and on it goes 50% of every EV made
today is being made in China and and
there's a great variety and there's a
lot of Technology they are no longer
copying us they are leading the way in a
lot of these new technologies now I
think
within five years probably as my guess
since they're full of scientists in
their top levels they will realize the
critical significance of toxicity and
population problems and they will act
and we will see them pretty soon burning
slashing and burning through toxic
chemicals
and Plastics Banning them here and
banning them there in a way we can't
even fantasize about and when they do
unlike climate
change where they move at the aggregate
speed of the whole world however fast
they move they put in more solar panels
last year than America has ever put in
as the richest country in the world but
in this case they won't move at the
average speed they'll move at the speed
of their
individual progress and they will move
incredibly fast I guess and their Health
and Longevity will improve incredibly
fast so this is existential the toxicity
crisis to the world it is a global issue
it is a global comment but as you're
saying um toxicity might be changed
locally in the country that it's
relevant but isn't it possible are you
hope
that toxicity endocrine disrupting
chemicals chemical pollution the drop in
testosterone the drop in sperm count the
change in hormones all of that could
finally be a nonpartisan bipartisan
wakeup call because
Republicans uh who uh dismiss climate
change sure enough care about
testosterone and sperm count and and
having children I would imagine so is
there is there hope that this could be a
bipart is an issue that gets traction
yes it there are a lot of promising
signs the right wing seem to be quite
upset with the fact they're getting
poisoned and I I can't say I blame them
yeah so this does have more community of
interest it's also much more personal
isn't it toxic cancer sperm count the
the masculinity of your male offspring
these are these are very personal right
leftwing issues for any any parent and
so on and I suspect it will get
traction and will escalate very rapidly
I am certainly hoping so I'd love to get
back to the the Paradox that in the end
we need to get our population down we
wouldn't have chosen to do that but by
some miraculous
unintended
consequence which is toxic environment
and toxic anti-natal capitalism
we we are getting there and uh now the
problem is we seem to be having too much
of a good thing we're dropping so fast
in countries like South Korea and Japan
that if it spreads we will find it very
very difficult to stabilize these
countries and and China being of
course co-equal largest country in the
world is prime example you can't imagine
the stress they will have because they
not only have
for grandparents per
grandchild 1.0 fertility but they have a
chronic shortage of fertile women
because of the one child
policy exactly the 20 to 40 year olds
are the one child group and they are
tilted 15% to men so everyone has a
problem with fertility everyone around
them but they only have a regular
shortage of fertile women China has a
special Chinese induced shortage of
fertile women times a miserable
fertility rate it's double jeopardy so
they will be aging inverting the the
pyramid faster than anyone on the planet
possibly I know that you and and other
philanthropists are helping sha as Swan
get this message out and is is the
message gaining traction G given the
speed and danger of the problem it is
shocking how slowly it's moving I am
guessing that China will pick it up
because they have many more scientists
in them in their structure of politics
of government than than we do than
almost any Western Country and they have
a history of doing that in climate
change and that that could change
everything but at the moment it's
creeping along like a snail and it is a
cause it is a cause of considerable
stress because you know I've spent my
life trying to promote neglected
problems but there's never been one like
this where it's much the most serious
much the fastest moving and much the
most disregarded It seems impossible I
gave a talk to the Boston security
analyst society and separately the New
York security analyst society in which I
among other things introduced the
question of toxicity and population
problems and they practically fell
asleep to to which my response was okay
so 50% reduction in sperm count in 50
years doesn't get your attention would
100% reduction in a 100 years do it it
might not though because that's not
their job depends on their quarterly
bonus or their yearly bonus you'd think
however they might have a passing
interest in the well-being of their own
children and grandchildren this is no
longer requiring you to worry about your
distant descendants it's requiring you
to worry about your children and
grandchildren it's it's become
immediate they they will have bad Health
a lot of us have had bad bad health
because we live too close to a toxic
chemical plant or something these are
have huge consequences and as shaa and
others will have told you the epigenetic
effect of many of these endocrine
disruptors means that your children pay
a price and quite probably your
grandchildren it's certainly the case in
studies on other animals so sha is now
working on determining if sperm count
decline can be remedied at the household
level uh by cleaning out
identifiable uh endocrine disrupting
chemicals edc's in kitchens uh closets
garages medicine cabinets and the like
food food and and food and food and I
understand the philanthropy from your
network is is helping with that uh um
project have you heard about how this is
going and and what are you hoping that
that research will will discover no I
haven't I don't want to speak for them
yet it's still preliminary okay but I I
I know they're good people I know it's a
sensible topic and and that's what our
foundation is meant to be funding well
she's had she has a movie coming out
next year and ahead of that movie I'm
going to do a podcast with her on the
findings yeah yeah I also have plenty of
issues that haven't come up yet and and
one of them that the average viewer will
not realize is that one of the
interesting characteristics of a sperm
count is that it can be measured in a
way almost none of the things can be
measured and secondly it is about the
most accurate predictor of future
General Health and
Longevity we are not prepared to say
that it is definitively the best
predictor but it may be and it's one of
the best wait if you so if you determine
if you measure a man's sperm count um
that itself is a predictor of their
future health I am not saying that okay
and that may be the case but I suspect
it will not be what I am saying is if
you have two societies Denmark with a
20% higher sperm count it will have
significantly higher Health and
Longevity in other words a reflection of
the society and the stress put upon it
whether it applies at the individual
level I don't know it may you mentioned
cancer earlier um in in passing but
beyond fertility does messing with these
endocrine disrupting chemicals affect
human health in other ways that that we
haven't
discussed we know that chemicals in
general have a lot to do with um being
overweight and all the problems that go
with that Parkinson's appears to be
correlated with the use of pesticides
and and one or two notorious uh
chemicals um which I'm forgetting the
three initials Dar it um but they go
back to the 1920s
isn't this amazing that there's just so
many human technological inventions that
solve problems that came from prior
human technological
inventions yes someone said how how
could we possibly deal without them and
I said you're kidding yourself the the
year before we introduced the toxic
pesticides we lost about a third of our
crop and last year we lost about a third
of our crop that all that has happened
if you look at the long sweep of history
is that you use more and more expensive
chemicals that the typical farmer can't
afford and uh you still lose a chunk of
the crop because among other things the
pests become immune to your expensive
pesticides and you have to use more at
more cost or several at more cost and if
you give up now you lose your whole crop
so this has not been satisfactory but if
you give up completely and you go to
regen a which we will everybody will be
regen a if we survive 100 years from now
we will be sustainable and the food will
be much more nutritious and totally
non-toxic and the soil will be rich and
and that is the consequence if you have
rich soil well nurtured you will have
much more nutritious food they have
found in some cases that the nutrition
of various mass-produced vegetables and
so on is down to like a quarter of what
it was in in many of the nutrients that
you would so so the calories are still
there but the micronutrients are missing
and indeed the calories often go up
because as the balance of of ingredients
tilts towards carbohydrates and so on uh
you're getting in the end more sugar and
less nutrient so is there evidence on
endocrine disrupting chemicals on
intellectual and emotional development
uh impulse control human intelligence
things like that
being an academic comes with certain
disadvantages you have to be a whole lot
more careful a financial analyst is kind
of train to look at the data recognize
that you'll make mistakes do the best
you possibly can with the data and
that's what I try and do that's why
you're a that's why you're a very
important guest for this podcast because
so I had no trouble extrapolating
backwards in the sperm count and a few
years ago extrapolating forward I took
hagy love the co the co-boss of the of
the main study of the meta study and I
took his expression that the growth rate
was not slowing if anything it was
accelerating and I said okay then
clearly for the seven missing years we
should take the same average rate of the
past which was just under 2% and then as
it turned out it was 2.7 because it had
accelerated but academics can't do stuff
like that they won't do stuff like that
so they can be years behind making
making a reasonable best guess and if
you're slightly if you're pretty careful
your best guess is highly likely to be
accurate for example we extrapolated
backwards uh to World War II from 1972
when the academic study started and we
said tell you what it will go back at
half the rate that it has been going on
but just remember between 1945 and 72
everybody smoked endocrine disruptor
everyone was surrounded by DDT vicious
endocrine disruptor and everyone was
surrounded by terrible smoke and smug in
London which is terrible in every way
including endocrine disruption so we
knew it was terrible but we took it back
at half the average rate and frankly it
has to be better than no guess at all if
someone said it was actually every bit
as high that would be very unsurprising
but the fact that it would be nothing is
impossible so who's in charge of this
like who's who responsibility or or who
will champion this if is this still an
information deficit problem or is there
it's a chronic information deficit
problem and I'm proud to say Grantham
Foundation has played some role in
sponsoring not one but seven
organizations whose job description in
various Fields is is is propagating
information including W call spun that
is trying to gather all the information
on micro risal organisms in the soil um
Loosely speaking mushrooms and related
stuff that we begin to understand uh uh
do so much in spreading resources and
communicating and so on we are talking
as we sit about the need for just such
an organization or two to deal with
toxicity and I have no doubt with any
luck three people will will call in to
tell us after this
that such an organization exists which
is fine but it has been hiding its light
under a bushel because we haven't found
them so if you were the toxicity Zar of
the next Administration how would you
even begin to structure and think about
um this challenge with a long-term plan
what would be some of the broad arcs of
of what you would look into and what
what things you would start I'm inclined
to say Nate that's over my pay grade um
I can IM everyone's pay grade if I was
an emperor yeah of
China I would get a a hit squad of 10 or
20 or
50 important scientists and give them
six months to come up with a list of the
worst 20% of
all pesticides and Industrial chemicals
that should be phased out within the
next year or two so it's a power law
right right there we get we get rid of
80% of the damage with just 20% of the
chemicals plus or minus maybe yes yes
let me just say by the way that there
are 10,000 chemicals used in in
cosmetics and
related bodily stuff and um in the EU
they have banned 1400 which if they
banned the worst 1400 might be a pretty
darn important contribution Canada I
believe has banned about 450 which is
pretty cheesy and America has banned 11
not 1100 11 well if 450 is cheesy what
is 11 suicidal would be strong but uh
near suicidal would be pretty accurate I
mean it is going to increase our ill
health lower our life expectancy with
something approaching absolute certainty
so this is this is also I mean this is a
risk to life on the planet but this is
super existential and Urgent and now for
the United States of America toxicity
endocrine disrupting chemicals almost
sound like an antidote to overshoot to
me with a giant speed bump in the near
term that we have to navigate it's just
a different flavor of great
simplification so let me ask you this is
it top- down scientists and Emperors and
politicians that are going to become
aware of the risks to society and do
things um in partnership with
corporations hard for me to imagine that
or is it individuals that uh in you know
thinking about theirselves their kids
their grandkids life on Earth is it
going to be a political Awakening and
movement that hell no edc's go sort of
thing or some combination or how do you
visualize uh an Awakening in
Consciousness about the threat of
toxicity to our future what I'm looking
for
is a few countries or regions will set
such a good example will get such a good
payoff that that will be the thin end of
the wedge and that will happen and in
the end it will be successful the
question is always as with climate
change the speed and the Damage that is
done and one has to remember the biggest
pain to uh escaping from toxicity and
population stress is climate change and
the biggest stress to climate change is
toxicity and the shock to the economic
system and and that's one I have to
spend a sentence wait a minute the
biggest threat to climate change is
toxicity yes because if toxicity
stresses the population the way it will
and that in turn stresses economic
growth we will very quickly and easily
feel poor we have just seen in the last
few years how easy it is to make the
average voter feel disappointed and feel
poor and feel that they really uh don't
want to spend that much money on climate
change because they can't afford it that
climate change is 50 years from now and
I'm having trouble feeding myself and my
children now and so if you feel poor you
don't have the money uh to do a proper
job on climate change and by the way
when you finish the trillions of dollars
the1 hundred trillion dollars that it
that would be a real bargain to detoxify
the industrial system you are faced with
the need to
extricate a 2 and2 trillion tons of
excess CO2 that if you do not take out
the oceans continue to rise and the
climate slowly gets worse and if you
mean for the climate to get rapidly
better you have to extricate that CO2
it's a dead we you don't get to drive a
sexy electric car you don't get
healthier you just have to take it out
of the air and and it's a lot of money
and if you are feeling poor because your
number of workers has imploded like
Japan or South Korea and your number of
old fogies has exploded
uh like Japan and South Korea then you
won't feel you can afford the necessary
action to move fast enough on climate
change and it may get out of control and
Tipping Point start so you can see how
closely these two stress factors are
related I do see that um although I've
been using different language to
describe it but let me ask you this um
what are your thoughts on the degrowth
movement those that care about the
environment and uh inequality and want
the world to consciously degrow um our
consumption and our GDP uh ultimately
for a healthier environment I completely
sympathize with them one has to admit
though it falls into the category of
urging people to be better people yeah
uh to to be kinder and wiser and nicer
and more logical and look further into
the future our results in the past
typically on this have been
that you get one or two or three% of the
people who are responsive and um in
Japan you might get three times there
but um it's not typical yeah and uh we
are over millions of years bred to be
pretty darn selfish and and struggle for
ourselves and our family and and that's
it so I suspect that that is a very big
ask and I notice that some of the best
climate people refuse to talk about
degrowth and any cost I I know that you
um understand and agree with what I'm
about to say but I just want to point it
out most of these things that you're
predicting it's assuming that everything
else stays equal which which it may not
uh the wars and the finan situation and
politics so assuming that everything
else stays constant that trend is
something that you
predict yes exactly and and there's I
see I'm I'm managing to knock off most
of my points here on my sheet um
but but one of them is a interesting
tidbit about China in the one child
policy when we were back in the
1960s and
70s the club of
Rome and related people made the case
that we couldn't afford to grow
indefinitely at that kind of warp
drive which was you know three or 4% a
year and and that we would very quickly
etc etc just for the record they were
remarkably accurate in almost every way
but but one and that is they said the
growing population would bring us to our
knees now just as a average
mathematician I can guarantee you that
had it continued it would have course
brought us to our knees but it in fact
changed and I can tell you how many
people back in 1960 or 70 uh predicted
that the population would would rise to
a peak of in
1961 of of 2% growth a year on the
planet in population and would then
start to decline and and would then
start to plummet and that is nobody I do
not think it was an available inside
that was so unexpected and so out of the
range of what people were thinking about
and and that is what happened is is we
peaked at in 1961 the global growth rate
in humans yeah 2.1 then drifted down but
continued to grow rapidly right uh until
in a few decades it will start to
decline it's already in babies as I told
you decline 10 years yeah we Peak 10
years ago and it's dropping you might
say like a rock um anyway how many
countries had enough gumption to say of
course they're right we can't have
Perpetual growth we can't keep on
growing people my old favorite thing
3,000 years of the Egyptian Empire at 1%
growth and trust me you have 9 trillion
times as many people one one lousy
percent a year for 3,000 years is
multiplies You by 9 trillion and now you
can check it on your iPhone when I first
said that you could not okay 9 trillion
times guys for just as long as the
Egyptian Empire was more or less in its
full Glory it it is a pretty simple
straightforward you can't do it so um
are you advocating for young people
today uh to have more children or you
think it's a good thing that overall
people are having fewer children for our
us listeners and and Beyond we've got to
get the population down we're lucky
miraculously lucky it's going to go down
the only risk is that it goes down here
and there so fast that they disintegrate
with very disturbing effects on on
Global Peace perhaps and so on and so
forth Russia is a particular problem in
that its population is imploding and
immigrating etc etc China is a
particular problem
also they will be really stressed at
this rid in is in as little as 30 40 50
years they will be in real stress so to
be clear you're more worried about baby
depletion than you are about oil
depletion I am worried that baby
depletion will become so rapid in
certain areas that very
quickly those countries will cease to be
functional and as I said I think South
Korea has probably gone one step too far
because there's one issue we haven't
really talked about and that is what a
scientist would call inertia that when
you get a cultural system it can be very
hard to change when my wife and I and
everyone we knew were deciding to have
children we didn't decide to have
children we just did it because that's
what families did you had a couple and
then you sat down and decided whether
you would have a third or a fourth
that's how it worked did did you say
earlier that the average woman not the a
or no you said the average mother had
four children like 50 or 60 years ago no
I actually misspoke and corrected myself
the average woman had four children for
every woman who didn't have any there
was someone who had five right wow and
that number now is two the the the
global number today I think is
technically 2.3 right and it peaked
almost twice as high at four and a bit
and
um and dropping rapidly I mean I read
your paper um and I talked to you about
this in the past but this conversation
has really changed my thinking on on
some of these
issues um you're doing a lot Jeremy on
all your different initiatives um
climate
especially uh endocrine disrupting
toxicity uh all all the
things but you're a Oasis in the
wilderness with uh Elite people that
were captains of industry and finance or
your your background uh and your means
uh which I know you're you're
contributing a lot to these these
efforts give us your umbrella pitch to
other humans in positions of privilege
about the stakes of our times and their
potential role in it yeah because we've
been around for a long time and we've
made a lot of progress and it's only now
that we are actually faced with not
 serious existential risks and
unfortunately they've come as a package
because of the massive growth of China
they went from 5% to 50% of iron ore and
coal and lots of important things we've
begun to hit the boundaries of Bountiful
resources and and that was pretty
clear over 10 years ago that we had run
out of the cheaper forever plentiful
Supply and we're going to be stressed
and then we have climate change moving
quite fast where anyone can see that the
damage increment from year to year
particularly a flooding by the way
severe flooding was always going to be
the most Dependable feature I'm happy to
say we've been writing about that for 20
years it was always going to be the
number one uh ahead of of droughts ahead
of forest fires and it has been it's
been shockingly painfully because warmer
air holds more water moisture and 5%
more water vapor in the air guarantees
heavier downpours yeah so it doesn't
guarantee there'll be more hurricanes
but it guarantees that they will have
more water and if they stall like they
did in North Car Carolina then it's Hell
on Wheels in a way and once in Houston
where it will drop you know 10 inches
for three days in a row and uh it will
flood anywhere whatever the
configuration what I'm doing with this
work is the the first thing is to
educate and communicate our metac crisis
uh in a scientifically tethered um
apolitical even non-prescriptive way so
people understand how these things fit
together and now we're we're um
including endocrine disrupting pollution
in in that story the second category is
all the the interventions of Bend uh not
break for society and one of those I'm
calling it for now the
1500 which is to change the
Consciousness or values or have an
Awakening of some of the 1500 most
influential people in the world even 5%
of them to devote not only their
financial Capital but their networks
their skills their creativity their
inventiveness towards solving these
issues so I I was just asking you to
that was a good kick yeah
um because that is such an important
issue and at the Grandam Foundation it's
our job number one you know can we
help fat cats
understand that um their experience with
technology their resources their Network
as you say uh that they could make a
difference the average guy has a very
hard time making a difference but they
they have an easy time if they choose
and and they should choose because this
threatens immediately it threatens their
children it threatens their
grandchildren and it's already
destabilizing the world you may not
realize this but the growth rate
of
of the planet has slowed down the
economic growth rate the growth rate in
Europe has slowed down so that it's
limping along at 1% down from three and
the US is bragging here and there and
The Economist is bragging on our behalf
that we we look Sensational we only look
Sensational by comparison with poor old
Europe and elsewhere we are way down
from where we used to be and a big
component of that are are these problems
mainly a decrease in the supply of
workers increase in medical costs and
and so on and um it will continue to get
worse and toxicity moving faster and and
more threateningly they really need to
get behind them because a dozen really
influential rich people could change the
outcome could save years just as the oil
companies by their brilliant propaganda
have have cost us 10 or 20 years on
climate change we need some rich
brilliant people to save us 10 or 20
years on toxicity and toxicity is easy
in comparison because it's local so if
all we have to do is get behind one or
two countries and really make a
brilliant example and maybe China will
do that if we're really lucky and we'll
move at China speed and make it clear to
everybody
how important it is and how successful
it can be you know it may be on climate
change that we will get paid for our
good work it is certain that we will get
paid for our good work on toxicity that
is Trivial what what what do you mean by
get paid you'll get healthier you'll
live longer everything will improve and
it will be quick you don't have to wait
20 years yes you were suffering from
your last 20 years worth of em bibing
toxins but will start to get healthier
immediately clean up the air take out
the particulate matter clean up the food
clean up your environment in the home
get rid of your your gas stoves and so
on and you will instantly improve your
health is the toxicity issue um similar
to the Exxon Mobile uh um public oil
companies in that there will be uh a
public benefit to cleaning up but there
will be a corporate interest
antagonistically opposing these things
like Dupont or or some other
corporations whose business it is to
create these chemical compounds is that
going to be another big hurdle with
lobbyists and and all that yeah yeah I
mean um that's how it works that's how
the capitalist system works Milton
Friedman explained to everybody that we
had no responsibility towards the social
well-being no responsibility therefore
to our grand children uh only
responsibility to our shareholders to
maximize um short and intermediate term
profits in other words uh we had a
responsibility to become sociopaths as
corporations because that's what a so
sociopath does they have no interest in
anybody but themselves that's a
sociopath so these corporations are
sociopathic and and everyone has bought
into to Milton Freedman and if you if
you did altruistic expenditures you're
quite likely to get sued by your
stockholders has a corporation ever had
a very profitable product that they
volunteered was dangerous to the long
term and took off the market I don't
think so the only answer is different
institutions or better prices where the
prices of the pollution and the social
cost that right now we're putting on the
commons and the future Generations is
included in in the prices that consumers
pay and corporations uh include yes well
there's one great Advantage about
climate change and that is the
technology has been so brilliant that
often the replacement far from being
expensive is simply better I think in
toxicity you simply have to ban them
they're not going to do it voluntarily
but Europe has
shown yes you can ban nicotinoids we
don't but but most countries in the
world do and my attitude is okay dudes
you don't want to ban them pay the price
if they ban them in Europe and Denmark
and China they will live longer and you
will not that's your choice in the end
it doesn't make that much significance
it makes a lot of significance to the
locals and therefore the locals should
get their act together and make sure
that they are not the worst country on
the planet because we are set to be the
worst country on the planet at the
moment perhaps fighting it out with
North Korea on these kind of issues that
was my next question um it just seems to
me that on a maturity wisdom in service
of the greater good uh ranking that
we're a couple years Junior to our uh
Senior High School colleagues in in in
Europe why is it that on these things on
these important issues the United States
is so near the bottom of of the class I
think we have a particular pentious form
of capitalism which gives immediate
feedback very
efficient um it's a very efficient form
of
capitalism but it absolutely does not
allow for recognition of the commons
recognition of long-term well-being it's
the price you pay for being efficient
you make more money you make it faster
and you pay a longer term price and you
know that I I hero worship uh Professor
Hicks and and one of the reasons he was
the most important British Economist
after KES and and the reason I admire
him so much is basically because of his
simple definition of a profit a profit
is what you have left
over at the end of the year having
protected everything that you started
with and um anything you produced etc
etc minus the cost to what you started
with which means if you use resources
you have to reckon what's the cost of
replacing copper basically you can't
what's the cost of replacing oil
basically you can't what what is the
cost of
detoxifying the environment that you
just toxified with your past it is many
many multiples of the profits that you
claimed we if we wanted to go back and
make our environment and our
lives as clean and with the same
equivalent resources as we had we have
not made any any money for at least the
last few decades we're running at a
fairly substantial loss and what is
happening is we Society will bear the
loss and they the corporations are
making the short-term profits well and
other species and generations will bear
the cost absolutely this is not a
conversation where we spent much time on
the environment but uh you may know that
as far as we can tell most species
animals insects are down 50 to 70% in
sheer biomass the weight of all the
elephants the weight of all the flying
insects they are not only down but just
like our sperm count if anything the
rate of decline seems to be still
accelerating so let me understand this I
um let's set aside for the moment that
we know that there is a a bill to be
paid because of our prior actions but
I'm hearing from you in our prior
conversation that you are a believer in
capitalism for the longer term but it's
a Kinder gentler uh more holistic
capitalism that has wider
boundaries um different values and and
better prices uh that include the
negatives in in addition to the
positives is that a fair summation I'm
not sure they FDI used to talk about the
need for a policeman on the corner of
Broad and wall that uh you you needed
rules and regulations for the stock
market you needed rules and regulations
for capitalism capitalism I've always
liked to say does a million things
better than than a than a central
government can do it's so infinitely
complicated although with AI and
billions trillions of of times
improvements in in Quant skills you just
might be able to regulate in the future
but in in any case in the past only
capitalism could deal with the
complexity of
pricing the cost of materials etc etc
even though they totally ignored second
and third order of facts they totally
ignored uh the finite nature of the
resources they were using
up but I do think the key is the
policeman on the corner of wall and
Broad that you need ulations capitalism
is not designed to look after the
commons there is no mechanism at all
it's not that they're trying and failing
it's not on their agenda they're not
even raising the issue if you want to
look after our long-term well-being it
has to be a central government they can
leave everything else alone with my
blessing If Only They look after
water
soil air and two .1 babies and the 2.1
babies I would not have said 10 years
ago now I realize that that is a part of
the commons you can decide not to have
children but if there are no workers
Society will collapse around you so in
addition to water uh soil uh healthy
ecosystems you believe that 2.1 children
is part of the commons if you do not if
you fall below 2.1 you just phas fairly
rapidly out of business that is simple
math every generation gets smaller until
it disappears there is absolutely no
substitute for 2.1 so either way it
would be like a thermostat if we're at
1.1 or 3.1 you you think there's got to
be some policy in in society to head
towards 2.1 at 3.1 you end up like my
ancient Egyptian example with right
millions of miles of bodies on top of
each other yeah and uh at 1.1 you go out
of business in a stunning
few number of
generations partly because we have no
experience at managing downwards how do
you
manage a strip of 20 stores and five or
shuted I mean for the for the other 15
it's Hell on Wheels it's like managing
Detroit how do you close down parts of
the railroad system parts of the grid
parts of this parts of that whole towns
in Japan this is a problem we have no
experience at beginning to in Japan
maybe and we know is many times more
difficult managing for growth is a piece
of cake isn't it you can let capitalism
just get on with it but uh managing
backwards is is a threat uh to
everything including as I say critically
our willingness to address climate
change which is expensive so we need to
continue to grow and burn some carbon in
order to have the brain power and
stability to address the carbon crisis
no I don't know I think if we pushed
ahead rapidly we will very quickly have
uh renewable energy that is the least of
our problems it is going to be much
harder to
um to detoxify capitalism so that it
becomes a Kindler as you say a gentler
variant um and I think you can only
really do that by government Fiat and
you can only get government Fiat by a
fairly massive level of support from the
general public it has to be fairly
massive because the super powerful
companies and financial Elite can so
punch beyond their numbers yeah and they
have disproportionate influence so you
have to outnumber them outvote them and
make sure we start to have governments
that are prepared to reasonably look
after the long-term future and they do a
much better job let's face it in in
Scandinavia in in Holland in in most of
Europe well I'm I'm certainly hopeful
that Shauna's work uh and your work um
will raise awareness to the general
population of the importance uh of a
bipartisan nonpartisan response to the
danger from endocrine disrupting and
other chemical
pollution um I asked you on your your
first episode here about a year ago the
the magic wand question and other
typical questions in our first interview
is there anything major that's changed
in your thinking or your advice uh to
listeners in in the past year it has
been a fairly unpleasant year um I have
to admit
because the perception of the speed of
the damage in climate change was so
impressive and um the recognition of the
Tipping points in climate change and how
they could get Beyond our control at any
minute like the
U the AAR or
the whatever they call that what we used
to call the Atlantic meridianal o
overturning circulation yeah yeah uh
could happen any time with with
disastrous consequences from which we
cannot go back at the same time we've
been struggling with toxicity realizing
on everything we turned
over that it was a bigger problem moving
faster and possibly even more neglected
than we thought
approaching
zero interest you know I asked a
question in my paper that you had that
and what is the corporate response to
this giant rapidly moving problem I
think the answer is no they have no
response it's not on their agenda
they're not talking about it at board
meetings it's a complete non-issue in my
opinion I might be amazed to find that
that is wrong I would certainly hope
it's wrong but I'm pretty damn confident
it it's not is your um nerd likee
qualities act as a anesthesia to the
magnitude of all this stuff because this
is pretty freaking heavy what you're
discussing um and does does it okay yeah
and um getting out in the the most
amazing Autumn uh fall of of all time
isn't it we've just had yeah I mean
amazing and and days of perfect weather
in in Massachusetts let it be said that
climate change is not entirely without
its local benefits on occasion and we
just had it and walking in the woods I
must say or clipping Briar or clearing
your brain I mean and playing a good
game of tennis you you can feel pretty
pretty darn cheerful and I do and and I
have a great family and these good
things but do do I worry more for the
well-being of of of society and America
than I did a year ago yes I do I do too
um I know you are so busy and so
committed to helping on all these things
so um our viewers probably just see this
little glimpse of you but for a long
time you've been a champion for these
these uh overlooked risk especially with
Earth's environment so thank you for
that Jeremy and do you have any closing
words uh for our viewers today I would
just reiterate what you brought up and
that is if by some miracle one or two
super rich smart reasonable people
wander into this zone of yours and and
see this and other
podcasts of yours that they realize that
they can make a difference that it
doesn't necessarily need that big push
to move some of these agenda items or
some of these Technologies and for God's
sake jump on board because if you don't
soon it might be too late thank you sir
we uh we shall speak again and um I'm
hoping that the paper that your staff
sent me will be available in the next
six weeks or so to put online and share
with others because then we'll we'll
book in that with this uh podcast and
people can read it and share it we'll
try and do it in the next couple of
weeks actually thank you so so much
Jeremy no it's a pleasure you're welcome
bye-bye if you enjoyed or learned from
this episode of the great simplification
please follow us on your favorite
podcast platform you can also visit the
greats simplification tocom for
references and show notes from today's
conversation and to connect with fellow
listeners of this podcast check out our
Discord Channel this show is hosted by
me Nate Hagin edited by no troublemakers
media
and produced by Misty stinet Leslie bat
Lutz Brady hyen and Lizzy serani
