this video was made possible by
curiosity stream and nebula
in today's video we're going to examine
how trans writes and trans people more
broadly are discussed in the media in
particular we're going to explore how an
increasing obsession with the so-called
trans debate even in news outlets which
describe themselves as liberal or
Progressive has created a cultural
environment in which deeply dehumanizing
arguments can be framed as entirely
reasonable sensible contributions to a
respectable discussion
doing so is naturally going to involve
looking at a bunch of examples of people
making transphobic arguments so if that
doesn't sound like something you need in
your life right now feel free to give
this one a Miss which on the theme of
things I wish I could give a Miss I'm
afraid we need to start at the extremes
by talking for slightly longer than I
would like about transphobic provocateur
and daily wire host
Matt Walsh
on the 1st of June 2022 the conservative
news site turned Media Company the daily
wire released an original documentary
called what is a woman
directed by Justin folk and presented by
Matt Walsh the promo for the film
suggested that it would be an
inquisitive attempt by a controversial
yet committed truth Seeker to gain some
clarity around contemporary attitudes
towards sex and gender with a particular
focus on gender transition
I'm asking these questions okay try to
figure out what a woman is that's why
I'm here this is the women's March I
figured it's a good place to find out
I've come all this way to ask that
question can anyone tell me what a woman
is for women we ask you to leave what is
that
am I harassing I'm asking a question as
anyone with even the slightest knowledge
of Matt Walsh or any of the other weird
little dudes at the daily wire will have
come to expect however this is nonsense
in reality the film is little more than
a 90-minute dire tribe against trans
people the film can broadly be divided
into three kind of Acts
the first which we'll talk about in more
detail later does broadly cling to the
pretense of Walsh being a
well-intentioned documentarian
I'm a husband I'm a father of four
I host a talk show I give speeches I
write books
I like to make sense of things as we'll
see later Walsh certainly asks some uh
probing questions of his subjects but
the first 20 minutes of the documentary
are spent mostly interviewing Healthcare
professionals and one academic who are
either trans themselves or transforming
in their practices what do you mean by
assigned female who who
a science female yeah I say mostly
interviewing trans affirming
professionals because perhaps to
reassure the daily wires core audience
that the documentary is not going to be
too even-handed they also managed to
squeeze in a chat with this guy whose
qualifications to appear in a
documentary about trans rights and
Health Care amount to him running a Star
Wars shop and also I guess this because
I got a dick even if one is charitable
enough to take the more reasonable
seeming sections in this first act at
face value however by the second section
of the film The pretensive reasonable
disinterested inquiry has been dropped
in time over the course of the next 50
minutes we're introduced to an ever
expanding cast of anti-trans activists
and conspiracy theorists
now with some of these interviewees you
can at least see how they've developed
the views they hold this guy Scott and
Eugene for example clearly had a very
bad experience with transition I'm a
biological woman
that medically transitioned to appear
like a male I will never be a man and
while he talks a lot of dangerous
nonsense in this interview freely
misinterpreting research and citing some
completely made up statistics there's
obviously some real her that's led to
Nugent being sat in that chair opposite
Matt Walsh most of the interviewees
however are serial right-wing grifters
For Whom the current anti-trans moral
Panic is just the latest focal point in
a long-standing traditionalist agenda
take this woman Miriam Grossman for
instance where other medical
professionals interviewed during the
film are portrayed as completely
unhinged cranks Grossman is offered up
as one of the good ones unspoiled by
so-called gender ideology which is
unsurprising given that prior to
boarding the right-wing disinformation
gravy trained a decade ago Grossman
seems to have spent most of her medical
career as an in-house College
psychiatrist rather than having any kind
of specialism in trans Healthcare the
most revealing of the several segments
which feature Grossman comes about 50
minutes into the documentary when
Grossman is asked to talk about schools
the particular idea that the film is
trying to plant in our heads at this
point is that schools are somehow
encouraging children who would otherwise
be completely content with the gender
that they were assigned at Birth to
falsely come out as trans as evidence
for this Grossman holds up a book called
It's Perfectly Normal
okay it's perfectly normal
for
10 years and up in order to highlight
its age recommendation she's even drawn
arrows pointing to the Box on the cover
as though it's some secret and not
printed in eye-catching red within the
context of everything we've been hearing
about in the film so far one would
assume that this book is some kind of
instruction manual teaching kids how to
become trans yeah that it's not what it
perfectly normal is at all this book is
actually a pretty broad primer on
puberty sex and relationships the copy
of the book that Grossman shows to Walsh
was published way back in 1994. that's a
full 28 years and almost my entire
lifetime ago do you want to guess how
many references to trans people there
are in this book
if you guessed only one you would be
incorrect because it's zero an updated
version of the book published in 2014
did amend this but even then but it's
quite a nice affirmational little
section it only amounts to 12 very short
sentences which do little more than
explain that trans people exist it only
promotes becoming trans to the extent
that this Encyclopedia of South American
birds promotes becoming a horned
screamer side note cracking cover design
job on that book by the way it's proper
top stuff always judge a book by its
cover well most of what is a woman's
anger is reserved for Trans people then
there are also plenty of moments when
these broader right-wing resentments
slip out Grossman for example turns out
not only to be against acknowledgments
of trans and queer people in schools but
in favor of polishing sex and
relationships education entirely I
always need to give a shout out to this
guy the incredibly named Carl trueman
who gives us this gen we need to
acknowledge that there are powerful
Lobby groups powerful cultural and
political Lobby groups driving this
thing Hollywood is pressing lgbtq plus
matters in so many movies we're seeing
it in the way Amazon sets up its
algorithms you heard it here first folks
the Amazon algorithm is gay now joking
aside by the third Act of the film
what is a woman has become driven
entirely by unhinged conspiracism
there's also a stylistic shift in which
we believe behind the talking head
format which has dominated the film thus
far and are invited to follow Walsh as
he undertakes a series of stunts
intended to expose the absurdity of
so-called gender ideology
I'm done asking questions
one of these stunts sees Walsh right a
children's book called Johnny the walrus
about a young boy who wait for it
identifies as a walrus Johnny's a boy
with a big imagination
one day he's a dog the next day a
crustacean
Johnny's mom loves her sons make-believe
time
your Johnny The Walrus till you change
your mind
this is obviously a super original gag
and not just a lazy cross between ice
actually identify as an attack
helicopter and that 2018 episode of Last
Week Tonight in which John Oliver
released a satirical children's book
about Mike Pence's bunny rabbit the more
visceral third act stunt however is that
in which Walsh attends a school board
meeting in Loudoun County Virginia the
background here is that Loudoun County
School Board was looking to pass a set
of policies which would among other
things require teachers to use students
correct pronouns and affirm trans
students right to use the bathrooms
which correspond with their gender
in truth this was simply a formalization
of already common practices in local
schools yet right Wingers descended on
the county in an attempt to turn it into
a cause selebra as the film tells it
Walsh travels over from his home in
Nashville to join the raucus yeah when
he gets there he finds that the school
board has introduced rules requiring
anyone who wants to attend a meeting to
prove that they're a resident of the
county which
yeah obviously nevertheless Walsh finds
a solution that's right conservative
commentator Matt Walsh told me he's
leasing out someone's basement in
Loudoun County so he'll be able to speak
during tonight's meeting which I will
say there's an amazing lack of
self-awareness to a guy who's generally
creepy as Matt Walsh going to Such Great
Lengths to gain access to a school
building including hiring out a basement
which is objectively the creepiest of
all residential dwellings and then for
him to accuse others of having ill
intentions for children the sequence
ends with Walsh giving his speech to the
school board meeting the address is the
cruel hate-filled screed of a religious
Fundamentalist involves accusing School
administrators of being child abusers
occult Fanatics for the simple Act of
trying to create a safe learning
environment for some of their most
vulnerable students these 60 seconds are
really the truth of the film all that
pretends are genuine inquiry and the
attempt at comedy are Stripped Away and
what we're left with is an insecure
crifter using children as a prop to push
a cruel transphobic agenda of course as
I mentioned at the beginning this was
always going to be the case the daily
wire was never going to have produced an
even-handed informative documentary
about gender and gender transition but
despite the fact that this section ended
up being
long this is not really a video about
the daily wire or Matt Walsh or what is
a woman you see what kept jumping out to
me as I watched this film was how
familiar the tone of those early
sections in which Walsh interviews trans
affirming professionals felt and not to
the work of Other Extreme right-wing
provocateurs but it's the manner in
which many supposedly respectable
mainstream news outlets particularly in
the UK have increasingly begun to frame
discussions of trans people and their
rights in recent years but before we go
any further I want to suggest that if
you're finding this video interesting
then you might also like to check out
another video that I made about the
media which looks at How Bad actors on
the political right use organizations
called think tanks to push certain
stories and perspectives in the news and
if you want the best experience for
watching that video then you're going to
watch to do so on my streaming service
nebula nebula was founded by a bunch of
educational and education adjacent
creators who wanted to be less beholden
to algorithms and demonetization systems
when making videos unlike YouTube or
tiktok or Instagram nebula is owned by
the creators who publish on it this
ensures we have more say in how the
platform is run and allows us to create
bigger and Bolder videos for our lovely
viewers that you and also to present
them in a premium ad-free viewing
Experience One in which if you follow a
Creator you'll actually get a
notification when they put out a new
video once you're finished watching my
video about think tanks for example
you're probably going to want to stick
around and watch second thoughts videos
about media bias as well as Mia
moulder's video about trans women in
sport now if the idea of early and
exclusive content from all your favorite
creators sound intriguing then you're
going to want to know that the best way
to sign up to nebula is through a deal
that we've put together with the folks
over and curiosity stream this allows
you to get access to both platforms for
less than it would cost to sign up to
either on its own where nebula is the
preferred platform of all your favorite
Indie creators curiosity stream gathers
together thousands of titles of big
budget documentaries for more
traditional Studios I recently really
enjoyed the three-part series electing
Lincoln which contains a fascinating
eating episode about the shamelessness
with which 19th century American
newspaper owners would distort the truth
to fit their personal political agendas
I'll leave you to draw your own
conclusions as to how much has changed
there but whether your thing is history
nature science or travel curiosity
stream is bound to have loads of titles
that you will absolutely adore curiosity
stream and nebula make for amazing
companions to one another as we've
teamed up to put together an incredibly
priced bundle deal if you head to
curiositystream.com forward slash Tom
Nicholas you can get access to both
curiosity stream and nebula for an
entire year for less than 15
further in doing so and in using that
link you'll be helping to support my
channel and helping me to make more
videos like this one which will resume
momentarily
foreign
so I guess I need to start by sharing a
shocking Revelation with you
Britain has a transphobia problem okay
unfortunately to many people that's
probably not particularly new
information as the Deluge of turf Island
memes one is met with when everyone
mentions the UK in certain spaces online
might suggest for several years now
Britain's descent into a full-blown
transphobic moral Panic has been
impossible to ignore for folks living in
the UK and particularly trans folks
living in the UK it's quite clear that a
blow hum of transphobic sentiment has
become as Central to British culture as
queuing fish and chip shops and
laundering the wealth of Russian
oligarchs but the phenomenon has also
gained plenty of international attention
American news outlets including the New
York Times The Washington Post and CNN
have all commissioned British writers to
try and make sense of this curious
phenomenon for the benefits of plexed
readers outside of the country banned by
the political level the Council of
Europe which monitors human rights
abuses and administers the European
convention on human rights issued a
formal condemnation of the UK government
for backsliding on protections for Trans
people
how and why the UK arrived at this point
is a complicated multi-factored story
which would require an entire video all
to itself what's evident however is that
the rise of UK transphobia has been an
acutely top-down Affair over in the US
the stereotypical transphobe is most
likely to be a matter hat wearing small
town dwelling fundamentalist Christian
by contrast the leaders of Britain's
anti-trans Crusade have been secular
wealthy educated metropolitans
furthermore where in other countries the
fueling of bigoted sentiment is usually
The Preserve of arguably Fringe
right-wing Outlets such as the daily
wire or Breitbart in the UK a suspicion
towards trans people has come to guide
the reporting of media institutions
across the political Spectrum in fact
among the Publications that have been
most influential or in rallying
opposition to trans rights in Britain
have been the guardian and the new
Statesman these are periodicals which
are thought up within British culture as
being Progressive to the point of parody
yet both have seemingly adopted
opposition to trans rights as a central
plank of their editorial line the
relationship between this British form
of polite liberal transphobia and the
more obviously cruel conservative
transphobia typified by what is a woman
is
complicated in July 2022 The Accidental
Queen of the UK movement JK Rowling had
a brief interaction with Matt Walsh on
Twitter Rowling criticized Walsh's
self-aggrandizing approach only to then
praise what is a woman as doing a good
job exploding the incoherence of gender
identity Theory and some of the harms
it's done Julie bindle a journalist who
has been a key figure in popularizing
trans-exclusionary radical feminism in
Britain over the past two decades simile
claimed that what the film had loads of
sexism in it it was still well worth a
watch for context this is a film for
which this is the final scene
what is a woman
an adult human female
who needs help opening this
still well worth a watch for all good
feminists I guess
nevertheless Rowling and bindle are
somewhat unique in that both have been
entirely consumed by transphobia to the
point that it's become their whole brand
I mean I guess you've got to Pivot to
something where no one wants to watch
your films anymore given the prominence
afforded to what is a Woman by The Wild
amounts of money that the daily y has
been promoting the film including more
than one million dollars in ad spend on
Facebook alone it was probably
impossible for liberals that have gone
all in on transphobic moral Panic to
avoid some kind of Alliance of
convenience with Walsh and his fan base
elsewhere in the British media most
journalists would be infuriated if you
suggested that the reporting that they
do of the BBC or Sky News or Wales
online or wherever else had anything in
common with the openly hateful
opportunistic bigotry of Matt Walsh and
the daily wire in fact in 2019 the
independent press standards organization
published this report with short to
analyze changing Trends in how British
newspapers had reported on trans issues
in the Years between 2009 and 2019 and
pretty much all of the editors and other
newspaper staff interviewed for the
study were adamant that journalists have
adopted a more respectful approach to
stories concerning transgender subjects
than at the start of the decade now
there is one very small way in which
this is true as that same report
highlighted over the past decade there
has been a significant drop off in the
use of outright slurs in trans adjacent
newspaper articles in 2009 and 2010
around 10 percent of articles about
trans people published in the British
media used language which the study very
generously describes as being considered
offensive by 2019 that figure was down
to just one percent which well done
British media you did it you so
transphobia okay obviously not don't get
me wrong a decrease in outright slurs is
clearly good but that alone doesn't mean
that the reporting that you're doing is
necessarily respectful or balanced or
even accurate all of which brings us to
this clip a British politician and
current leader of the UK labor party
kirstan being interviewed by the BBC's
Andrew ma now those of you watching from
outside the UK probably don't spend a
massive portion of your time thinking
about the UK labor party and I envy you
really I do but Stormer is essentially
the platonic ideal of the wannabe's
sensible Centrist he's super reluctant
to make any policy pledges and is highly
conflict diverse in interviews he
essentially makes Joe Biden look like a
peppy charismatic radical some of this
timidity was on display in his chat with
Andrew ma the exchange was recorded in
September 2021 in Brighton where the
labor party were holding their annual
conference this was starmer's first such
event as party leader and against a
backdrop of the covid-19 pandemic a
government corruption Scandal and plenty
of internal party divisions at the
conference itself
the question which ma was desperate for
starma to answer was this is it
transphobic to say only women have a
cervix once more of those at the back is
it transphobic to say only women have a
cervix okay so there is some context
here relating to labor MP Rosie Duffield
who over the past year had been
performing a kind of low rent JK Rowling
tribute Act of making increasingly
transphobic comments and then playing
the victim whenever people disagreed
with her more interesting than what led
to this question being asked however is
what happens next
see stormers answer
wasn't awful well it is uh something
that uh shouldn't be said it is not
right but it was kind of awkward you can
almost hear the fans speeding up in his
brain as he tries to compute an answer
which will please as many people as
possible it is uh something that uh
shouldn't be said it is not right that
one it might not make for great politics
politicians squirming like this does
make for good television storm is
awkward not an answer signal to the
media the trans issues were a topic
which could be used to catch labor
politicians off guard when storm is
colleague and essentially second in
command Rachel Reeves appeared on radio
station LBC the next day right-wing host
Nick Ferrari thus decided to ask her the
same question but I have to put it to
you the same question was put to the
party leader is it transphobic to say
only women have a cervix good morning
which nothing says British journalist in
the early 2020s more than asking someone
about cervixes before you've even said
good morning good morning Reeves's
answer also started well I just think
that this issue has just become so
divisive and toxic and it pits people
against each other both groups who face
discrimination in society women and
trans women and I just find this debate
incredibly unhelpful and and and
unproductive to be totally honest ah get
on Rachel that's a pretty cracking
answer actually like proper decisive you
ready nips that one in the bud but then
when pushed further
look
is it transphobic look
I just I don't even know how no I start
answering these questions
oh dear
oh dear oh dear older God it was going
so well Rachel from here on out over the
next six months there was a 50 50 chance
that any appearance by a labor
politician on TV or the radio would
sooner or later end in them being asked
some question about gender and genitalia
is it transphobic to say only women have
acervix David but trans women are women
from your perspective is that right are
you comfortable defining what a woman is
so a woman can have a penis do I think
that women were born with penises yes do
you agree with her
now labor party politicians weren't the
only ones being pressed to declare their
interpretation of the meaning of
Womanhood as we'll see towards the end
of this video in a period since the
conservative party has increasingly
sought to turn trans rights into a wedge
issue the reason that labor MPS have had
to field these questions so much more
than politicians from other parties
is that their responses have
consistently been absolute car crashes
the mere mention of trans people seems
to cause senior labor party figures to
turn into whimpering little messes these
presenters will probably feel as though
they're doing an excellent job here and
by the metrics the really matter in
contemporary journalism they are these
exchanges make for great social media
content and tend to get a decent amount
of clicks far more at least than videos
and politicians talking about
taxes or whatever else but that aside in
these interviews even the most right
wing of these presenters will no doubt
Comfort themselves that they've not
sought to push an agenda at all hip but
have merely been asking questions
this facade of just asking questions
often allows journalists to convince
themselves as much as their viewers but
they are of a completely different breed
to motivated conspiracists like Matt
Walsh fennel screaming in the faces of a
school board accusing them of child
abuse but talking calmly and politely in
the studio of a respected news
organization
yeah wolf spends a good hour of his film
warming up to that big finale for the
entire opening third of what is a woman
his approach is practically identical to
that of these mainstream British news
presenters and this got me thinking
maybe there's an opportunity here even
if we acknowledge that there are some
important differences between what is a
woman and these interviews in the
British media maybe the Abundant
similarities have a lot to teach us
about what's really going on in these
discussions about gender and trans
rights in the UK press
now some of you might be thinking that
it's a bit strange to have gotten this
far through a video about journalists
obsessing over the definition of the
word woman without having provided some
kind of answer to that question surely
by now there should have been a section
in which I crack the spine on some dusty
old copy of the Oxford English
Dictionary and take you through some
etymology or something which if I did
would reveal that the word derives from
the old English term withman or wife
person which
seems a little bit problematic the fact
of the matter is however that none of
the interviewers in any of the
conversations we've looked at in this
video are remotely interested in the
definition of Womanhood let me explain
see if you sit down to watch what is a
woman you will very quickly notice that
its style is pretty derivative as I
mentioned earlier the outright pinches
gags from John Oliver and also take some
cues from Michael Moore and from The
Daily Show the cultural reference that
kept leaping into my mind as I was
watching the film however was this guy
my name I like you as a reminder in this
First Act of what is a woman Matt Walsh
almost exclusively interviews Healthcare
professionals and one academic who are
trans affirming in their practices if we
take the film on face value this is
supposed to be washed giving supporters
of trans rights an opportunity to
explain their understanding of sex and
gender throughout however it's evident
that Walsh is playing something of a
character of course I don't doubt that
Matt Walsh is a pretty intellectually
and curious guy but he's obviously
panning it up a bit I mean with a very
slightly different framing this could
all be a very very good parody of the
exact genre of confused by Modern Life
bloke that mattawash is being a dad is
one of the great privileges of my life
give my son a BB gun and that's just
about all the emotional support he needs
yeah yeah I also hate my kids maybe this
is simply some good old-fashioned
self-depreciating humor even a humorless
loser like me occasionally enjoys a bit
of self-redicue but the more I watched
of what is a woman the more it became
evident that Matt Walsh being a little
bit intellectually challenged is
actually pretty essential for the film
to work
see as we discussed earlier the idea
that Walsh is out on some genuine
fact-finding mission is a complete
facade the real premise of this first
portion of the film is the left is crazy
and no one is able to say what a woman
is anymore the problem for Walsh and the
production team is that many of his
interviewees actually do provide fairly
decent answers to that question take
Marty Bowers response for instance a
woman is a
you know it's a combination of your
physical attributes and then what you're
showing to the world and the gender
clues that you give and hopefully those
match your gender identity now not
everyone will agree with this definition
but for the film to work wash can't just
disagree with the definition that
someone provides that definition needs
to be absolutely nonsensical whenever
he's given any answer to his question
which accepts that gender might be a
tiny bit more complicated than just
woman equals vagina then whoosh has to
act like a complete simpleton as though
his brain just can't compute anything
beyond a very basic level of reasoning
the most ridiculous example of this
happens slightly later in the film after
Walsh asks gender studies Professor
Patrick rezanka to help him understand
the difference between sex and gender
this starts off normal enough what we
tend to think about in The Social
Sciences today
is that sex refers to a set of
biological characteristics and gender is
a social Constructor category but then a
piece of classical music starts to fade
in and the film begins to skip parts of
chrysantha's answer as if to imply that
it's really long and pretentious which
has the secondary effect of making it
look like Walsh's brain just melts the
instant that he hears a word longer than
two syllables you think you can explain
things to me well Checkmate leftists
cause I'm an idiot at the end of the day
there is no answer that any of Walsh's
trans a Fermi interviewees could give
that would suffice because as with Borat
the goal here isn't to genuinely
interrogate these interviewees expertise
but to Simply ask them question after
question until they say something that
sounds a bit silly and that's before we
even get into the fact that like those
in Borat all of these interviews were
secured under false pretenses there's
more than an element of this in the
exchanges that we've been looking at
from the British media too in one
interview we even see a repeat of this
pantomime of acting as though any
definition of Womanhood which
acknowledges that cervixes might not be
everything is treated as though it's
beyond the limits of human comprehension
I think it's because a lot of people
listening would say well I know what a
woman is it's really straightforward and
then it feels that politicians start to
get themselves into into rabbit holes
about this the added awfulness here is
that where Walsh at least has the
decency to play the idiot himself the UK
equivalent typically involves affluent
privately educated nepotism babies like
Stig Abel here suggesting that it's
Their audience who is too thick to
understand what's going on way to pay
back the fan stick crucially even when
politicians have leaned towards the
kinds of trans-exclusionary responses
that it seems that these journalists are
looking for that hasn't been enough
either after being asked several times
for her definition of woman for example
labor MP Analise Dodds began to distance
herself from support for Trans rights
when asked if she agreed with a
colleague that women could be born with
penises she gave this jumbled answer
um well no I don't agree with her
biological females
um obviously aren't of course they're
also a trans woman who've made a
transition in their gender but sex is
not the same as gender did this mealy
mouth response put the matter to bed
no of course not the channel in question
still clipped the interview for social
media and further headlines followed
about the labor party being torn apart
by the so-called trans debate on one
level then the question what is a woman
is simply being used as a means of
securing a gotcha moment in which by
pulling the right faces whilst their
interviewee responds a presenter can
portray them as being either stupid
disingenuous or out of touch you can't
get me with your big idea is about
gender for Matt Walsh this is an attempt
to discredit his political opponents for
British journalists it is partly about
trying to push the labor party to the
right on social issues but also about
presenters wanting to generate some Buzz
about their respective shows on social
media through taking advantage of the
inherent virality of these clips there
is another more important function that
the question what is a woman serves in
all these interviews however and that is
the
pseudo-philosophical veneer there's such
a focus on picking apart the meaning of
words and Concepts gives to the
conversation suddenly we're not just
doing boring old politics anymore we're
doing metaphysics baby it just brings
such a refined academic heir to the
proceedings Matt Walsh really leans into
this during the opening act of his film
and it leads to some incredible voice
over moments truth is
I'm not very good at fishing
but what is truth
is there a truth is this what progress
looks like
can my boys really become girls
do I have four daughters
do I now have to pay for Four Weddings
is there a son Trapped In My Daughter's
body
if so how do I get them out
are any of my kids who they claim to be
who are these people
who am I
seriously it would be impossible to
write a sketch satirizing map Walsh
because it would just be word for word
this a similar desire to want to feel
like an intellectual no doubt also fuels
presenters like Stig Abel and Nick
Ferrari and Andrew Marr all of whom get
a chance to role play as Plato for five
minutes but the most important effect of
this philosophical gesturing is the
manner in which it allows everyone
involved in these debates to pretend
that this conversation is primarily
about abstract ideas we're just
discussing definitions here guys when in
reality that's far from the case see as
is evident in the trajectory of Matt
Walsh's documentary the question what is
a woman is really just a stand-in for do
you think trans people exist which is
itself a stand-in for more practical
questions about what rights should be
extended to trans people well Healthcare
they should have access to and whether
they should be able to live free from
harassment well the motivations may be
slightly less clear this is equally true
of the interviews that we've been
looking at from the British media
journalists don't make a habit out of
asking higher ranking politicians
abstract philosophical questions for no
reason the motivation for doing so here
then is because they believe that the
definition of Womanhood that these
interviewees provide will be indicative
of how they might vote on legislation
relating to trans rights the question
what is a woman is that's a way to push
politicians to commit to supporting or
opposing trans rights without
you know
coming across as too divisive of course
there are elements of the British media
that are more than happy to engage in
very direct open fear-mongering about
trans people however that kind of
Journalism only really works among a
certain crowd more mainstream audiences
will often be turned off by rhetoric
which comes across as to outwardly
hateful the team which produced what is
a woman seems very aware of this there's
a reason the first 25 minutes of the
film seems so mild for something
produced by the daily wire it needs that
time to set wash up as a reasonable
respectable journalist to anyone who's
only coming across his work for the
first time this functions to present the
hate which so clearly fuels his latest
stunts as the outcome of the
conversations he's had during the making
of This film rather than a textbook case
of a right-wing fear of the other
this isn't to say that I necessarily
think that any of these journalists are
likely to be giving speeches at Turf
rallies anytime soon but it's clear that
each of them and their producers feel
some level of professional jealousy when
they see the attention which
inflammatory articles about the
so-called trans debate attract this
pseudo-philosophical language thus
provides an opportunity in the form of a
level of plausible deniability they're
able to participate in this
controversial debate or sometimes not
even mentioning trans people by name at
all
most British journalists would thus like
to think that there is an ocean between
themselves and Matt Walsh okay obviously
there is a literal Ocean between them
most of the time but I mean a
metaphorical one as well journalists
such as those that we've looked at in
this video would perhaps stress that
they're reporting lacks the kind of open
hostility towards trans people that
defines the output of Institutions like
the daily Wire yeah just as that more
timid opening act of what is a woman
Works to legitimize the more openly
hateful sequences that follow so too of
these pseudo-intellectual conversations
about definitions of Womanhood allowed
more extreme transphobic formations to
emerge into the mainstream and perhaps
those more recent developments provide a
means of drawing this video to a close
foreign
Lizzy has been soaking up the majority
of press attention over recent weeks a
time of recording Britain's transphobic
moral Panic continues on in Earnest
shortly after I started working on this
video Boris Johnson resigned as prime
minister of the UK this meant that his
colleagues in the conservative party had
to elect a new leader and as a direct
result of seeing the anguish that the
so-called trans debate appears to cause
the labor party candidates for the
position jostled with one another to
present themselves as the most opposed
to trans rights announcing her bid for
the party leadership suena Braverman
gave this moving speech we need to get
rid of all of this woke rubbish and
actually get back to a country where
describing a man and a woman in terms of
biology does not mean that you're going
to lose your job Rishi sunak simile
launched his campaign with a Manifesto
for woman's rights in truth little more
than a transphobic dog whistle another
candidate Penny Morden had previously
been seen as a rare trans Ally within
the conservative party trans men are men
trans women are women on putting herself
forward for leader however she span like
a fidget spinner posting a Twitter
Thread about how trans women are not
biological women and highlighting her
record of fighting trans Orthodoxy last
but by very no means least we have Kenny
basenok who tried to grab Headlines by
Banning gender-neutral toilets from the
venue where she hosted her campaign
launch but the problem being that the
toilet is in question were just two
self-contained cubicles so AIDS had to
stick sad handwritten notes reading men
and ladies to the doors which I feel the
need to say if you're going to do
gendered anything it's clearly men and
women or ladies and gentlemen it's not
men and ladies if you're gonna swing
around the gender binary like it's a
Fleming Hammer then at least get your
labels right I don't think it is an
overstatement at all to say that this
bout of competitive transphobia by
potential Prime Ministers which provokes
almost entirely by the sequence of
interviews that we've looked at in this
video Whatever claims they might make
about being a political whatever
defenses they might invoke about how
they were just asking questions these
journalists promotion of the idea that
questioning the existence of trans
people is a legitimate even intelligent
Pursuit has very real consequences
it doesn't matter whether or not their
intentions might be different from those
of Matt Walsh the results are
surprisingly similar but this
pseudo-philosophical riddle me this
genre of debate is not only dangerous as
a gateway to more openly hostile
transphobic politics
it is troubling enough in and of itself
for it is inherently dehumanizing this
whole charade about definitions of
Womanhood denies trans people their
Humanity the popes fears frustrations
and aspirations of actual living
breathing trans people are hidden from
View and this already marginalized
Community is instead transformed into a
philosophical provocation a linguistic
complication such a mode of debate
obviously makes it much easier for
bigotry to grow
because it conceals any traces of
character and personality and experience
that CIS people watching these debates
might connect with all of this will no
doubt be more than obvious to any trans
people watching
others will also likely have noticed the
manner in which these debates mirror
those surrounding other marginalized
groups for any CIS people watching
however I think whenever we find
ourselves drawn into these kinds of
discussions it's important not only to
make it clear that trans people and
lives and rights are Knocked Up For
Debate but also to reinject that sense
of humanity back into the conversation
because that sense of shared humanity is
the foundation on which real solidarity
is built
thank you so much for watching this
video I hope that it has been worthy of
your time if you think that others might
get something out of these thoughts as
well then I would love it if you'd
consider sharing the video on social
media or wherever else
um it really does make all the
difference a special thank you as ever
to Richard Cindy Nielsen David Brothers
Alan Gann Luke Meyer Gary dick on Spain
Bill Mitchell house feigert zc Reese
shab Kumar Alexander blank Neil is a
bildegard Sophia R president Dwayne
Elizondo Mountain Dew Herbert Camacho
Sergio Suarez Nicholas shackmart strange
weekend Ricardo Fernandez de Cordoba
Richard rapoon
Udo Elliott day Amit Singh paraha Parker
Mead Karen Rose now Gabriel Coke
demelzer Jimmy Dunn and Christopher
Cowan for being signed up to the top
tier of my patreon if you would like to
join them in getting early access to
scripts Early Access to videos even
copies of the scripts to them and more
then you can find out how to do so at
patreon.com forward slash Tom Nicholas
thank you once again for watching and
have a fantastic week
