hiss hiss our given the chaos that is
British politics we spent a lot of
previous shows lot of recent shows
talking about parliamentary maneuvers
resignations and PR stunts you won't be
talking about any of that today that's
because we've got grace Blakely in the
studio whose first book stolen how to
save the world from financialization has
just been released that gives us the
opportunity to take a step back and look
at the big economic forces shaping the
world not just the latest madcap plan
scribbled by Dominic Cummings it also
means we get to talk about what our
movement is actually fighting for do we
want a form of social democracy or
something which moves beyond capitalism
altogether what grace cause democratic
socialism grace Berkeley thank you for
joining me this evening thank you so
much for having me and congratulations
on the book thank you it's very it's
very weird to be back here like you know
a year and a half ago I was sitting here
doing the stuff with you you guys gave
me my first break yeah now you're on DMV
this morning and were too quiet in the
afternoon I wanted to know I haven't I
didn't wake up in time obviously about
well but I've been awake since 5:00 a.m.
guys so if I'm a bit like that just like
yeah I know you're very even it's very
times how did it go down with Piers
Morgan was he persuaded well what what
was weird is that they kind of like
Piers was quite insistent that we did
actually talk about the book because
we've like I've done lots of stuff with
him and he quite likes going head to
head I don't really know why he's just
quite like to having arguments with me
so he was actually like the fact that
even brought it up was quite big like a
lot of the other solutes they picked the
book up and we're like we're gonna talk
that was great price during the paper
review which was like amazing for me but
I mean obviously you completely disagree
with everything I had to say but he did
so in a kind of you know classic pr0n
then Susannah did her thing of like
defending me and being like you know it
was great did she seem to get it what
she said was interesting which is you
know what over the last couple of weeks
I've realised that one of the most the
the kind of most significant ways in
which people understand and experience
the kind of political economic crisis
we're going through at the moment is
through a sense that they don't have any
voice or any power that like they see
the world collapsing around them there's
chaos and golfing you know our political
institutions our environment the now
motives that they've used to understand
things historically have broken down the
systems that they live with and we're
breaking down and they kind of feel like
I want to do something about this but
because of the kind of way there are
society develops because of the kind of
individualization of our economic
relationships our political
relationships they feel completely
disempowered to do anything about it so
long segue but what she was saying was
like you know we have this social
contract and people pay their taxes they
obey the rules and in return they expect
to be able to hold their politicians to
account and it just doesn't seem like
that's happening anymore and I was like
yeah that's right because ultimately you
know I've had very strong opinions
recently about this defend democracy
line because I don't think we live in
what could really be understood as a
real democracy because of the way the
capital you know controls and directs
the decisions that are undertaken by our
you know most kind of biggest most
significant political and economic
institutions and I think people get that
because they know that they've been
demanding change for a very long time
mainly to do with the fact that you know
we've had wage stagnation rising
regional disparity kind of you know an
intensification of the kind of work that
people are expected to do and their
demands haven't been respected and I
kind of think that that's what she was
getting at when she was talking about
this I think it's what a lot of people
get at when they talk about how
frustrated they are with our politics
I suppose that question of what is real
democracy we'll get onto a bit later
with social democracy versus democratic
socialism oh wait first I want to go to
Andrew Neil as well oh thank you when he
was like what's the difference between
Saudi democracy and democratic socialism
yeah anyway let's go through you know
the key ideas of the book so it's cool
yeah
perhaps it well stole on how to save the
world from financialization so that
seems apt to start with definitions what
is financialization so the best-known
definition of financialization is the
increasing role of financial motives
financial markets financial institutions
and financial actors in the operation of
the domestic and international economies
Gerald Epstein brackets 2005 I've been
doing that's just been like literally
wired into my brain
I mean basically like I use that quote
and I say what it means is is bigger
banks and other financial institutions
a bigger role in in the economy and
those two times need unpacking as well
so banks are institutions that take
deposits and then lend up money and a
guaranteed by the state you have other
other institutions that are also engaged
in financial activities so you know one
of the big ones I talked about in the
book is kind of institutional investors
and asset managers people who control
who well yeah
direct people's savings so whether it's
them you know the money you put into
your pension fund corporate profits that
they're they're putting away even like a
sovereign wealth fund there are these
big pools of capital based on people's
savings or savings of other economic
actors that are controlled by asset
managers and they kind of you know
determine where that capital goes they
act as kind of their job is the highest
returns exact savers people with their
money in their pension plan or whatever
yeah then they kind of take a commission
on that and you have all different kinds
of funds like that you know from pension
funds all the way through to mutual
funds and hedge funds you've got you
know different kinds of actors actors
that do different types of investment
like private equity venture capital you
have the whole shadow banking system so
all of these different economic actors
do different things with money and
investment essentially and then you have
the effect different parts of the
economy and so the way I analyze this in
the book is that I take all the elements
of Keynes's aggregate demand equation so
for Keynes aggregate demand is
consumption as many by individuals plus
investment spending by businesses plus
government spending by households and
then net exports masses we're breaking
down all aspects of the economy right so
he's categorizing all that all the ways
that money is spent spent by consumers
spent by the government spent to invest
in companies or whatever and spent
abroad yeah so that's the the amount
that's spent in the economy the amount
of demand that's created today there's a
different kind of way of looking at the
amount the economy could produce if we
were all spending as much as we could as
efficiently as we could over the long
term but that idea of kind of what
everyone's spending comprising the
entirety of effectively GDP now is yeah
as a Keynesian idea and so I look at the
ways in which the financialization has
affected each of those different things
so firstly I look at the
financialization of consumption spending
by individuals so I call that the
financialization of the household ie of
kind of individual spending then I look
at the financialization of corporations
and
financialization of the state and
finally financial globalization which
looks at how that's changed the
International economy mm-hmm let's go
through some of those though so what
does the financialization of the
household mean or look like so before
going into that I'm just gonna quickly
situate this historically because one of
the things I think I've realized while
writing the book is I set out to write
the book and I was like it's gonna have
this really clear like clean neat
structure I'm gonna go like household
stay and you know government businesses
whatever and then the crisis then what
we can do about it and I very quickly
realized that which i think is why every
marks doesn't always write like this but
I think it's sometimes why Marx writes
the way he does is that you cannot
understand anything that's going on at
any one point in a capitalist society
without analyzing how its emerged
historically and so then I ended up
having this big extra chapter which and
it started really big and I managed to
shrink down about how this model emerged
and I look at basically how from the
kind of inauguration of the post-war
consensus model so from the post-war
period onwards when you get the Bretton
Woods system which has you know leads to
constraints on on capital mobility lots
of financial regulation of the state
playing a much bigger role in the
economy much more powerful unions all
these sorts of things that you know
result from various changes in
technological and structural forces and
how you know it almost as soon as that
happens it starts to be eroded by the
interests of Finance that always kind of
strain against this model you know there
are there are limits imposed on
effectively wealth accumulation by the
few and because you know you continue to
live in a capitalist society that those
contradictions and tensions continue to
kind of exist and you get basically
those interest pushing back against this
model slowly and eroding it so you get
you know the emergence of the euro
dollar markets big multinational
corporations emerging the financial
system being changed because of American
imperialism eventually yet the collapse
of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s
which leads to the the emergence of this
kind of decade-long period of crisis
which i think is really analogous to the
situation we're facing today if you look
at the economic
kind of situation that there was in the
early 70s you had the barber boom a big
boom that ended in a big bust high
levels of unemployment kind of sense
that the economy wasn't working for a
lot of people which was followed by a
long period of political turmoil as
people were kind of like well the social
democratic order isn't really working
anymore
that trial tripartite model of
corporations states and businesses and
unions are trying to work together to
determine how the economy works started
to break down as finance undermine the
model as competition from you know
internationally started to basically
make those distributive tensions more
significant and so that model started to
strain and when it started to strain it
created this long period of crisis and
you've had you know a couple of years
where there were like two elections you
had loads of governments you're loads of
elections you had in the late seventies
now what from the early 17th yeah yeah
series of kind of constitutional
economic crises and I think that's a
similar kind of moment that we face
today it's obviously not the same but in
terms of the idea that the old models
broken down the new one has yet to
emerge and these morbid symptoms kind of
characterize our our existence is I
think that's quite an apt comparison and
then of course towards the end of that
period you get the emergence of a new
model and I look in the book at the
various different reasons the what I
call finance led growth which is kind of
I suppose the model of accumulation that
underpins neoliberalism as an ideology
and as a set of institutional structures
and yeah I mean that's what was
inaugurated in the UK with the election
of Thatcher and I 79 off the the winter
of discontent after a really you know
acute crisis of that model and she comes
in she removes restrictions on capital
mobility she removes exchange control so
allows banks to create as much money as
they could have want she removes
restrictions on the london stock
exchange creates the big bang does write
to buy a whole set of kind of really
quite transformational transformational
changes that impact the structure of the
economy that impacts the
the I suppose the balance of power
between workers and owners both at the
national level of the firm at the level
of the community etc and that leads to a
whole host of changes and first I start
with I start with the corporation so
look at how the big bang and the removal
of restrictions on capital mobility
allow those big investors I talked about
at the beginning the kind of big asset
managers institutional investors to
suddenly gained a huge amount of control
over corporate culture and because as
you said these guys have this pressure
to maximize returns when they're buying
up corporations right whether buying up
equities or bonds of corporations
there's a kind of an insistence on
shareholder value maximization on
respecting you know credit relationships
and you get the emergence of this really
quite ruthless and extractive corporate
culture that you start to see emerge in
the 1980s with kind of the activist
investor that's like if you don't
increase your dividends payout even if
it means stopping investing in
production even if it means not paying
your workers then you know you're
screwed or the corporate raiders there's
a kind of little I paint a little
picture in there of one of the corporate
raiders that emerged in the nineteen
eighties that Thatcher was really close
to and basically their role was to load
up on cheap debt take a load of cheap
debt out use it to buy up corporate
equities strip out the assets from that
corporation and then sell them off you
know making huge margins and yeah that
model was eventually you know the 1980s
was kind of the fit that started this
whole thing but it eventually just
became a norm of corporate governance
and so today we have this essential
assumption that it's the job of
businesses to maximize value for
shareholders which essentially means
it's the job of businesses to maximize
value for the finance sector that and
often you know they're doing so through
other relationships with a finite sector
whether it's fire lending and credit
what does it I'm a bit so the fact that
now you've got shareholders who have
like a lot of power visa instead of so
who was him who had power over these
firms beforehand guys a good question so
prior to that the the interesting thing
that happened
during this period is that you get more
of a separation between ownership and
management okay
so prior to that you know you had a
combination of a small number of
individual shareholders some of whom
would have just been you know
middle-class savers but many of whom
would have been basically the owners and
the managers of the company people who'd
started the company they had known as
your control they also manage things
you've got the idea of a family business
that might have very large yeah exactly
yeah and you still have some quite close
relationships between you know whether
their familial relationships or kind of
collegiate relationships or whatever and
so they've gotten it does in a long-term
benefit of the firm because you know I
have an investment in the fate of the
firm beyond the next financial quarter
or whatever that is what they would have
said and that's kind of the argument as
to why corporate culture works a little
bit better than what the kind of
basically what financial interests said
at the time through the kind of mouths
of the like mont pelerin society and the
various right-wing economists that they
hired was that the the separation of
ownership and control created a
principal agent problem so created a
problem of like a clash of interests
between the people who owned the
corporation and the people who run it
the managers people who ran the
corporation had an incentive to kind of
build out empires and you know increase
their power so they had more influence
you know so that they had more stuff to
play with
whereas the owners wanted lean
corporations that were able to maximize
returns so the idea was eventually a
series of articles in this kind of
literature around shareholder value that
say managers are the agents of
shareholders shareholders need to treat
managers in a way that will encourage
them to act in the interests of
shareholders which is when you start
getting management being paid in you
know getting share options and all these
sorts of things they become part owners
kind of a co-option of that of those
managers who you know at one point may
have been working literally in a rate a
wage relationship into these different
ownership structures and so that really
changes the way the firm works so in the
golden age you still did have a
separation between owners and managers
but it was more informal and these Mont
Pelerin guys had sort of found as the
the founders of the ideology of
neoliberalism fought you need a more
formal process
connecting you own it so the
shareholders and the managers which is
in writing targets yeah exactly you also
had like less of a significant
separation between those two things
because you know you may have had like
yeah you still have had family owned
corporations you still without it you
know individually or collectively owned
corporations and so yeah that kind of
separation issue was less of a big thing
and you also had I mean even when you
know today the ownership of shares is
something that may be mediated by like
ten different organizations and you know
that countries will around the world
whereas back then you would have had you
know if you owned a share in a company
you may have just bought that share from
you know the company itself or from a
bank or on the stock exchange it would
be a fairly kind of close relationship
whereas you know today you put your
money in a pension through a defined
benefit pension scheme that goes to a
pension fund the pension fund then sends
that capital off to an asset manager the
asset manager then says well I'm gonna
decide what I'm going to invest in I
might put some money in a shell company
in Bermuda and then via that invest in
this you know set of equities there or
that sort of bonds there so it's a much
more yeah mediated relationship that
means that you know what's been
interesting is that at the beginning of
this model there was this idea that
maybe the like maybe pension fund
capitalism would mean that workers
became owners and this would be like a
way in which we could kind of like shut
down the divide between owners and
workers but actually that's the
property-owning democracy right so if
you have a shareholder a shareholder
model then the middle class in society
can buy some shares in BT they compose
some shares in mark dispensers maybe
some shares in the business they they
work in and then ultimately they're all
going to or not they're all going to but
there'll be a big section of the middle
class who are quite invested in the
growths in the growth that accrues to
capitalist businesses yeah and that is
exactly what happens and you know with
whether through shares or through
property and that was obviously always
the intention of like financialized
political economy but the like the
initial on it's like some socialist
initially made that argument because
they were like workers are going to have
all over these corporations because
they're gonna own the shares but of
course they didn't anticipate that
actually like through the process of
asset like through basically what we
have which is monopoly captors and the
monopoly capitalism coordinated by a
couple of people like you know the the
board and the managers of Blackrock the
biggest asset management firm in the
world that it effectively acts as a
planner for the entire global economy
because that crook is so big it has so
many people savings that direct so much
investment that it has a huge role the
people you you manage those funds have a
huge role in determining where
investment goes when and how that's
obviously not a socialist idea even
though they are investing workers money
they're doing so based on very much not
just their personal interest for the
interest of their class and of you know
maintaining the stability of the system
and all that sort of stuff how does all
this on a very simple way how does this
make the firm behave differently I
suppose what's the problem with it
what's the problem with the way that a
firm that sort of governed by
shareholders or a disparate group of
shareholders as opposed to a firm who's
who's governed or owned by a small group
of individuals who have a personal
relationship to the firm what's the
difference so imagine you are like on
the board of some company say like
you're on the board of singer I don't
want too many libel here so we'll have
to be very careful okay Henry I'm not
looking at anything particular so the
company Henry you're on the board of the
company
you have a 20% share it was given to you
an inheritance your sister has a 20%
share you've got a bunch of other
shareholders that you know occasionally
can't to share into meetings maybe
they're like it's kind of all grandmas
maybe there's you know one or two
investment funds but basically you know
you're like pretty happy with the way
the company works you have a growth plan
maybe you kind of have a vision of where
that's going you have relationships with
probably the state at that point because
there's much closer corporatist
relationship between businesses in the
state you're much more tightly regulated
of course which is another side of this
story and you have strong relationships
through unions etc and so your vision
about what the role of the company is is
very different - you are on the board of
a company and you have your investors
are Blackrock are maybe I don't know
you've got people short selling your
shares you've got some pension funds
that are invested in you you've got all
these different competing economic
actors with very different views about
what I mean not with very different
views about what they you should be
doing with the corporation they all
think that you should be maximizing
their returns to them but with various
different ideas about how that should be
done and all saying the same thing we
want higher share prices how do you do
that right either you can be very clever
and have perfect information about the
future of the economy and you can think
I know exactly what's going to happen
ten years from now I'm going to make the
smartest investment in production and
I'm going to develop the best new
technology and everything's going to be
great that's a very risky strategy
because you don't know what's gonna
happen 10 years from now you have
literally no idea what technological
trends there are gonna be what's gonna
happen it's like you know in the rest of
the economy is much easier for you to
use the now very cheap money they're
able to access to buy back your own
shares boosting the share price merge
and a quiet merge with and acquire other
smaller corporations that might be doing
that technological development
themselves and just dish out money to
shareholders because when shelled is
getting more money the share price goes
up everyone's happy except for the fact
that to do that you are curtailing
long-term investment in production in
innovation in technology and you are
paying workers less and so obviously as
a result of this I mean this model just
becomes completely enough the dominant
it's not even question it's barely even
referred to because it's just so obvious
that it is the duty of companies to
maximize their share price and as a
result you just get like falling weights
of rage growth we have we've had
obviously a decade of wage stagnation
since the financial crisis but wage
growth has been slowing since the 1980s
lower levels of investment in fixed
capital so investment in you know
creating stuff higher levels of
investment in financial markets much
higher levels of debt not just because
firms are taking out more debt but
because they're not using the debt to
invest in anything real they're often
using the debts of dividends or it you
know whatever else so you get this like
really extractive highly financialized
and really unstable corporate model
they're kind of like like peridot Matic
example of this is Karelian right which
is a company that literally exists
through a series of like a finance
so Fiats it doesn't make anything it's a
Karelian is a firm which contracts yeah
tenders contracts from the state to do
things like run canteens or fi as well
as a like building you know bridges
roads railways etc I suppose that moves
us on to the financialization of the
state yes it does
yeah so obviously the the way that all
of this happens in terms of the D
regular the D regulatory agenda and the
boom that takes place in the city it's
all overseen by the state this is very
much such as aim in the book I look into
the close relationships that Thatcher
has with some of the kind of corporate
raiders and the shareholders that
emerged in the 1980s and the way she
does that is you know obviously
legislators have changed but also she
and she goes to war with the country's
unions and you know aside from all the
economics you stuff in here and there is
you know a fair amount of it and I think
I try and make it vaguely interesting
but like the most important message in
the book is that why did we get this
model we didn't get this model because a
bunch of people decided that you know it
was suddenly a really good idea that we
should try and maximize shareholder
value we got this model because power
relations change on the one hand like
you know finance capital gained more
power as a result of you know all the
stuff I was talking about about the
erosion of the post-war consensus and on
the other hand Thatcher used the power
of the state to wage class war she waged
class war from above and she decimated
the country's union movement there's a
brilliant quote in there from this
documentary cool I think it is called
still the it's called still the enemy
with him and it interviews a load of
miners looks back on the miners strike
and there's a quote in there that says
what was this is why Thatcher had to
come from us what was getting in the way
with the privatizations what was getting
in the way of the logic of neoliberalism
of you know it's like cutting spending
etc what was getting in the way it was
us and this was exactly what Thatcher
was trying to do she was trying to
decimate the power relations thunderpig
underpinned the Rosewall consensus in
order to build something new to create
space for finance capital's kind of take
more control over the economy
and like she supervises that process the
state supervises that process the state
was obviously very involved with the
police force or you know the benefit
system was used to like starve minors
out etc obviously deregulation during a
to the banking system right to buy all
these legislative changes and then you
get the kind of consolidation of that
model with new labor which as well as
continuing the deregulatory agenda with
finance so this kind of like touch
approach to regulation actually kind of
perfect this private financing model of
allowing investors to undertake spending
on the state's behalf and this is really
interesting because of course New Labour
knows that after the massive increase in
inequality in the 1980s you need to
increase the size of the state of you're
going to stabilize the model but how do
you do that if you just do state
spending then or you kind of do it
through nationalized industries or you
you know do it in relatively well you
know you use relatively well unionized
sectors then you are expanding the power
of working people relative to finance
capital that underpins the undermines
the political economy that makes the
whole thing work so what do you do you
operate a regime of privatized
Keynesianism
so rather than Keynesianism state
spending to boost demand you have
private individuals private investors
undertake that spending on the state's
behalf and when it comes to the
financialization of the state you get
you know PFI is the like pinnacle of the
logic of this which is we will pay
private investors more money than it
would cost us to borrow ourselves to
build things and to raise the capital
themselves to build these things just
because we want them to be able to make
money and we don't want to spend money
ourselves and we've seen you know what's
happened with the PFI programs they've
often been like 40 percent more
expensive and if government borrowing
was used on its own happy if i watch
this to make it super clear it's it's
the state says we want to build a
hospital building a hospital costs i
don't know 200 million quid yeah no idea
how much goes to build a hospital the
state says 1 we don't think the state
are very good at building stuff because
we think they're inefficient and 2 we
don't actually want to pay this two
hundred million quid right now because
it will be on our balance books so what
we're going to do is we
tender this we're gonna ask where were
any companies whatever any financial
consortiums want to build the hospital
for 200 million quid and then we'll pay
them you know five million quid
guaranteed every year for 20 years yes
something like that
obviously I've plucked the numbers out
no you might not add up and you'll say
okay ultimately they pay more in in this
guaranteed rent then then it cost to
build the hospital in the first yeah
exactly
it would be like you know if I had all
the money in the world to go and build
like a bridge I couldn't be bothered I
was just like whatever I don't want to
do that but I got you to go and build
that bridge on your own but said I will
pay you double the amount it would cost
me to do by like on my own if you go and
do it and I can pay you back over a long
period of absolute buying a car on
credit isn't it yeah kind of yeah except
you're also it would be like buying the
car and credit also getting the person
to selling you the car to build the car
I'm hanging them double yeah of what it
would cost them if you just built the
car yourself households yeah so this is
probably the most interesting
interesting part of this in terms of the
politics because what you were talking
about what property-owning democracy is
so so central to the logic of
financialization because you've got
obviously this problem of like stalling
wage growth because of the
financialization of the corporation so
corporations aren't paying workers as
much anymore
they're paying management a lot more
they're returning a lot more to
shareholders and obviously that's
creating a huge map inequality now the
problem with any model like Bill I mean
this is essentially the conditions that
emerged before the Wall Street Crash in
the early period of laissez-faire at the
beginning of the century the problem
with that model is that when you get
more and more money being sucked out of
the the real economy and up to the top
it creates instability not just because
there's less demand down here you know
people aren't buying stuff so businesses
have no reason to invest but because
businesses have no reason to invest
where's all this money at the top going
into these people need somewhere to put
their savings and if they can't lend it
to businesses to build stuff they will
lend it to businesses to buy property or
to buy up shares or to invest in
financial markets or they'll you know
channel
to Bitcoin or tulips or whatever else
whatever next big thing that they can
they can discover so yeah rising
inequality especially wealth inequality
creates instability so the genius of
financialization
is papering over these inherent
instabilities that result from
inequality through the creation of
unprecedented amounts of credit and
primarily mortgage lending and the
genius about creating credit for
mortgage lending is that you get that
dynamic of lots of people putting their
money in one thing which pushes up the
price of that thing which leads to that
self reinforcing cycle but rather than
having it just on the part of a smaller
league which is ultimately not going to
last very long long you have like 50 60
% of the electorate engaged in this
model and obviously the way that you do
that is by expanding asset ownership for
the middle classes in the global north
based on the mass of it like a massive
creation of money through credit that is
built on the extraction of savings from
the global south and this is like a
little bit complicated because yeah I
mean yeah it's sounding quite
complicated yes it basically you have
middle class people in the global north
you have political power yes they need
to be bought off how do you buy them off
without actually giving them the kind of
power that would allow them to kind of
subvert the system you do it through the
creation of debt and creating debt leads
to you know giving people access to debt
is not the same as increasing their
wages it creates and a very
individualized sense of one's prosperity
that is based on you know the level of
debt versus your you know your ownership
of your assets you're less likely to
kind of engage in collective bargaining
because you want to kind of boost your
wages you're more likely to think right
how can I kind of manage my finances
that I'm I'm getting better off and the
way that like the the way in which all
of that money is created is firstly
because the banking systems deregulated
and
understand that you really have to
understand that banks are able to create
money mm-hmm which it's actually not
that complicated to understand it's just
quite a big cognitively I'm sure most
people who are watching this do you get
that that like you know the role of a
bank is not I put ten pounds in the bank
the bank lends nine pounds to you it's
the bank exists it has the power to
create money because the state gives it
the power to create money so the bank
lends ten pounds to you and is then like
okay the state needs me to keep one
pound in the in the bank because I lent
you ten pounds so I'm gonna come to me
and say can I borrow a pound yeah and
that's how banking work so you know
banking is literally the creation of
money backed up by the state so when
banks not lending tons and tons of money
they're creating loads and those money
and when all that money is going into
the same thing so in this case it was
mainly mortgaged I think that was a
massive increase in mortgage lending and
total household debt and the majority
this was mortgage lending was 40 percent
of households disposable incomes in 1979
it reached about one hundred and forty
percent in 2007 that's like insane
that's a huge increase over a very short
period of time and so the banks were
like right we're creating tons of money
you've got tons of money you're gonna
use it to buy a house the housing stock
remains broadly the same loads of people
out here now have loads and loads of
money they're all bidding against each
other to buy the same number of houses
obviously when that happens house prices
rise you now own a house you had took
out a very large mortgage to divide it
but ultimately you get to a point where
you can pay it off great as everyone
else is now buying their house the value
of your house is rising yeah and even if
you don't pay it off right because you
can if you have a mortgage that if you
owe your bank a hundred twenty-five
pounds but your house is now worth half
a million pounds then that starts to
look yeah manageable exactly so you then
think right well I'm super wealthy I
have you know equity my home worth half
a million pounds I'm gonna release that
and borrow even more money
so you borrow more money and then maybe
you buy another house maybe you become a
buyer that landlord
maybe you just use it to you know go on
holiday maybe you use it to buy a new TV
and this you know model of what is
effectively it's called debt fueled
asset price inflation
it's basically money
created it goes into the perches of the
asset the price of the asset Rises and
that makes you feel wealthier so you
feel like you're able to buy more of
that asset and it creates this self
reinforcing cycle
that's what underpinned the financial
crisis it was more acute in the US but
it also happened in the UK and the most
interesting thing about this is the way
it affects politics because as I was
saying a second ago you know that
relationship between a household and a
bank or a household and a you know a
pension fund is very different to the
relationship between something like a
you know a household in an employer yeah
you come together collectively
you can't collectively bargain with your
bank exactly yes yeah in fact you're
terrified of your bank if you don't pay
them back they'll repossess your home
and it will be a very shameful awful
experience and there's no possibility of
organizing with other people who have
mortgages yeah yeah at the same time you
can buy big TVs and you feel that you're
getting richer because the value of your
house is going up so why would you want
to challenge the system and that is what
underlies this weird this very very
historically weird period of financial
stability and what seems like basically
classless this that we have between 1989
ralien and 2007 it's just the creation
of tons of money now obviously that
system was always going to blow up and
it did in 2008 but I mean the the way in
which that looking into looking into how
that model emerged and how it was
sustainable for so long and how so many
people fundamentally believed that class
was dead that things would only get
better and that the only thing that we
had to do was kind of expand this model
to the rest of the economy it's quite
staggering
because it like historically had that
been true it we really would have
chanced upon the perfect economic model
it's not that surprising that everyone
was like history's over capitalism has
won socialism's debt it's just that the
bubble that we created was bigger and
lasted longer than anything else in
history because even the post-war
consensus even though we call it the
consensus there was constant conflict
and we knew there was conflict because
the whole point was you had quite
powerful trade unions who were
bargaining with him
mediated by the state we call it we call
it the consensus basically because the
Tory party in the Conservative Party
were both proposing the same I suppose
corporatist system but in in the
neoliberal period after you destroyed
labor there was no other conflict which
you could see because everyone has now
become a property owner who was somewhat
invested in the system there wasn't I
mean obviously they were historically
low strikes after exactly let's go on I
suppose we're going to how this all you
know entered crisis in a moment so first
of all I just want to sort of like put
it into a very like the simplest
possible history it can be right okay
so do the little spiel it's like the
this the simplest possible history can
be okay okay so in the 1970s you had the
crisis of social democracy yeah as a
result people saw a car looking around
for a new economic model that would work
and the people with the most power were
the ones that were able to make sure
that their economic model one the people
with the most power at the time or
obviously the people who owned the stuff
they want to create a system in which
wealth rises to the top so they do but
how do they stabilize it obviously
you've got you know the creation of a
corporate model that sees money sucked
up from workers and investment up to
shareholders you have a financialized
state that is less bothered about rising
inequality of regulating the finance
sector that doesn't take a view on
nationalizations all these sorts of
things so how do you make that model
stable how do you allow the 1% to
continue to benefit from you know
extraction without creating the
conditions that have been associated
with a model like that for a lot of
history basically you create debt and
you create that on an unprecedented
scale you create debt by deregulating
the banking system you create debt by
sucking wealth out of other parts of the
planet create you know new and and like
more expansive forms of credit through
financial innovation and for a while the
system seems very stable because
everyone's getting richer the value of
all the assets are rising inflation is
low growth is high everyone's broadly
feeling literally like things can only
get better but instability that sorry
stability naturally leads to instability
capitalist systems like this
particularly in financial financialized
capitalist systems like this because the
assumption that things can only get
better leads people to take more risks
which means the debt gets bigger the
asset prices get higher and eventually
you get to a big bubble situation and
you know you can think of basically what
happened in 2008 with housing as you
know in one way or another with a huge
amount of complexity and and you know
global interest added in what happened
to Bitcoin or what happened to chill
it's you know it's a big bubble and this
is what stabilizes system for a while
but obviously eventually the bubble has
to burst and when the bubble bursts the
fundamental structural weaknesses the
like deep-seated inequalities and
inefficiencies that that model has given
rise to become very obvious you suddenly
see that oh we have corporations that
aren't investing there are very
unproductive that aren't paying their
workers we have a state that is
basically captured by a tiny corporate
elite and isn't doing its job properly
we have households that are completely
disempowered and unable to bargain for
wages that don't really have any social
security and that can rely completely on
kind of an individual sense of debt and
assets and as a result our economy has
like a really low level of just demand
businesses aren't investing the
government isn't spending people aren't
spending where as gross coming from and
it's not I mean this is the problem
we've had since the financial crisis we
are now living in really that kind of
you know we're living with the inherent
contradictions of a model that sees
growth being sucked up to the top
without the bomb of constantly rising
asset prices I also realized I was
supposed to do that as never elevator
pitch and it was quite long but I think
it was relatively simplified it was
relatively simplified I mean it's very
difficult to make this kind of thing
simple isn't it I mean it's ultimately
economic history is yeah and especially
the financial markets a competent yeah
but I mean but like in the book I like I
do try it you know I use stories I like
yeah explain so Debbie pause no no
you're doing I'm riveted
ripped by this history of neoliberalism
yes I mean I think we're not actually
gonna delve that deep into the crash I
mean ultimately there was lots of credit
created but banks were able to lend more
that meant that consumers and households
were able to borrow more buy more stuff
and that sort of papered over the cracks
of the of neoliberalism and sort of hid
it away hid the extent to which it
allowed companies to become unproductive
and I suppose to press the wages of the
working-class we're gonna go on to the
alternatives in one moment first of all
you're watching the viral media this is
tyskie sour this is only possible
because of your kind support if you are
already a subscriber thank you very much
you're what makes it possible if not
please go to support Navarro Mediacom
and donate the equivalent of one hours
wage a month as ever like this video it
means it appears in more people's
newsfeeds subscribe to the Navarro media
YouTube channel keep your comments
coming we'll go to questions at the end
if you can please make some comments on
Twitter with the hashtag kiss kiss our
when it comes to question time I'll read
out some of those because we want this
and we want the word to go out about
this show beyond beyond our YouTube
community although we value you dearly
Ida can't remember if there's any
shoutouts I have to do share it on
Facebook share it on Twitter Sean sign
up to the Cortado which is a star cars
brilliant newsletter which goes out
every Thursday you can sign up to that
on our website let's talk about
alternatives right
so you think that the financialization
of the household the firm the state has
ultimately made a society which is more
unfair less productive than it needs to
be what's your solution so it's not just
that it's more unfair and less
productive it's that it's fundamentally
unstable okay so in many ways because it
relies on debt which eventually can't be
paid off because yeah if you if you're
just constantly papering over the clock
cracks by lending money without
increasing wages these these households
are never going to be able to pay it
back which is why we had the housing
crisis yeah and you know ultimately for
we absent the debt filled asset price
inflation you have all the inherent
contradictions of capitalist growths
that basically marx identified from
overproduction to the tendency of the
rate of profits are fooled like all of
these things haven't gone away
a they've not gonna way throughout the
entirety of capitalist history but
capitalists have been extremely good at
figuring out new ways of making them
less relevant or you know fixing them
for decades on end and that's really
what's characterized how we've lurked
from one growth regime to the next and
what I argue is that you know we're in
again this period of crisis like a 1970s
period like a kind of you know post
1930s period poster the Great Depression
and what happens next is is not really
determined by us coming up with clever
ideas I mean it's partly the time by us
coming up with clever ideas but only
because the ideas shape the extent to
which we feel like we have the power
ultimately you know I have a Marxist
view of history is that what happens is
driven by essential antagonisms between
different classes of people and the kind
of battles between owners and workers
between people who live off work and
people who live off wealth are what
drive history forward it's not you know
clever people debating in the House of
Commons saying you know we should do
this no we should do that so really like
the like the way I see our job like the
job of socialists like the kind of like
reason I wrote the book is to give us a
sense of the importance of this
historical moment and even more
importantly a sense of our own power in
shaping how it turns out now looking at
how it turns out obviously not obviously
I argue that we can't just continue to
try and fix and paper over the cracks in
a capitalist system that is ultimately
broken and whether it's broken because
of rising inequality whether it's broken
because of the climate crisis whether
it's broken because it's run out of
space into which it can expand whether
it's broken because of you know the
changing ways in which technology is
used in an industry there's a whole load
of reasons to suggest that the
trajectory of catalyst development
especially in the global north is not
going to be what it has been for the
last couple of hundred years so what do
we do with that dying model either and
this is really where I think the kind of
blood
school issues that we're seeing today
how what happens next will be determined
by the possibilities that we think
exists within the comic current moment
so why we have a very pessimistic view
of human nature and we think okay fine
capitalism is broken what can we do well
I'm not really that confident that we're
able to come together and build
something new so let's just put the
walls up stop everything from changing
and like consolidate the gains that we
have now that's basically the strategy
of the far right it's not people coming
in it's kind of just protects the
economy as it exists today protect the
interests of the people that currently
have buying within the system and stop
things changing stop things from getting
worse because obviously everyone knows
things getting worse the other option is
and I fundamentally believe that the
difference between those two outlooks
has less to do with you know particular
ideological commitments to you know
socialism versus captors and more
different forms of ownership structures
and actually just like whether or not
you're optimistic about human nature do
we then say right we're at this really
kind of critical historical juncture do
human beings had the capacity to come
together talk about ideas understand
where they are at the moment and build
power to change things and I think that
we do and the way like a bit you know
obviously doing that requires building
up a sense of all the stuff I've just
been talking about and not just suburb
just been talking about but like a sense
of where working people exist in like
the long trajectory of history and kind
of facilitating this basically the rise
of class consciousness the emergence of
a sense of identity amongst everyone
from how to get to the next place to
what the next place is gonna look like
do you not I mean
don't focus on sort of like what you
know I suppose the question I want to
ask is what is attention I think in your
book which often which is often present
in leftist accounts of neoliberalism
where what the the substance of the book
is doing is critiquing neoliberalism
creaking a bit critiquing a particular
for
of capitalism and the conclusion is
abolish capitalism you know and you see
a lot Sonya Naomi Klein did that but
capitalism versus the climate the whole
book is critiquing neoliberal neoliberal
capitalism and at the end says to save
the climate we have to abolish capital
so there's there's a kind of potentially
a mismatch there why is the response to
the failures of neoliberal or
financialized capitalism to abolish
capitalism as opposed to just finding a
different form of capitalism well that's
kind of that's kind of what I was trying
to say which is that the choice is not
do we have some sort of like committee
that exists in Parliament and say we're
abolishing capitalism putting in place
socialism it's how how do the
antagonisms between different classes
develop in order to lead us to the next
model that we will inevitably have so
like there's something that's there's a
combination of structure and agency and
there's a combination of like what's
going on what are the problems so
obvious laid out all the problems well
you know we know the basic you can't
continue as we are and the really an
acceleration of the model that we have
now you know the creation of more debt
rising equality where they make things
worse so we know that what happens next
because something different is gonna
happen have to happen next will be
determined by who has the power right so
it's not like I guess the point I want
to get across is is not as simple as
saying let's abolish capitalism when
we're gonna cross is how do we build the
power and the consciousness of working
people of the people who live from a
wage rather than people who own the
stuff in order so that to allow them to
build what comes next
yeah you know because you know that the
crisis of the 1970s it wasn't like I
don't think it was like people getting
together in Montpellier and being like
we need to build a model of
financialized capitalism where this this
and this happened it was them coming
together and saying we have these
interests we need to force those
interests we've basically to organize in
order to force those interests onto a
government which will impose those
interests on society and make sure that
we are there at every moment acting
within Parliament outside Parliament
with in financial markets within
corporations to make sure that our
interests are
promoted in the same way the
recommendations I have in here aren't
recommendations to abolish capitalism
their recommendations to increase the
power of working people relative to the
power of Finance capital relative the
power of capital together and to I
suppose like expand our collective
understanding of ourselves as a class so
that we can collectively democratically
determine what kind of economy we want
to live in that's the next step the next
step is not how do we get rid of private
ownership the next step is how do we
realize that we have the power to build
a system in which there is no private
ownership so is that I was expecting us
to disagree a bit more so that sounds
like democracy right so to say well yeah
I guess right yeah but but I feel like
in your book you did have more of a we
need to move beyond such because class
was so Socrates at it you're gonna have
you can have the profit motive I'm gonna
have some privacy yeah yes you can have
a bit of private ownership of the means
of production you're also going to have
some state ownership of the means of
production in some democratic ownership
it means means of production but you're
still going to have the profit motive in
you're still going to have competition
which sort of generates certain
innovations even if in conjunction with
with the state that what separates it
from like third ways social democracies
you recognize it the only way you're
going to get something that looks
remotely just inequitable is with a very
powerful working class which is
something that new labor kind of ignored
I felt like you kind of feel that that's
inherently contradictory and ultimately
what you're going to have to do is not
just euthanize the rentier which is sort
of would be my response to rentier
capitalism or to neoliberal capitalism
or to financialized capitalism but to
also euthanize the the productive
capitalists that a person who owns a
business which is somewhat productive
and is you know ostensibly innovating
and and is driven by the profit motive
in a competition you know you think
we're aiming for something without that
right again I just don't I don't want to
use the aiming language I want to use
the inherent forces that develop what
you are you know if you've got a I'm not
arguing for anything I'm offering for a
directionality
okay I'm arguing for and okay no I want
to answer your question first because
this is gonna sound silly if I don't
probably aren't you
so do we go through do we just get to
social democracy with an empowered
working class that ultimately makes
things better for everyone else or do we
move to something beyond that and the
answer that question is can we ever
exist in a stable form of social
democracy right no exactly
we tried that can we ever exist in a
stable form of any society that's my
issue
well no exactly but I mean what we do
know is that we have tried to create
basically a form of state capitalism
along with you know that where you had
democracy with state capitalism well
whatever we had in nineteen in the but
you know the post-war period whether you
want to call it state captioners more
than you want to call it social
democracy I would argue that it had
elements of the two right and
corporatist capitalist yes yeah you can
call the corporate is capitalism that
model had its own contradictions and
those contradictions emerged from the
inherent tensions that exist between
people who own the stuff and people who
work for a living for a while again
those tensions were then papered over by
imperialism in globalization you know it
was much easier to think that we could
have a system where States workers
corporations could work together to
distribute the rewards that society
generated fairly amongst themselves but
when things got tough as they inevitably
always do in capitalism the tensions
exploded and suddenly all these people
pursuing their own interests led to the
collapse of the system I think that
that's an inherent feature of social
democracy I don't just think his
inherent features feature of social
democracy because it happened
I think it's an inherently democracy
because it was theorized before it
happened by cholesky and others who
basically said there are political
reasons why social democracy cannot work
so they thought if you collect you said
that if you have full employment then it
won't be acceptable to business because
they won't be able to discipline labor
anymore and so they're going to
counter-attack and try and make some
unemployed people which which describes
quite well what happened in the 1970s
and 1980s so you had lots of strikes in
the 1970s when there were workers who
wanted a bigger share of the pie
Capital businesses weren't willing to
accept that they wanted higher profits
and so they had to
I mean basically destroy the labor
movement and massively increase
unemployment yeah yeah which created
issues that also
you know screwed them over as well which
is what's interesting about our
contradiction is that's what's
interesting about capitalism you get to
a point where capitalists pursuing their
own interests undermine the interests of
capital and that is what creates space
for socialism and that's why I suppose I
wouldn't say I wouldn't say the the the
purpose of this book is to aim for its
some sort of socialist Democratic utopia
mmm-hmm the purpose of this book is to
set out you know the like historical
trajectory that I think you know there's
sort of juncture sorry that I think
we're in now and make a series of
recommendations based on what I observed
to be happening in the economy and
politics in society at the moment that
will shape the path that we take next
and I basically we think we have a
choice between two paths really all
three paths right one is an
intensification of the model we
currently have the other is the kind of
closed down protectionist far-right
trumpian model and the other is a kind
of emancipatory model right that moves
us yes through some sort of social
democracy right the 2017 manifesto yes
social democracy but with not the aim
but I suppose almost like the law was
like a like a I don't see Lee ology but
like it has an inherent force within it
that kind of model where you are
empowering working people and the gains
that you are providing them with
enhanced class consciousness enhance
people's capacity to organize reduce the
power of the people who owned the stuff
increase people's demands for equity
increase their self consciousness
ultimately leads us to a situation in
which we are going to have to ask that
question again right we are going to get
to that point again where we do have to
say do we want market socialism do we
want state socialism do we want social
democracy do we want democratic
socialism do we want you know all these
different things and that's almost a
question for another day like I have my
views on what that should be I think it
should be democratic socialism and I
think the institutions that we build in
the interim to the extent that we have
the capacity to build those from the
ground up should be aiming towards
goal ultimately the aim for me is just
to build power build power against the
people who currently have it and as you
build power amongst working people
against the people that currently have
it it's just natural that their system
emerges I did this thing recently did
you see this um there was this like
Marxist values left value survey you're
talking about yes before we went live
and I okay the one thing that I will get
that I will admit to is that I got
really strong on scientific versus
utopian hmm which is I love the one
thing you'll admit to or the other
everyone else right you know like we
real-world basically the same I got very
high on decentralized as well actually
rather than in centralized but no like
is that yeah I have a very strong belief
in I came out as also docs Marxism right
and I think this is updated but
ultimately I do think that there is
something about the nature of capitalist
systems the intriguing fascinating
incredibly complex nature of capitalist
systems that you know creates these
historical trajectories these historical
waves that we're able to analyze and
that Marx analyzed so acutely and the it
matters less what we can imagine about
the future I mean of course it matters
what we can imagine about the future
because what we can imagine about the
future shapes the extent to which we
feel powerful but what really matters is
the extent to which we feel able to like
go into battle and demand those things
but it's also what you're demanding
right
yeah I mean because I feel that you're
the book the chapter on sort of like
what you want is very ambitious you're
talking about socializing finance you're
talking about but only because those are
all things that like it's easy to do
right I mean it's not you know easy to
do in the sense of winning the war it's
easy to do technologically like in terms
of legislation in terms of you know
building institutions like we you know I
think the reason that maybe I mean the
reason its ambition is only because I
want all these things to happen but the
reason that it's also ambitious is
because you know we're not particularly
optimistic about some of the things that
we can achieve often and I think partly
that's because we believe we look at the
edifice of capital
and we look at the facade of capitalism
and we think wow these people are really
bloody powerful but I mean yeah they are
really powerful you know they they do
control most of the things that we need
to survive and they will use their power
ruthlessly but they aren't involve
there are deep weaknesses in the system
as it exists and the weaknesses in the
system as it exists give us the power to
organize against there that's really why
I focus on finance it's because the
contradictions of financialization
create opportunities for working-class
organization and the global north where
for several decades we've been hearing
from a lot of Marxist scholars that the
working class and the global north is
basically gone right that's not gonna be
the revolutionary subject I mean what
we're gonna have to either just rely on
the global south or rely on different
kinds of social movements here I think
no I think we need to look at the
productive forces technological
development sociological relevant
politics etc how those all relate to
capitalism and think how is how what are
their weaknesses firstly because we're
probably under estimating how weak they
are and and how do we exploit those
mm-hm
where do you see your politics reflected
in in the current state of play
I don't know obviously we've got sort of
like Corbin and Sanders and you can pick
up sort of certain policies which you
can particularly speak to what your
solutions are but I also kind of wanted
to talk about how your vision differs
from I suppose center-left economy so
you've got yeah you've got lots of
people now Olivia Blanchard who was on
emissive the IMF I was listening to a
podcast with him the other day and he
was saying maybe we need to introduce
capital controls you know so so so
you've got a big move within I suppose
the technocratic soft left away from the
kinds of financialized capitalism that
you write about in the dark but I assume
that you see your solutions as somewhat
different to that of Olivia Blanchard or
it'd be interesting if you don't I don't
know I mean I do but also I think so
obviously you know I have different aims
than Blanchard and stating that we need
capital controls liberals think that
they're stabilizing the system as you
know the Jeff man book the great book
about Cadence's like you know ultimately
he is views himself as the save
of civilization and humanity and by
saving capitalism he's saving the world
we obviously think we're building an
entirely new system and you know maybe
we're wrong maybe the Liberals are right
maybe by engaging in these things we are
just stabilizing the system that's been
the problematic of like you know leftist
reform for generations but I would argue
that the reason that they're suddenly
saying all these things is because
they're seeing the same things that
we're seeing they're seeing the deep
problems that have been created by this
model and they're thinking right how do
we paper over the cracks and in papering
over the cracks they are they're
papering of the cracked in a particular
way they want to think of themselves as
progressives not making things worse but
making things a little bit better making
things better for future generations and
in doing so they are kind of almost
unconsciously for the first bit of this
journey they are unconsciously on the
same wavelength on a lot of these
economic issues that many on the Left
are that's why often we're able to build
this coalition that we have been able to
build of socialists and liberals
liberals want to make the system a
little bit better a little bit less
exploitative socialists want to
transform the system all together but
for a while they go along the same page
you know they both want a welfare state
they both want higher taxes they both
make one a little bit of nationalization
and that's good for a while but there
will come to a point as I said but we
have to start making the fundamental
choices about what will come next and
basically I think that because of those
things because those things increase the
power of working people relative to
capital then there will come a point
where either there is a retrenchment
well there is an advancement and the
1970s was an example of that and if we
do get the kind of basically social
democratic reforms that you know most
people are arguing for at the moment
then there will come a point which will
have to be more ambitious I suppose the
recommendations in here are about what
happens when we start to become more
ambitious how do we move from you know
good social democracy through to
something that looks a lot more like
democratic socialism and it's not like a
you know clique of the rest of the way
you come in and press a button that says
socialism it's I think I've come up with
ways of basically steadily constraining
the power of private finance and that's
what Keynes wanted to do that really
isn't it
here's the power of working people he
wanted to constrain the power of Finance
he wanted to constrain the power of
Finance relative to industrial capital
right there was never any analysis there
of there was kind of an analysis of
class but there wasn't I mean there
wasn't as a class but there wasn't a
sense that and this is what I meant when
I talked about the fundamental division
being whether or not you're optimistic
about the capacity of human beings to
create their own systems their own
futures their own lives Keynes was he
did not like working class people like
the harasser he said something this see
baby you Genesis is very good on Cain's
mmm-hmm it's very interesting he he was
you know a member of the elite and he
didn't trust working people to make
their own decisions he was like I know
I'm talking about
I want to stabilize the system initially
he was like guys Tories liberals why
aren't you listening to me I'm trying to
help you right that was the aim of this
whole thing
because you know if you are in an
enlightened capitalist you think wow if
I actually think ten years into the
future if I continue to erode the wages
of my workers it's that story about the
Ford factory when the unionist goes
round and says I know the fort Ford
takes a unionist run the factory and
there's loads of new machines in there
and for test two the unionist who you're
gonna pick get to pay your your Union
subs and the unionist turns the Ford and
says who you're gonna get to buy your
cars like you know there are sections of
capsules up and that is ultimately why
fought you know implemented the kind of
regime that he said where he increased
wages and you know gave various gave its
various demands from from the years in
the working classes but that is a very
different thing to ultimately saying we
believe that working people are the best
people to make decisions about how
society works I think that's the
fundamental division I'm gonna go to
questions in a moment first of all I've
got a question for you in when I go to
the questions you're gonna have to
not be fazed by the fact that sometimes
I'm sort of squinting at my screen while
you're answering the question why would
I be fazed by that well sometimes people
are like what's he doing it seems kind
of weird the way you're just leaning
into his laptop while I'm talking
I've done this show a lot oh yeah
fabulous of course now my question what
have you learned from past socialist
experiment so past experiments of of of
a movement which seeks to move beyond
social democracy or I suppose societal
projects which whit's the lack of social
democracy because not every socialist
experiment had the trajectory of going
violence obviously to their endpoint um
I guess I don't know I guess if I wanted
to be trite about it I would say that we
consistently underestimate our own power
and overestimate the power of the enemy
I think that there is a powerful kind of
Mirage
about how capsule is and works that
makes it seem and ROM rebel until it
breaks and we obviously saw that before
2008 but I think that has taken place
you know with most socialist projects
having said that that might just be how
the status quo always seems because
Thatcher came up against similar levels
of resistance within her party within
you know various sections of the elite
when she tried to basically you know
move to a completely different system
herself so I guess I think the way in
which that I think the reason that that
comes about is that we rely too much on
our own cleverness and our sense of
understanding of what's going on and our
ability to you know play groups off
against each other and deliver socialism
on a plate and aren't sufficiently
optimistic about the capacity of people
to organize for themselves
I think the Labour Party is in many ways
guilty of doing this at the moment of
trying to be a bit too clever by half
and a lot of issues that they think
matter to the elite rather than actually
thinking our job is
how the working classes because the
elites ultimately screwed over some time
period no matter what happens the
question is whether or not we're able to
build something new before it all goes
to question this I don't know how
because I've got no idea how you're
going to answer it Daniel Eden what if
social is is what if socialism is
impossible what then
it's kind of an existential hunt isn't
it I suppose do you ever worry that
socialism potentially is or do you ever
wanna read that it's just not going to
work and I suppose in terms of learning
from past socialist experiments not just
failures in the West to move beyond
social democracy but when you have had a
system where sort of the financing of
the economies is democratically run or
run by the state and you know at times
seem somewhat incredibly productive and
at times seem somewhat stagnant well I
think how do you avoid the stagnant part
like so firstly you know the system that
we have today is pretty stagnant but
anything has any questions we have to
move beyond what we have today so the
question is what do you want to replace
the current form of capitalism with and
then you have a much kind of smaller set
of options and then I think that part of
the reason that we are often pretty
pessimistic about socialism is that
again we like going back to Marx the
technological conditions that exist
within each age are very different from
one time to the next it would have been
possible to imagine the Roman Empire
during you know the Assyrians like it
would have been impossible to imagine
feudalism during the dark ages one day
the Dark Ages were feudalism during I
don't know the Roman era whatever would
have been impossible to imagine
capitalism during feudalism like the
technological conditions that change
power relations that change the sense of
possibility and the reality of
possibility differ from one time to the
next and I do think that we are living
in a historical moment where the
technological conditions the social
conditions and the imperative the
environmental imperative in particular
socialism means that not only is it more
conceivable whether you're talking about
problems around planning and allocation
but it's also just inevitable or you
know we all burn to death
t WTWO - Tom - Tom could the next
financial crisis be the catalyst for
change and empower the left as another
way of putting that do we need one more
financial crisis before people get
financial crises never empower the left
crises never the left this one did 10
years on right well yeah exactly crises
make the left weaker like 2008 did not
make the left stronger it took a long
time for people to realize okay crises
turn people into fear mode I think it
was de Tocqueville that talked about
this
I have revolutions come when you've had
a long period of stagnation and people
look into their future and see decline
after a crisis or in the midst of a
crisis people look into their futures
and think oh everything's gone
badly we need to retrench and wait for
things to get better
yeah it's during periods of stagnation
that people start thinking we need to
change the status quo and that's where
we are now you know Millennials are the
first generation since 1881 they're
gonna be worse off than their parents
they've got just like a deep rational
incentive to change how things work this
is an interesting interesting question
from Samra opinion of McDonald's idea of
a right to buy in the private housing
sector oh yeah okay so this is the one
way if you're a private tenant you can
yes yes I think we should have instead
of private events right to buy the right
of the state to buy housing back off
private landlords as price because you
don't want to promote property ownership
I'm not really that bothered about home
ownership but the ownership of a
consumer good either way
the issue is that today housing is not
just a consumer good it's also an
investment good obviously it was central
to the financial crisis it's central to
you know the divisions between workers
are known as
political economy today and we are not
going to resolve you know if you look at
housing tenure through the last 100
years before the First World War you had
basically like 80 or 90 percent private
renters and then a tiny number of owners
and you had slums you had you know a
massive housing crisis and that will
change during the rent strikes during
the post-war period you had 30 40 %
social housing 10-ish maybe less percent
private renters and the rest owners
that's where we the most stable model
that's most sable and D commodified and
D financialized model of housing that
we've had ever then since the 1980s
we've basically moved back towards the
pre-war model of like high levels of
renting like yes higher levels but
eroding levels of ownership and
basically no social housing provision
and if we want to get back to a system
where housing is D commodified where it
is a consumer good where it is a human
right rather than investment goods and
the state needs to provide a floor of
social housing that is provided to
everyone and the best way to do that is
to Reem you know supplies for the state
to buy up housing that is sold by
private landlords particularly easy to
do during a crisis when everyone wants
to sell in terms of people buying their
homes I'm like fine but if we have what
is better having lots of people
individually owning things this is like
the kind of difference I see between you
behind UBS as well what is better having
a load of individual people owning
things and having an individual source
of income or having if actually the same
levels of like utility of happiness but
provided through a collective ID system
where you don't have to pay for anything
you get all the goods that are
associated with the ownership of that
thing without the individualized
relationship with that thing and with
the market I would say the latter yeah I
mean my I think if as long as it's not a
speculative asset there's nothing wrong
with people owning their homes so the
idea is the problem isn't so much home
ownership the problem is
homes being treated as an investment
good right
poor Godric Kelly asks what do you think
of the D Growth debate
I've been asked so much about this and
that was this good I have on my phone
open this piece the open democracy did
the other day about the D growth
delusion which I'm interested to read
I've done exactly the same have you yeah
I mean clearly like I hate the one thing
we all agree on is that GDP grace is not
a thing it's obviously not something
that we should be using basically a lot
of people agree that GDP growth isn't
the best way to measure how the economy
works and subjectively objectively
according to the economics profession
it's just not it just doesn't work what
we then move to is another question
entirely
sometimes the D growth question can be
framed as we're already too well off
people shouldn't expect to get any
better off we should just basically deal
with the fact that we have this
relationship with nature and you know we
have to kind of constrain our demands
and I get the thrust of that argument
but I don't think it is politically
tenable or historically viable you know
technological change throughout the
whole of human history has completely
transformed man's relationship with the
environment from like Malthus onwards so
anything it's fair to say that like we
can only ever expect to be able to have
the levels of productivity and the
ability to use our natural results in
the way that we currently do forever and
I also don't think it's fair to say that
like human beings should just expect to
broadly stay at the level of wealth that
they have now even if that you know
involves a redistribution to make that
slightly fairer on the more extreme end
of the spectrum on the degress debate
there isn't even really the kind of
redistribution of element of that it's
just like things need to stop and I kind
of almost equate that with some of the
arguments that we see around
protectionism and from the right that
like things just need to stay exactly as
they are otherwise
things are only gonna get worse where I
do sympathize with it
is that we need a better way of
measuring happiness and prosperity
because just incomes in a very narrow
sense and particularly under capitalism
where incomes effectively equates your
ability to purchase you know not just
the things that you need but random
stuff it's not necessarily a good
measure of like what people need and
yeah it would make sense to have a
measure of if not growth then prosperity
that would include people's sense of you
know it includes like environmental
objectives it would include stress and
health outcomes it would include whether
you're not your basic needs the met it
would include your disposable incomes
like all these sorts of things whether
or not we should they're named for gross
on those indicators whether what we
should be aiming for people to become
happier and that's a controversial
subject
what's your I'm just this isn't it I'm
not gonna this is not a question on
YouTube but what's it what's your
position on China so I suppose it's
difficult question so what's your
position on China but I mean so your
book I suppose is talking about how
financial globalization in the last 40
years have been quite a negative story
in terms of the the results of of a
capitalist global economy but also in I
suppose over the last two decades you've
had the greatest I mean the most people
have been lifted out of poverty and sure
it's a period of time ever and that was
thanks to I mean as a sort of state
capitalist system as well model that
will China like the if not entirely
insulated they didn't insulate itself
that managed its relationship with that
process of financial globalization if
you compare say those states that were
forced to submit to the logic of the
free market and to financial
globalization through the structural
adjustment programs in the 1970s so
we're on sub-saharan African countries
some Latin American countries basically
forced to open up their economies to
international capital not able to have
high levels of state spending high
levels of state investment of the kind
that most big economies had as they grew
and obviously not have able to have any
controls on capital mobility or any of
that stuff
they haven't mostly fed particularly
well China has fared well I mean yes
it's moved towards a more market-based
economy but it is not by any stretch of
the imagination a primarily free-market
economy it is the estate's capitalist
society and China has been able to
sustain the levels of growth and poverty
alleviation it has had by insulating
domestic capital from international
financial markets partly through capital
controls exchange controls and credit
controls partly through a state banking
system partly through massive state
ownership and the rest of the economy
and partly through a very rigid and
authoritarianism of control over the
people that exist within that state
that's not a triumph of capitalism and I
find it really weird that most people
think that it is because basically
because China moved from a Maoist
society to a state a state capitalist
society that therefore means that
free-market capitalism and financial
globalization is the best way to
alleviate poverty it's kind of a non
sequitur well it allowed the profit
motive to I mean it what happened in the
late 1980s 1989 is that you had reforms
that introduced the profit motive into I
mean you presumably had it a little bit
before but sort of celebrated the profit
motive in the Chinese economy and it did
you know have some quite impressive
results yeah of course it allowed China
to undertake not on the same level but
the same sort of development that you
had in the UK and the US during the
early period of captors development
there it basically insulated China from
the forces of imperialism it allowed
China to have its own domestic
progression through a particular stage
of capitalist development and we're
seeing the results of that now and
obviously when you have societies that
still have basically feudal or
subsistence forms of economic
relationships and you move them on to
capitalism then you're going to see
growth in those societies right I mean
that's just I mean it's it could be
described as theological but it is the
kind of Marx
these things progress through so that's
just a phase right but yeah I mean the
thing about China is that the reason
that we haven't seen the Chinese model
take place in the rest of the world is
because that teleological model doesn't
apply in an imperialist global system
Ghana Zambia can't be expected to can no
longer given the conditions that in the
global economy in which they exist
expect to have the same historical
trajectory and in capitalist development
that the UK did in the 1800s because a
lot of the investment that takes place
within those countries is foreign and so
the returns from growth in those
countries agree to foreign investors and
you know this is just Lenin's argument
about imperialism right what China was
able to do is insulate itself from the
forces of imperialism and therefore have
a similar sort of capitalist development
model as was pursued in the US and the
UK and other parts of Europe let's I'm
gonna have this is the last question I
like it
what do you see so you've got your your
sort of democratic socialist solution to
the crisis or there's a sort of trumpian
one well there's sort of just trying to
continue with the status quo
I suppose this question is what is that
if you were a capitalist with foresight
you know so you want to save the system
what do you do and I'm I want to ask who
I want to find who asked it okay this is
from Colin Bostock in it and he wrote in
seeing what you see what is the
capitalist solution to this
financialization crisis that is a really
good question or do you not want to give
away the secret I suppose I don't wanna
give away the secret to my mates no I
mean I think like the problem with
trying to imagine this situation is not
that you can't imagine clever cap sness
they're able to come up with sustainable
models that will allow them to you know
continue to make profit in the future
and save the environment I think that's
basically what a lot of left liberals
want right that's what a large part of
our coalition wants it's a form of
capitalism that's less extractive less
exploitative which doesn't involve any
rupture or kind of fundamental break
with the past but the issue there is
that trying to coordinate Kappa
so to pursue that aim is effectively
impossible because the interests of this
is you know again a Marxist argument the
interests of individual capitals
individual businesses are such that the
attempts are kind of coordinate to
create a less extractive more
sustainable model of capitalism will
mean that the people that lead that end
up being the ones that are pushed out of
the market that you know die unless you
change the incentive structures right
unless you change the regulations and
you sort of I mean this would be amount
correcting market failures so yes but
again doing so I mean yes at the
national level
yeah right so you're still gonna have
the forces of capitalist competition
that are ultimately the most important
ones which are internationals capitalist
competition especially for you know
ultimately you can think of like we've
come to a point of monopoly capitalism
where it might be easier for a couple of
different big corporations within the
national economy to say we're going to
change how this model works and you know
that is actually the situation that
we're in today a small number of people
have a huge amount of control over the
kind of choices that we make as to how
our economy works but that then leads to
changes in the relative standing of
particular economies in particular
States and I think this is what we're
starting to see now with the divergence
between the US Europe and other parts of
the world like the state today in you
know monopoly capitalist society is
really a kind of you know it acts
alongside Monopoly capitals that exist
within it so further the interests of
those capitalists and the competition
and the protectionism that we're seeing
emerge again kind of like what we saw in
the 1930s is I think the result of each
of these different sets of Monopoly
capitals trying to compete with each
other so even if you have like nice
capitalists in the UK being like we need
a nice progressive better economic model
and nice ones in the u.s. saying you
know we need to solve climate change or
in Europe saying you know we need to
work with you to all these nice things
like a there
probably using horrific exploit
certificate anes they're probably using
business structures that allow them to
avoid tax and ultimately when it comes
down to it if it's a choice between
environmental sustainability and our
competing you know a monopoly in a
different part of the world then they're
gonna choose the latter so it's
basically a collective action problem
amongst capitalism like if the things
that are needed to sustain capitalism as
a system are not in the interest of any
one section of capital whether that's a
national section of a capital industrial
section of capital and particularly in
the interest of any one business and
that's just Marx like thats just Marx's
argument this is a debate that could go
on all night but I know that you woke up
at 5:00 a.m. this morning I am very
tired thank you so much for coming and
and having this conversation after such
a long day thanks for just listening to
me talk as always a pleasure grace and
congratulations on the book definitely
get Grace's first book it won't be the
last
I hope not oh you've got to put the
camera on the book no the cut will
switch at one point okay yes it is a
great read very readable I learned a lot
it makes a very strong argument for
democratic socialism and for why we are
in the mess we are currently in and yeah
we'll be continuing all of these debates
over the next months and years because
this is a long-term project I think
exactly through this conversation I will
see you next
again I'm not I'm not exactly sure the
politics at the moment is so chaotic
that we sort of making it up as we go
along
definitely by next Tuesday but
presumably also before then if you want
to watch these shows more often our
viewers are our viewership is going up
which is wonderful we're consistently
over a thousand every show now when
there's a big political moment it gets
close to 2000 we want to get over that
on that on the live shows if you want us
to be more often to keep expanding to
keep making more different types of
content you know what to do you need to
give us money so please go to support
dot navarro Mediacom if you're already a
subscriber thank you very much if not
please donate the equivalent of one
hour's wage a month your
one-off
donations are also very welcome because
we want to move Studios soon and we
would love to move studio before a
general election which is obviously
going to be pretty goddamn soon and that
is going to be you know a very exciting
time where I hope you'll agree that
navara media's presence in the media
landscape will be important yeah I just
needed that affirmation they're very
very important ok I'll see you soon good
night
you
