so prageru just became a verified
educational vendor in the State of
Florida and as someone with a background
in education and more than a passing
interest in prageru I decided to look
into the educational materials that they
have available and what I found was
genuinely really surprising I actually
started looking into all of this for a
bigger video that I'm working on about
educational censorship and how we teach
history so if you don't want to miss
that one when it comes out then be sure
to subscribe to the channel and ring the
bell so that you get notified when it
releases anyway prageru is now a
verified educational vendor in Florida
which means Florida public school
teachers are free to use any of
prageru's content in their classes
without fear of repercussions now lots
of outlets have covered this news but
most of them focus on the political bias
that permeates Prager use kids content
but honestly I think there's a lot more
to say about prageru's new educational
stuff outside the politics so literally
the day that I finished editing this
video like literally the day that it
went live for patrons and members
prageru announced that their kids
content had also been verified as
Supplemental Educational materials in
Texas and Jill simonian made a whole
video talking about the hate press that
that earlier announcement had gotten of
people talking about the politics of
prageru kids videos and she took real
issue with that so Jill if you're
watching this one is for you but also if
you want to see my full thoughts on that
video that she made then you can check
out the recording I did with my friends
over at the human restoration project on
their YouTube channel and I will have
that Linked In the description this
aside is just to say that anytime I
mentioned Florida in the video remember
that I'm also now talking about Texas
anyway back to the video as their CEO
herself recently said in a video
reacting to The Young Turks discussion
of prageru kids companies that are
trying to really slander us are still
holding on to a video that we took down
because there's nothing else for you to
attack us on and so you have to attack
us on something that is non-existent it
is non-existent and it was never part of
prageru kids so today I don't want to
talk about the politics of their videos
what I want to do today is look at their
lesson plans the newest set of
Educational Tools in their marketing
Arsenal and I want to look at them from
a purely educational perspective because
whether or not you agree with our
politics if prageru is going to be used
in schools it's worth figuring out
whether they're actually any good when
you go onto their website they have a
prageru in Schools page that proudly
proclaims their state approval in
Florida as well as what their goals are
for these lesson plans prageru wants
their lessons to be engaging interactive
and fun to be educationally sound and to
be TurnKey so they're easy for teachers
to implement and if they're used widely
enough these lessons can even change the
future of Education in America these are
some pretty ambitious goals but there's
a multi-million dollar media Empire
working to accomplish them so if anyone
can do it it's prageru they have six
lesson plans currently available and
each one is paired with an ongoing
Prager you show like Autos Tales Leo and
Layla and Michael Knowles book club and
the first one that I looked at was the
auto Tales lesson on the Statue of
Liberty for kindergarten through second
grade now to help you understand what
you're looking at here let's talk about
what lesson plans even are I was a
teacher for almost five years and while
I was getting my teaching license and
teaching at the college level I had to
learn how to make lesson plans so here
is a super basic rundown a lesson plan
is your road map for the class you're
teaching and the two most important
parts are your learning objectives the
concrete things that students should be
able to do and to know by the end of
class and the lesson that will help
students to reach those objectives and
help the teacher to assess whether those
objectives have actually been met I was
also taught that a good lesson plan
should contain everything that you need
to know to teach the lesson and it
shouldn't leave anything to ambiguous so
anyone could teach it even if they don't
know anything about the class and for
prageru they want their lessons to be
TurnKey so this ease of use thing is
definitely an important goal here so
lesson plans need objectives a plan for
how to reach those objectives and a
method for how to evaluate whether the
objectives have actually been reached
and the whole thing needs to be written
in a way that is clear and easy to
implement with that in mind let's take a
look at this Statue of Liberty lesson
alright so this lesson is for grades K
through two so around five to seven
years old and the big overarching
question is why is liberty important in
America students should learn about the
Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island
understanding the importance of Liberty
in America they'll join Otto the bulldog
and smidge the kitten as they travel to
New York City and meet new friends who
show them the history of this great
Monument
awesome then we have our learning
objectives and remember our learning
objectives need to be actions that
students can take that are able to be
assessed by the teacher so we're looking
for strong verbs here we have understand
the concept of Liberty recognize the
Statue of Liberty identify the reasons
people immigrate to America explain what
the parts of the statue represent and
appreciate America's dedication to
Freedom alright these aren't great but
we'll come back to that let's just see
what the lesson itself has to offer we
start by asking students what they know
about the Statue of Liberty this is
great by doing this the teacher is
establishing what the students already
know so that they can then tailor the
rest of the lesson to them and it's also
getting kids brains warmed up to start
thinking about the subject of the lesson
cool the actual lesson itself is
watching a video I don't think that
watching a video counts as a lesson
especially when it's just Jill simonian
reading a book to us but then we have
discussion discuss what students liked
about the story and have them share
share what they would add to the Statue
of Liberty if they could this is not
really what I would classify as
discussion like usually when you're
having students discuss what they just
read or watched you ask two types of
questions questions to determine content
knowledge so like do they actually
understand what they just read and
questions that further understanding so
asking them to think about the text in
New contexts Or things that present them
with ways that they can use the content
knowledge that they just gained and this
discussion has neither of those these
questions are entirely unrelated to the
actual content of the text like it would
be different if you ask students what
they liked about the story and then ask
them why they liked it or if you had
students investigate their relationship
with the story but no what we get is
entirely service level and this lesson
being for younger students is no excuse
here young kids can think deeply Believe
It or Not finally we have a wrap up or
as they put it a warp up
seriously prageru is funded by
Millionaires and they couldn't be
bothered to proofread this I expect more
from prageru yeah typos happen to the
best of us but those little issues add
up as we'll see later anyway the warp up
is equally bad teachers are simply
handing out the books that the video is
based on and asking students to pick
their favorite page and again this
doesn't really have anything to do with
a lesson and it's unclear whether
students are supposed to read the book
first or if they're just skimming to
find a good picture that they like at
least we then actually ask students
about why they chose that page so that's
something and then we ask questions to
check for understanding and I don't know
why we're doing that here and not
earlier in the lesson and also some of
these questions are just terrible like
everybody knows what color the Statue of
Liberty is what does that have to do
with liberty or immigration because oh
yeah don't forget the lesson is supposed
to get students to reach the learning
objectives in an easily measurable way
so how does this lesson which I'll
remind you is just watch a video and
then ask them what decorations they
would add to the Statue of Liberty in
what way does that lead students to
understanding the concept of Liberty or
identifying why people immigrate to
America or appreciating America's
dedication to freedom and while we're
here let's talk about these learning
objectives because oh boy so most of the
time learning objectives are based on
what's called Bloom's taxonomy which
essentially breaks down learning into a
hierarchy of action verbs at the bottom
we have knowledge and understanding
verbs and then application and Analysis
verbs and then at the top are the most
complex evaluation and creation verbs so
we use these words when writing our
objectives because they give us concrete
actions that are easy to assess and
they're in a hierarchy because you need
to have the lower level skills in order
to be able to perform the higher level
ones like you have to be able to
identify what a metaphor is before you
can analyze how an author uses metaphors
in a piece of writing for instance now
some people have criticized Bloom's
taxonomy and I'm personally not the
biggest fan but in any case it is still
best practice for writing lesson plans
so first thing all of these are low
level skills just because a lesson is
for young kids doesn't mean those young
kids can't handle higher level thinking
if all you focus on is a low level
skills your lessons are going to be
boring and second of all appreciate is
not a bloom word you will not find a
Bloom's taxonomy list of verbs that
contains appreciate because appreciate
is not a demonstrable accessible action
in fact I actually looked it up to make
sure that I was right on this and if you
look up Bloom's taxonomy words and
appreciate you only get resources
telling you to avoid using it because
it's not measurable seriously if anyone
can explain to me how to measure
appreciation in a way that doesn't feel
like indoctrination please let me know
but even if all the objectives were good
the activities still wouldn't actually
help students to reach those objectives
or give the teacher a way to assess them
that discussion is about what students
liked about the story and how they would
decorate the Statue of Liberty those do
not show understanding of the concept of
liberty or give students a way to
identify the reasons why people
immigrate to America and this is
especially bad for the teacher giving
the lesson because there is no
indication of why the lesson includes
these things none of the activities seem
to relate to the learning objectives so
what is the point of doing the
activities the lesson is supposed to
always tie back to its objectives and
standards and this one simply does not
it is poorly constructed Ambiguously
organized and boils down to show a video
and ask some tangentially related
questions remember Prager use goals for
their lessons is that they're fun and
engaging educationally sound and easy to
implement this lesson is none of those
things it has six-year-olds watching a
15 minute long video and then talking
about how they'd redecorate a statue not
actually redecorating it which would be
easy enough to do with some coloring
sheets and craft supplies but I digress
the lesson doesn't actually connect its
activities to its learning objectives so
even if it were educationally sound
you'd have no way to tell and it's
written in an unclear way and doesn't
give the teacher any justification for
its own existence this lesson doesn't
just fail by the standards of normal
lesson plans it fails by prageru's own
standards it's bad
and it's only the first of six
but before we go any further I want to
tell you a little bit about today's
sponsor notion so notion is a workspace
that combines features of a word
processor database and project
management tool and you can access it
through your browser using their
software on Mac and windows or through
their app on IOS and Android
notion is basically an all-in-one tool
for writing an organization and I
absolutely love it I've actually been
using notion to write my scripts for a
little while now so when they reached
out to me about doing a sponsorship I
immediately said yes in fact I'm
actually writing this that I'm currently
now reading in notion one of my favorite
things about notion is how it helps me
with organization when I'm working on
videos especially big ones that have a
lot of research and video references and
just a ton of moving Parts it can be a
pain to try to juggle all of those
different sources across a dozen
different platforms but with notion I
can keep everything in the same space I
can link to different parts in the
document I can embed tables and Google
Docs and even gifs it is so convenient
to be able to just drag and drop tables
and images it really makes it so much
easier to stay organized and it means
that I can move stuff around and
customize my workspace to be however my
messy brain needs it to be you can even
add covers and color code the paragraphs
which let me just say my chaos brain
loves color coding like when I was in
grad school I color coded everything
like my notes and paper revisions even
like student papers that I was grading
color coding so I love this so much
this is the sort of tool that I wish I
had in college because it would have
been a lifesaver as a student it can be
really hard to plan papers and projects
and stay organized especially when
you're collaborating with other people
but with notion you can keep your notes
and your projects and job applications
and even to-do lists and meeting notices
all in the same space
but if the idea of like total
customization power sounds too daunting
for you don't worry notion has a ton of
templates over on their template Gallery
so if you just want a pre-made dashboard
or Wiki or lesson plan for instance you
can go to the template gallery and find
pretty much anything that you need but
one of the best things about notion is
that it is completely free for students
and Educators if you sign up using your
school email you get all of the plus
features for free but even if you're out
of school like I am notion has a free
version which is actually the one that I
use that I think is great for individual
use but whatever account type you choose
to go with notion is just a great tool
for staying organized and like I said
earlier it's something that I actually
use in real life like for this job so I
am just so excited to be able to share
it with all of you if you like the sound
of notion then you can go ahead and sign
up using the link in the description and
thanks again to notion for sponsoring
okay let's get back to the terrible
lesson plans
I can't just move you
my spot has been taken so we'll we'll do
what we can
oh there he goes
you're so cute look at his belly
unsurprisingly the rest of the lesson
plans are just as bad and in some cases
definitely worse but I don't have it in
me to do an in-depth discussion of every
single one of these so let's just go
through the highlights the Leo and Layla
lesson on John Marshall was actually
organized okay but I didn't understand
why they had to give the teacher an
exact script of what to say during the
lesson it's also confusingly written
where they never say whether the
students are supposed to actually like
read the text at the beginning of the
worksheet or not it's just really
unclear C plus the guess or mass lesson
on John Adams is certainly ambitious
it's a part of a larger project where
students are tasked with doing research
papers and presentations on presidents
but it's written really confusingly and
also has students do research papers
without actually giving any support or
scaffolding for how to do research
projects which is literally what lesson
plans are for also they say that John
Adam's son was the fourth president of
the United States
he was not he was the sixth president of
the United States amazing stuff C minus
I actually did a stream with the human
restoration project folks where we
looked at this lesson in depth so if you
want a more detailed look at this one in
particular I have that stream linked
below the street smarts lesson about
citizenship made my brain melt
so this lesson has appreciate as a
learning objective and we all know how I
feel about that but let me run through
exactly what is involved in this lesson
first ask students about citizenship
this is fine then we hand out a
worksheet and have students work on it
as a class don't love it but whatever
then the actual lesson step one state
let's play a fun game and see if we got
it right
step two watch the video
so first watching a video is not playing
a game and second the street smarts
video that they're watching has the host
ask kids on the street various history
questions and the history questions in
this video
are the same questions as the ones on
the worksheet this would be bad enough
on its own but then we get down to the
wrap up and it says to allow students 10
minutes to complete the worksheet you
know the same worksheet that they got at
the beginning of class
in other words this lesson has teachers
hand out a worksheet give students time
to answer the questions as a class then
watch a video in which the people in
said video ask and provide the answers
for the same set of questions as those
on the worksheet then students get an
additional 10 minutes to complete the
worksheet the worksheet whose questions
I will remind you have already been
asked twice and answered this lesson is
just 45 minutes of doing the same
worksheet answering the same eight
questions three separate times and
literally any actual discussion of the
questions is saved for the last few
minutes of class also one of the
learning objectives is recognize the
origins of modern citizenship from
ancient Greek and Roman Empires but
literally all they do to accomplish this
is say our system came from Rome and
Greece and that's it no discussion of
what that even means because heaven
forbid we devote any more time to
actually discussing these topics because
then we might not have time to answer
the same set of questions three separate
times
this lesson is for sixth graders
it gets an F
the book club lesson is on The
Federalist Papers and it also has
appreciate as one of its learning
objectives the warm-up has the teacher
asked the students what the purpose of
the Federal Government is and why we
have a government and what it means for
a government to be too powerful and this
is supposed to take five minutes to talk
about all of that and you'd better hope
that that discussion doesn't go too long
because the main lesson includes
watching the book club video on The
Federalist Papers which is 27 minutes
long literally half of your class time
is devoted to watching two guys talk
about a thing not the class talking
about it the class watching two other
people talk about it this is actually a
common Trend across all the lessons
talking about doing a thing or watching
other people do a thing instead of just
doing the thing in the class like the
Statue of Liberty lesson has students
talk about decorating the Statue of
Liberty when they could have just
actually decorated the Statue of Liberty
with some crayons and coloring pages
same thing with the citizenship and John
Adams lessons they watch a video of
people playing a game because both of
the shows are game shows when you could
just do the game in the class
are you done sneezing
like prageru had already designed the
games for their shows they could have
just converted the games into lesson
plans but the reality is most of the
lessons just boil down to watch a video
and do a worksheet like the cash course
lesson on budgeting isn't even worth
talking about because it's a nothing
lesson for that reason but I think that
this is all indicative of just how vapid
prageru's view of schooling is their
lessons don't include real activities or
real discussions because they simply
cannot imagine a lesson that isn't
someone standing at the front of a
classroom talking at a bunch of children
who are silently sitting at their desks
with a worksheet in front of them they
say that they want to change the future
of Education in America but what they're
providing with these lesson plans isn't
some kind of educational Revolution it's
boring like I said about the first
lesson we looked at these lessons aren't
just bad by normal standards they're bad
by Prager use own standards they aren't
fun and engaging because most of them
boil down to watching other people do
activities and then filling out
worksheets they aren't educationally
sound because the learning objectives
are rarely if ever met through the
lesson and they aren't good for teachers
these lessons are constantly leaving
teachers hanging like The Federalist
Papers lesson has students do a debate
after watching the video but there's no
guidance on what a debate should even
look like like what the rules should be
if it should be teams or individual or
any of the details that would be useful
to have in a lesson plan about a debate
and the same goes for the John Adams
lesson which was honestly really
confusing and didn't give any
information on how to teach elementary
school kids how to do research if your
lesson plans aren't explaining how to do
these things what is the point of them
teachers aren't given any support or
justification for the activities and
what they are given is pointless like
some of the lessons get give teachers a
script like in The Federalist Papers one
which had the space to tell teachers
exactly what to say but not enough space
to specify which portion of federalist
number 51 to read the priorities of
these lessons with what they choose to
include and what they don't is absurd
and there's also a bunch of little
things that I wouldn't call out if it
were an individual teacher's lesson
plans but which are absolutely
unacceptable when it's a well-funded
organization like prageru like sometimes
a wrap up is spelled with a hyphen in
the middle and sometimes it's not and of
course there's the warp up disgrace from
the Statue of Liberty lesson too
sometimes the length of the lessons is
written with the full word minutes while
other times it's shortened to mins
sometimes the educational standards are
written with every word starting with a
capital letter and sometimes they're not
sometimes they describe the sections
with pedagogical language like connect
to prior knowledge and gradual release
of responsibility which is great but
they only do that on one lesson and
let's not forget that a lesson about
John Adams has a factual error about
John Adams Family sure some of these
things are Petty but if prageru is
asking to be taken seriously as official
state approved providers of educational
material they need to start making stuff
that is of a quality worth it taking
seriously honestly I was considering
doing like a whole bit where I actually
fixed all the lesson plans and rewrote
them to be actually good like for the
first one I like the idea of having
students make their own version of the
Statue of Liberty like okay so what did
we learn about the Statue of Liberty
like what is represented by her crown
and her tablets and the torch Etc and
then having students make their own
versions with their own features with
their own deeper symbolic meanings and
then we could all share our personal
statues that we made and talk about them
like that would be a fun lesson that
actually has students demonstrate their
learning but I didn't want to do a bunch
of unpaid work for prageru in fixing all
of these sloppy lesson plans
but
I also just couldn't help myself so I
did go through and fix some of them
and if you want to see my read on lesson
plans they're up on my patreon all
patrons have access to them so Prager
you folks if you're watching
join my patreon all of this is to say
these lesson plans these tools that are
funded by a multi-million dollar media
Empire and which Florida has decided are
valid educational resources are very bad
and in my professional opinion not fit
for classroom use to quote a history
teacher friend of mine using these
lessons unmodified from prageru amounts
to educational malpractice and I'm sure
most of my regular viewers aren't
exactly surprised by this but if anyone
is watching this who is a fan of prageru
first of all thank you for making it
this far in the video like genuinely
thank you I just wanted this video to
show that even if you agree with
prageru's politics you should still be
able to acknowledge that these lesson
plans are not well designed even if you
agree with all of prageru's educational
goals you should be able to see that
these lessons don't actually help
students or teachers reach those goals
honestly these lessons are so lazily
made they are so shallow and poorly put
together I was genuinely surprised at
how bad they were I expected more from
prageru but if they're willing to
actually give these terrible low effort
lesson plans to teachers to use it's
worth questioning how much respect they
actually have for educators and it's not
even just that the lessons themselves
are poorly crafted it's that the deeper
problems we've discussed betray
prageru's uninspired view of education
and their demeaning view of children
these lessons are so boring and
pedagogically unsound very few things
are actually going to be learned during
these lessons and no child is going to
find them intellectually stimulating if
this is what prageru considers quality
it's worth questioning how much they
actually know or care about education
the only thing I can draw from all of
this is that prageru doesn't actually
care about making engaging lessons that
will teach critical thinking they just
want teachers to show their videos and
hand out their worksheets and have
students passively absorb and
regurgitate information without actually
doing any learning they don't care about
education
they care about putting their brand in
front of your children
if you want your students to learn
history in an engaging and critical way
you need to use lessons that teach them
to ask questions to be curious to
interrogate narratives to actually
engage with stuff and do stuff not just
watch videos and do worksheets
but
if what you want is for kids to be
obedient and uncurious and bored
then yeah use prageru
I know which one I'd want
thanks for sticking around till the end
of the video this was a lot of fun to
make but uh it is part of a bigger and
more serious video coming out hopefully
in late September so if you want to make
sure not to miss that one then subscribe
to the channel and ring the little bell
that notifies you when my videos release
also if you're into these preg review
videos I want to recommend the channel
test dummy who makes some great videos
some of which are about prageru he
actually did a follow-up video to my
Prairie pipeline video from last year
and I've actually gotten to know Ben a
little bit over the past several weeks
and he's just a really awesome Creator
and I definitely recommend checking out
his work Linked In the description I
want to give a huge thanks to all of the
people whose names are scrolling by over
here
I think I assume that's where I'll put
it that mood makes sense
and especially enthusiastic thanks to a
tasty snack Adam cue Sophia jaded Flames
Justin Lowry and Paige Hanson thank you
all so very much if you would like to
join these lovely people in the credits
get early access to ad-free versions of
my videos or just help to support the
channel then you can join my patreon
Linked In the description or become a
channel member by hitting the little
join button that is down there over here
I bet
finally
for today's Patron poem of the video we
have worship for Emily Armstrong wake up
young man and go
listen to The Myth blind philosopher
carve history into fresh plucked bones
Neil at the altar of wealthy failures
and prey for silver and wives drink the
blood of the Venom spent Cobra muscle
bound and martyred
feel the Cry of the Leviathan Quake
under steel-toed boots and beg the god
you built for a reminder you're alive
because forgiveness
too much to ask
anyway I have a big video to go make and
also some Baldur's Gate 3 to play so I
will catch you all next time until then
stay safe stay warm and I will see you
all again soon I hope
bye folks
I hope the hair was okay please be nice
about my hair in the comments I'm still
figuring out
how to do it
it's been a while since I've had it this
short so it's like
what do I do I'm figuring it out I don't
know how anything works
um that's my secret is I'm winging all
of it
you're the good boy
you are you're a good boy
the cat hair all over my clothes prageru
is now a verified educational vendor in
Florida which means that Florida public
Desmond just made a mistake
