what the hell happened to TV all your
favorite shows are getting cancelled the
few that do stick around make like six
episodes every 2 years and all the most
popular shows are reruns from 20 years
ago I guess people are nostalgic for the
good old days when you worked in an
office and TV didn't  suck
somehow even though the average user is
now paying more for streaming than we
ever were for cable the companies are
all losing money and the people who
actually make the shows are barely
scraping by you know I thought the
streaming Revolution was supposed to fix
TV and Usher in a golden age of cheap
high quality watch when you want
entertainment so what the hell happened
well the answer is that the entire
streaming Revolution was built on a lie
that is on the verge of destroying one
of the most successful Industries in the
world and you know this one is personal
to me because I happen to work in this
industry but none of us are safe because
the big Tech Playbook that that gutted
Hollywood is gearing up to annihilate
your industry next now before we get
into it I just want to thank everybody
who supports this show on patreon head
to patreon.com adamc Conover you can get
every monologue and podcast I put out ad
free but more importantly you can join
our online community full of smart
curious people who love complaining
about how screwed up the world is just
as much as you do head to patreon.com
Adam conon and join us we would love to
have you and of course if you like
standup comedy come see me on the road
head to Adam Conor . net for all my
tickets and tour dates here are some of
those dates right now wow come see me
adamc con.net remember 2013 we were all
eating fro yo and doing the Harlem Shake
at the thrift shop with mmore and
everything on TV was amazing critics
were calling it a new golden age of
television and Peak TV TV was such a
cultural force that entire websites were
devoted to recapping the previous
night's episodes and the shows
themselves were genuinely incredible you
had cuttingedge dramas like Mad Men and
Breaking Bad crowd-pleasing comedies
like parks and wreck and new girl edgy
satire like vep and Eastbound and Down
and massive hits like Game of Thrones
and The Walking Dead and sure there were
some annoying things about the old days
of TV there was that big cable bill you
had to watch all those Geo caveman ads
and you had to wait a whole week to see
what wigs they'd wear on the next
episode of The Americans a whole week
for wigs companies were making bank the
writers actors and crew were making a
and the shows were so good that people
were literally saying that TV was better
than movies but you know what today
nobody is saying that  when you open
Netflix or peacock or Max you see a
bunch of shows you've never heard of
that nobody is talking about I mean
which one of these is a real show and
which one was mocked up by my producer
Tony you don't even  know and
once you finally find a show you like it
gets two six episode Seasons if you're
lucky and then it's cancelled I mean
what is this England was the Boston Tea
Party for nothing and even though it now
costs more to have the top streaming
services than it did to have cable the
streamers are somehow losing money huh
maybe it's because the executives keep
buying so many ugly ass puffer vests I
mean how else could peacock lose almost
a billion dollars in one quarter and how
in 2022 could Titan of industry and
Canadian tuxedo Ruiner David zaslov lose
Warner Brothers Discovery over 2 billion
in one quarter I mean we knew the guy
was good at murdering your favorite
character but somehow he's also
murdering his own profits so how did
this happen how is Hollywood losing
money by the zaz full while you pay more
well the answer goes back to the big
tech company that promised to
revolutionize Hollywood Netflix Let's
Travel back to the 2010s the Golden Age
of television Netflix was fresh off the
bloody evisceration of their loome enemy
Blockbuster Americans cheered their
Victory their stock price was through
the roof and Netflix was looking for its
next dinner so they decided to storm the
gates of Hollywood with a brand new
business model streaming Netflix made
the public a simple promise for eight
bucks a month you could watch almost any
show ever made whenever you wanted with
no ads this was an almost impossibly
good deal and the public went feral for
it so many people can cable and signed
up for Netflix instead the media gave
the phenomenon a name cord cutting but
this almost incredible deal was always
too good to be true how was it possible
to replace all of television with a
service that costs just a few cups of
coffee a month and has no ads I mean
advertising used to fund almost the
entire television industry you weren't
actually paying the bills the zoom zoom
kid was zoom zoom zoom zoom the  was
that ass so how could Netflix afford to
offer such an amazing deal with no ads
at all simple they were subsidized by
Wall Street who showered them with tumb
loads of cash because they told
investors that they disrupt the entire
industry and form a monopoly and just so
you know that I'm not exaggerating when
I say that a Netflix executive literally
said that their entire objective was to
replace all of television Netflix grew
so quickly and was so blunt about their
quest for world domination that the rest
of the entertainment industry  their
 pants I mean the network heads
saw what Spotify did to the music
industry and they did not want to become
the next meal so when confronted by this
new threat they did what good
capitalists have done since the dawn of
time they ripped their competitor off
every Entertainment Company rushed to
launch a Netflix clone Paramount created
CBS all access I mean Paramount Plus
Warner Brothers launched HBO Max I mean
Max I mean pretty soon they're just
going to be calling it m and Disney
created both Disney plus and Hulu which
they're now trying to smash together
like two dickas Ken dolls each of these
companies threw away the profitable
business model that has assain them for
decades in order to replace it with
Netflix's but this was a deadly mistake
because Netflix was never designed to be
a sustainable model for a television
network it was designed to kill the
television industry it was a trojan
horse containing within it three fatal
flaws that when duplicated by the Legacy
networks caused their businesses to
collapse first up we have Netflix's most
famous invention binge watching you know
at first binging was a cool novelty
instead of waiting a week to watch your
favorite show you could Gorge yourself
on the whole thing right away when House
of Cards dropped an executive I used to
work with the college humor bragged to
the whole office that he watched the
entire season the very night it dropped
and at the time I thought wow this guy
gets paid a lot of money to have more
free time than me but today binging has
become an obligation in fact it's now
how the streamers measure success they
expect Their audience to binge the
entire show as soon as it drops and if
we don't they cancel it but who has time
for binging now I mean the average
American is lucky to have half an hour
free after working two jobs to pay rent
and putting the kids down if we're
binging on anything it's seral for
 dinner I mean we're supposed to
watch 5 hours of TV a night and if we
don't Wednesday gets it that's
ridiculous I mean binging is literally a
use disorder binge eating binge shopping
binge drinking none of those are good
things in fact binging is bad for the
shows themselves that's because binging
kills the most important form of
marketing in television word of mouth
with a weekly release schedule every
time a new episode comes out people talk
about the show you know almost no one
watched Breaking Bad on the day the
first episode dropped they watched it
after hearing 10 friends for 10 weeks
say I need someone to talk about
Walter's tidy whes with or I'll go
breaking mad but with binging that
momentum never has time to build a show
drops and then a week later no one is
talking about it you know earlier this
year Netflix released a new $160 million
show from the creators of Game of
Thrones but I bet you haven't thought
about that one in a while I mean this
was a good show but it was in the
conversation for 3 days and then
everyone went right back to watching
Suits the obsession with binging is also
why the streamers make Seasons that are
so short now when I made the g-word for
Netflix we were told that our Target was
to make it short enough that people
could binge the entire Series in just
one night because that's what looked
best for Netflix's success metrics and
you know what that's all well and good
for a limited series like ours but there
are are so many types of shows that just
don't work with a binge model because
they're better consumed a little bit
each night for months on end you know
the reason people like sitcoms is
because you get to spend long enough
with the characters that they start to
feel like your literal friends and that
is why some of the most popular shows on
streaming aren't Netflix originals
they're reruns of old cable and network
shows that made dozens of episodes every
season for hundreds of episodes and yet
despite their overwhelming popularity
none of the streamers are making shows
like these anymore in fact entire genres
of TV that people love have just
disappeared you can't binge game shows
and you can't binge late night shows so
the streamers don't make them at all
anymore but that doesn't mean people
don't want to watch them the game shows
that my friends at Dropout make are
wildly popular and late night comedy
actually has more viewers than it ever
did they're just watching it on YouTube
I mean you are literally watching me do
what I used to do on TV right next to
where you watch John Stewart and Steven
Co bear and that means that the
companies could have come up with a
business model for streaming that
supported daily or weekly content but no
they all followed Netflix gorged
themselves on binging and threw up
entire genres of Television into the
YouTube
toilet hey speaking of streaming
subscriptions how closely do you track
your bank statements and credit card
history are you combing through every
single charge on a regular basis or do
you just just assume everything is fine
until you notice something weird
honestly I don't have time to watch my
accounts that closely but now that I'm
using rocket money it does all of that
for me so I don't have to worry about it
rocket money is a personal finance app
that findes and cancels your unwanted
subscriptions monitors your spending and
helps lower your bills so you can grow
your savings with rocket money I have
full control over my subscriptions and a
clear view of my expenses I can see all
my subscriptions in one place and if I
see something I don't want rocket money
can help me cancel it with just a few
Taps I love how the dashboard shows me
this month's spending compared to last
month so that I can clearly see my
spending habits plus they'll help me
create a custom budget and keep my
spending on track rocket money will even
try to negotiate lower bills for you by
up to 20% all you have to do is submit a
picture of your bill and Rocket money
takes care of the rest they'll even deal
with customer service for you rocket
money has over 5 million users and has
saved a total of $500 million in
canceled subscriptions saving members up
to $74 a year when using all the apps
features so stop wasting money on things
you don't use cancel your unwanted
subscriptions by going to Rocket
money.com Conover that's rocket
money.com Conover the second fatal flaw
at the heart of the streaming Revolution
was the death of the media brand so back
in the old days before Netflix the big
media companies divided themselves into
multiple sub Brands otherwise known as
channels Each of which was for a
different audience
as a teenager I watched Comedy Central
because I loved comedy and bleeped
swears while my sister watched Animal
Planet because she was an animal lover
who is obsessed with mircat gossip and
my grandpa watched TV Land because he
was fing old these were famous popular
valuable brands that people loved I mean
I literally identified with Comedy
Central it felt like a channel that was
made for me and that was good for the
company because advertisers were willing
to pay more to reach a specific audience
of dumbass edgy
16-year-olds but Netflix didn't want to
Target a specific audience their goal
remember was to be a monopoly so they
needed to be everything to everyone so
what did the Legacy Media companies do
to compete with that they threw all
those beloved brands in the 
trash Comedy Central was once the most
important brand in American Comedy they
didn't just create some of the most
successful TV comedies of all time they
also produce standup specials comedy
albums and Live Events they were an
essential part of the infrastructure of
the entire comedy industry there is no
reason that Paramount comedy centrals
parent company couldn't have come up
with a business model that brought this
beloved brand into the digital age but
no in the process of competing with
Netflix Paramount fired comedy Central's
leadership and forbid it from making new
scripted shows and now it's nothing more
than a sub pain on Paramount plus this
happened a across the media ecosystem
MTV one of the most famous TV brands of
all time now airs nothing but reruns and
doesn't even exist on streaming TBS TNT
my old Network True TV all famous brands
that used to make unique shows that
people loved had their entire staffs
laid off and now make nothing and even
HBO one of the most valuable brands in
media the Cathedral of Television
synonymous with quality Warner Discovery
took it goddamn name out of the
streaming service I mean I understand
HBO Max it's HBO but there's more but
what the  is Max maximum what it's
like if Koch zero changed its name to
zero what's in the bottle 
nothing but the media brands of a decade
ago weren't just good for business they
were good for television as an art form
because they attracted a specific
audience they caused the companies to
make unique shows that catered to the
tastes of that audience that's how we
got edgy dramas on FX Cutting Edge
comedy on Comedy Central and weird ass
Stoner animation on Adult Swim but when
you try to be everything to everyone you
just end up making flavorless Pap I mean
Netflix describes the perfect streaming
show as a gourmet cheeseburger and yeah
sure everyone's fine eating a gourmet
cheeseburger you know why because they
all taste the same but if you want to
cook a dish that's daring something new
and different you have to take a risk
risk that not everyone will like it and
cater instead to a more specific taste
so if you've been wondering why the
streamers have started making generic
common denominator programming choices I
think this is why they stopped trying to
make you happy and they started trying
to make everyone happy and that is
simply not a recipe for greatness it's
the recipe they use at the Guy Fieri
burger joint on a Caribbean cruise no
shade to guy by the way I love triple D
give me that donkey sauce
and that leads us to the third and
biggest problem with the streaming
business model see Netflix's goal was to
take over the world but they did so by
copying the most exclusive least
scalable business model in television
HBO see back when Netflix started HBO
was the most prestigious and admired
Network on television so Netflix set out
to copy them CEO Ted Sandos even said
the goal is for us to become HBO faster
than HBO can become us but at that time
HBO was just one small part of the
television ecosystem it was a premium
status symbol paid for by rich people
who didn't want to pollute their viewing
with todrey ads HBO was so fancy it was
literally advertised as a perk at hotels
ooh how dah a place where I can cheat on
my wife sexually and by watching The
Sopranos without her but in reality most
people couldn't afford HBO he hell half
of us watching Game of Thrones were just
borrowing the password from our rich
friends parents the real cash cows of
the TV industry were free ad supported
broadcast channels like CBS NBC and ABC
and paid ad supported cable like
Nickelodeon and Comedy Central the
advertising on those channels subsidized
the cost of the media lowering the price
to a level where more people could watch
it is simply not possible to get as many
people to tune in for 15 bucks a month
as you can for free because the truth is
as much as we all hate ads and I do hate
them we hate paying for  more I mean
you could watch an adree version of this
video if you just subscribed to my
patreon but you didn't do that because
you'd much rather watch me do an ad and
get the content for free and that's fine
if you want as many viewers as possible
you have to offer an ad supported option
it was simply never going to be the case
that the future of TV was everyone
subscribing to multiple adree hbos for
15 bucks a pop there are simply not
enough rich people on the planet to make
that sustainable so by throwing away the
advertising business model that had
supported them for decades the Legacy
companies did massive damage to their
own businesses they are now losing money
hand over fist while Netflix the company
that tricked them into running off the
cliff is close to its goal of replacing
all of TV and so what is Netflix doing
why they're adding ads and jacking up
the price which of course they were
always going to do
that too good to be true deal was always
just a promo funded by Wall Street and
designed to help Netflix kill the
competition and take over the industry
and all the other CEOs were so gutless
and so brainless that they fell for it
they threw out the advertising the sub
Brands and the weekly release schedule
that made them  rich but you know
what Bob Iger and zaz they're going to
be fine they're still making bank it's
the rest of us who pay the the price
Hollywood has started making less shows
and since August 2022 the entertainment
industry has seen more than a quarter of
jobs laid off things got so bad last
year that writers and actors had to go
on a six-month strike for basic worker
protections and even though we won
enormous gains in that strike including
protections against AI today writers
actors and the crews that make your
favorite shows are struggling to find
work why because these idiots killed a
profitable industry chasing a big Tech
Mirage and did we get the revolution
they promised no TV is worse we pay more
and average workers can barely make a
living the rich got richer and everyone
else got  and the worst part is
this bait and switch business model is
coming for every industry in America
Uber and Lyft did it to the cab industry
Amazon did it to the retail industry
Airbnb did it to the entire housing
market they use Wall Street money to
undercut the competition then once
they're in charge they Jack the prices
up on you all while paying the workers
peanuts they promise a revolution but
what we end up with is something that's
worse than what we had before for
everyone except the rich people at the
top and it'll keep happening as long as
we the public keep falling for it we
need to start recognizing this pattern
when it starts not when it's already too
late so the next time the tech disruptor
snake oil salesman shows up and starts
tap dancing on your porch promising you
something too good to be true just slam
the door in his  face and go back
to watching
TV thank you so much for watching if
you're a TV executive please hire me I
swear it was all in good fun if you want
to support videos like these head to
patreon.com adamc Conover five bucks a
month gets you every video I put out
adree for 15 bucks a month I will put
your name in the credits of every single
one of these video monologues look at
the names of all of these wonderful
folks we also have a wonderful online
community we would love you to join head
to
