hello and welcome to factually I'm Adam
Conover thank you so much for joining me
on the show again you know we don't
often think about this because it feels
so normal to us now but in the past
couple decades we have gone through a
shocking revolution in how we see
experience and disseminate music film
video art and just about any other form
of media or culture and I can see this
transformation in my own career you know
back in 2004 back when I got started if
I made a funny video and it went viral
on the internet that was because people
liked it people had to email it to their
friends or post it to a message board or
just tell their friend about it years
later when I got a TV show on basic
cable we got that show because me and
the people I worked with convinced a
human executive to produce it that it
was a good idea and that people would
like it however imperfect that process
was and it was very imperfect humans
decided what would hit and thus would
get seen but those days are long gone
today when I post work on YouTube or
social media or even make a show for
Netflix My Success is Not based on human
decision-making but on the opaque
capricious and confusing whims of an
algorithm I mean it's pretty weird that
now entertainers musicians artists of
all kinds now have to think about how
our work will interact with a totally
impersonal everchanging series of
computer programs just to reach an
audience or God forbid make a living I
mean supposed we're making art for
humans not for computers but that is not
really what the job feels like anymore
and here's the weirdest part of all we
now talk as a population about the
algorithm as though it's some sort of
Mystical Force because in many ways it
is I mean we have so little power or
recourse over the algorithm we know that
it manipulates us and that the
manipulation benefits the companies that
own the algorithm and yet there's
nothing we can do about it I mean have
you ever been on Tik Tok and there's
some random video with millions of views
and then all the comments are people
baffled about why it was suggested to
them we know that we're being screwed
with and we're all freaking out about it
and yet here we are I mean it is just
buck wild that we have outsourced who
gets to see what to these multi-billion
doll platforms that do not have our best
interests at heart it has shifted our
entire cultural landscape to what our
guest today calls filter world and that
has been a transform AAL change and not
for the better to talk about this today
we have an incredible guest but before
we get to it I want to remind you that
if you want to support this show you can
do so on patreon head to patreon.com
adamc Conover five bucks a month gets
you every one of these episodes add free
and help keeps the podcast free for
everyone else to enjoy and if you want
to come see me do standup comedy avoid
the algorithm entirely and watch me with
your two human eyes soon I'm going to be
in San Jose California La Hoya
California Indianapolis a lot of other
great cities head to Adam con.net for
tickets and tour dates and now let's
welcome today's guest his name is Kyle
ja he's the author of a wildly smart and
insightful new book called filter world
how the algorithms flatten culture
please welcome Kyle
cha Kyle thank you so much for being on
the show yeah thank you for having me so
let's jump right into it how pervasive
are these algorithms and actually that's
a word that you know has a mathematical
meaning but we now use it in this very
general way what are we talking about
when we talk about the algorithm we're
kind of talking about everything I feel
like like we have this abstract notion
of the algorithm when really what we're
dealing with is a series of different
algorithmic recommendation systems that
work differently on all of these
platforms that we use and I think we're
kind of surrounded by algorithms right
now like everything from your Netflix
homepage to your Tik Tock feed to your
email inbox to whose Instagram stories
do you see first all of these things are
dictated by these equations that are
trying to guess what you're going to be
interested in and you know the first
thing that jumps out at me is that it
really depersonalizes it to call it an
algorithm because you know when when you
used to watch in the in the Golden Age
of TV when that was the only sort of
moving image you had available to you
you knew that uh what you saw was being
dictated by somebody at NBC CBS or ABC
the same is true of Facebook Twitter Tik
Tok all of these services but we say the
algorithm which really depersonalizes it
when actually it's I mean it's Mark
Zuckerberg and the people who work for
him that are determining what we see
right they have the same level of media
control right so when we blame the
algorithm I think we think of some robot
or like a machine blackbox like
incomprehensible system but really all
of these equations are controlled by the
CEOs of tech companies they're designed
by Engineers there's a bunch of human
people sitting in offices who are
deciding how these feeds work work even
though we think of them as so abstract
it's actually this very commercial you
know corporate decision yeah uh and so
what is the effect of these algorithms
on us on our culture that you argue in
your book in my book I mean I was struck
by the sense that culture overall was
becoming more homogeneous and kind of a
little more boring a little less
compelling and we're all just becoming
more passive consumers of the culture
around us and I think the responsibility
for that lays with these algorithms and
the digital platforms that use
algorithmic feeds like they're just
feeding stuff to us that is supposed to
fit with our tastes that's supposed to
give us what we want to see but I think
in reality we're having a much more
shallow experience well there's a place
for shallow experiences sometimes right
like I listen to certain you know uh uh
playlists on the streaming services
sometimes because I just want some
Pleasant background music I don't want
to be surprised and delighted uh by
something interesting I just want
 rain sounds CU I'm going to
sleep right there there is a place for
that kind of thing but what do we lose
overall when all of our culture becomes
that way yeah like I think of the
YouTube channel Loi chill hip hop beats
to study relax to like I totally use
that to do work and do writing and
that's the kind of like passive ambient
background music that we appreciate from
an algorithmic feed but I do wor
although I think Loi beats is actually
at least originally was curated by a
human who was curating it uh 24 hours C
yep but now it's been ripped off by
dozens and dozens of algorithmic feeds
on Spotify Apple music Etc totally so I
think we lose culture that doesn't fit
into that box like everything is
becoming more ambient more ignorable a
lot of these things exist for you to
look at your phone at the same time like
a Netflix shows are kind of more ambient
I think a lot of music is is more
ambient and I just worry that that kind
of quality is taking over too much I I
agree with you in a lot of ways but I
will say I just want to push on a little
bit that there are sometimes that I feel
that algorithms do give me a bit of
surprise and delight and the main
example I have is when I first installed
Tik Tock Tik Tock gave me the sense of
surprise delight and Serendipity that I
felt like I used to get on the internet
you know I'm a child of the internet
from the '90s from the early 2000s and
every time you went on the internet you
would see something weird and crazy that
you didn't get anywhere else that was
the whole appeal of it was like holy
 look at this right and that sort of
novelty sort of felt like it bled out of
the internet I wasn't getting that from
you know Twitter and Instagram I was
seeing the same old  and then
suddenly when I went on Tik Tok I was
like hold on a second it's showing me
the weirdest video I've ever seen why am
I looking at this why does this the best
feeling on Tik Tok is why does this have
100,000 likes I got to keep watching
watching and then you'll see some you
know the craziest video you've ever seen
someone recorded the most bizarre thing
ever or you know someone has a
completely strange opinion or some teen
has made some bizarre song you know that
uh that goes viral for weird reasons and
so I did get some of that strangeness
and I remember going oh I like this
algorithm this algorithm is better than
other ones I've experienced in the past
CU it's giving me a little bit like and
it felt like it was driving culture in
an interesting way at least for the
first maybe year and a half of Tik toks
you know going mainstream I I'm curious
what you think about that yeah I think I
mean the internet did kind of calcify I
think and Tik Tok shook it up a lot in
part by embracing the algorithmic
recommendation like your for you feed is
not about who you choose to follow it's
not about what you know is out there
it's just about bringing you stuff
that's like interesting and compelling
that you would never have even known to
look for so I had that same experience
like this is so cool this is so
surprising and new and different I never
would have found this stuff but I feel
like I mean one problem I think is that
the Tik Tok algorithm has changed over
time like we can't rely on these to stay
the same and at least now three out of
every four videos it shows me is
somebody trying to sell me some plastic
crap like shopping Tik Tok shopping has
utterly taken over I think it's become
less surprising and delightful as Tik
Tok the company tries to further
monetize your attention and make more
money out of that feed so I think we
can't r on it staying the same like I
wish there was a dial I could turn up
and down like I want to get more
surprise I want
like I just have to tell you this is one
of the first Tik Tok videos I ever saw
okay I was scrolling and I come across
an account the name of the account is
big fat David okay it's a it's like a
13-year-old kid in Fresno California
he's on an almond Farm in Fresno
California and he's saying okay you guys
today I'm going to dig a hole and then
he starts digging a deep hole and then
he builds a fire in the hole he says now
the fire is getting really big and then
at the end he turns to the camera and
goes tomorrow I'm going to make Denny's
here's what I'm making tomorrow and he
shows a picture of a Denny's Grand Slam
breakfast and he says he's gonna make it
and everyone in the comments is like
what the  is going on in this video
but it was so compelling and then I
followed him and I've literally tracked
now big fat David's life for the last
like four years I'm a fan of big fat
David and he has he sells t-shirts now
he's living his best life in Fresno
California uh and digging holes on an
almond Farm uh and and that was a Wonder
but I don't get that as much as I used
to from Tik Tok I'm not seeing that like
I feel like we've lived through that
same like the era of the internet that
started in the mid to late 90s and I
feel like the internet always starts in
the weirdest possible place like you had
the crazy internet humor forums you had
you know the weirdest memes possible and
like there's these life cycles where you
start in a really weird place and then
you get to a really boring and like
corporatized and monotonous place and I
feel like we've seen that happen with
Tik Tok over the past few years um you
know like I think there are life cycles
of the internet where we wanted to
change and we wanted to move on and we
need a kind of fresh wave of stuff and I
feel like part of my motivation for
writing this book was just I think there
is an era that's ending I think the era
of the giant social network the kind of
era that started in the 2010s and peaked
around you know 2020 2021 that's kind of
over and we're starting to be hungry for
the next thing yeah and it's funny how
long it took me to figure out that
things were going to change on the
internet I thought it was going to be
the way that it started forever and then
after 15 years I was like wait why does
the internet suck now and then I started
to learn about you know the work of for
instance the writer Tim woo who's
written a lot about how the same thing
happened to the internet as happened to
radio when radio started out it was
supposed to everyone would broadcast and
receive people would talk to each other
no one had any idea what it was for
there was huge experimentation and then
20 years later it's three giant
companies just broadcasting the same
three shows um and no one talking to
each other except on very narrow bands
like the sort of corporate takeover of
the medium and I had never realized oh I
was living through the hon early days
where it's hobbyists and Weirdos and no
one knows what this thing is going to be
and the powerful have not yet been able
to exert their power over the platform
to make to bring it under their control
as they eventually did the people with
money one as they as they always do do
do you sort of agree with that story The
Very broad Strokes yeah there's a
monopolization of the Internet that
happened like if we think back to the
90s or early 2000s you know up to the
era of Facebook like websites were a
different kind of thing like websites
were things that people made of their
own valtion often very creatively or
weirdly they were very Niche like there
were certain destinations to be social
online but they weren't so corporate
they we weren't all like stuffing
ourselves into the same modules that we
are in now on Facebook or Instagram like
part of my problem is that the
containers of the internet have become
so restrictive that if we want to
express ourselves we have to cram it
into like the the Twitter or Xbox or we
have to show it through our Instagram
feeds and we have no agency over how
those things work and no way to like
talk back to it or express ourselves
differently and that's really
frustrating I think of early internet
culture you know media properties I
don't know what else to call them uh
like for instance dinosaur Comics if you
remember dinosaur comics where this guy
used the exact same frame of two
dinosaurs talking to each other every
single day and changed the word bubbles
in an insane thing to do extremely
popular or Ali bro's comics where she
would write long essays and illustrate
them in in this crazy way that
eventually like gave birth to you know
the Rage Comic meme format those are
people just saying hey I've got a blank
canvas what the hell do I want to put on
it and struck upon something people like
those same people today would be like
how do I make a real you know I need to
make a real because that's what and
that's what I'm trying to do now is just
like make the thing that Instagram likes
yeah I mean the production values have
gotten so much higher right like that's
why we're on video that's why you're in
a a stage set it's like we have to Not
Just Produce text or audio we need to
like do this kind of TV show because
that's what the platform is prioritizing
like Instagram is obsessed with reals
because it was trying to compete with
Tik Tok and so what kind of post will
get you the most algorithmic promotion a
video like you can't do still photos
anymore and gain an audience so we're
all kind of molding what we make you
know are us digital creators of whatever
we're all tailoring our creativ telling
our content to what works for the
platforms yeah and I mean the
fundamental reason I'm doing this
podcast video is be I started doing that
about a year ago after doing the first
three years or so of the podcast Audio
Only and it's because so many eyeballs
became centralized on the video
platforms that if you weren't doing
something on video it essentially didn't
exist you know it was like invisible to
the internet like there's a podcast
somewhere if you know to go search on
Apple podcast or Spotify for it but no
one has a way to share it there's no way
to broadcast it out to more people than
are already seeing it so all right we
must do video because that's where most
of the eyeballs are and look I'm a
broadcaster by Nature I'm happy to go
where the eyeballs are that's sort of my
job as an Entertainer if people are
watching reals I got to make them but I
can accept that about my own career and
know that if that's the only form of
media making that is successful is
whatever serves Zuckerberg or bite Dan's
interest we've lost something right I
mean it's not about your own Creative
Vision necessarily it's not that you
definitely want to make a video it's not
that you definitely want to cut your
Clips up into 10sec bits and then put
them on Tik Tok so that people will
engage with them I think there's like
the incentives for cultural distribution
are more about what works for the tech
company than what works for either the
end consumer or the creator of the
content and so these platforms are not
oriented around the best kind of
cultural consumption they're not
oriented around highlighting great
voices they're they're oriented on
selling advertising they are tracking
your data surveilling what you do and
then targeting you with ads that Brands
pay for to reach you and that like yeah
the whole structure is oriented toward
that goal and I hope that we could do a
lot better than that for our cultural
projects yeah I mean I would hope so too
and yet it seems so dangerously naive
that I ever thought that this would
wouldn't happen that you know the forces
of capital who have all the money right
would figure out how to turn the
internet into a you know money and
Eyeball source for them like of course
that's what they did right the people
who have power have power and they use
it to get more power um of course the
the wild west wasn't going to stay the
way it was forever eventually people
start putting up fences and the railroad
comes through you know
likeu money can do that yeah the the
wild west is a good metaphor for it I
think where it was like not so
commodified it was very open and I think
we we lived through an era of the
internet that was floating on a lot of
venture capital A lot of crazy startup
valuations and ultimately that was not
what was going to be permanent like I
really think of the rise and fall of
Tumblr as a case in point like I spent a
ton of time on Tumblr I thought it was
an amazing place for sharing culture and
like weird Niche accounts like you know
medieval manuscript illumin ations and
you could really like dig into something
and curate an account and it wasn't too
fast like it wasn't overwhelming
necessarily but that company got sold to
Yahoo I think and then just basically
left for dead like like that it couldn't
survive in its non-commodified state and
so we lost that creative space online
and I think we're like users like myself
included creators are struggling to get
that kind of more intimate slower more
direct space back it's funny though
because even when we try to create that
space it's hard for us to use it does
that make sense like um you know
Mastadon for example is a wonderful I've
talked about it on this YouTube channel
before it's it God the idealism of it is
wonderful I think the technology is
quite good it's exactly what I want
people to be building and yet I do not
find myself using it right I go check it
every once in a while and I go man
everything on this platform is
everyone's very serious I can't find
people I you know it's like okay I'll
 go back to Twitter I reload
Twitter because you know there's action
there and also because I know how to use
the algorithm on those Services
sometimes I need to post something that
I need to get 10,000 hits or 10,000
retweets that is and I know that I can
do it because I know how to take
advantage of the algorithm to broadcast
 really wide and I can't necessarily
do that on Mastadon so I I do find
sometimes that like we're fighting with
ourselves that we want this smaller
experience and yet we don't yeah we
missed the distribution like we on one
level we want to go viral like we want
the broadcast we want to reach a bunch
of Internet randos because that's kind
of fun and exciting and that was the
promise of the internet for a long time
right like you can reach the invisible
audience that's out there and on the
smaller platforms like a Mastadon or
like starting a newsletter or something
you don't know that there are so many
people out there like you don't you
don't know that you're reaching those
Rando randos of the internet and it just
feels less fun like like when you're not
getting that feedback loop of Engagement
and commenting and conversation it's not
fun enough to sustain itself and so I
think we're like looking for more spaces
to have fun in and to start like
sparking the that kind of Internet chaos
that's so compelling when I think about
the promise of Tik Tok I saw an ad for a
Tik Tok competitor I forget the name of
it but it was a similar uh similar app
and their ad campaign was your 15
minutes of fame or your 15 seconds of
Fame they were explicitly promising
which Tik Tok more implicitly promises
if you use this service you will
experience going viral that is one of
the underrated things that Tik Tok
offers people if you record a Tik Tok
every day for a year eventually one of
your Tik toks is going to get 15,000
views or something and you're going to
go oh oh my God people are looking at me
and it's going to be exciting and a lot
of people want that and that is
something that you know you can say that
maybe we shouldn't want it and they're
taking advantage of a weird dark desire
we have but they are in fact doing it
effectively but they're doing it in such
a way that it's sort of stifling the
creativity of the internet man like the
incentive of Tik Tok is that you can
reach that audience and you can go viral
and on Tik Tok you can go like more
viral than any other platform even the
the Twitter you know character main
character of the day did not like PED in
comparison to people getting 10 million
Tik Tok views in like 48 hours it's the
scale of it is unbelievable and there's
always that thirst for some kind of
Internet Fame for like you know I see
these accounts on Tik Tok all the time
where the person has had one or two big
viral videos for no particular reason
maybe it was like a funny High School
moment or something and then they try to
drum that up into a bigger influencer
career and you find them suddenly doing
all the memes and the trends and like
trying to hustle their way into more
sustained attention and it's it feels
kind of sad for one thing because it
doesn't often work and it's just like
this is this the best use of our time
like like maybe there's a better
ecosystem in which we could pursue the
things that we're interested in than
just the like throwing darts at a board
to hit the viral you know Bullseye or
whatever and speaking of of throwing
darts at a board I mean you look at what
people do on Tik Tok to try to go viral
like the people who do the trick shots
right so-called trick shots and what
they're actually doing is sitting in
front of a bunch of pots and pans
tossing so the the goal is to toss a
little pingpong ball for people haven't
seen this and it bounces off pan one pan
two pan three into a little cup right
and so it's hard to do and if they can
get it to happen once then they've got
an incredible 5 Seconds that maybe will
go viral but they have to do it a
100,000 times they just sit there and
like try to do it over and over again
until they get the one lucky one and
you're looking at this going this is
drudgery this is like it's like one of
those horrible scenes it's like almost
like watching one of those videos of
like kids dismantling scrapped airplanes
in Africa or something where you're like
what a horrible occupation that
capitalism has forced people into
Humanity was not meant to live like this
that's the way I feel when I watch
people doing that on Tik Tok in order to
try to catch the algorithm right it's I
think it's like a thing that I observed
throughout the book and kind of what
sparked it in my mind to begin with
actually was like the weirdness of
particular things that are designed to
for the algorithm that they're following
algorithmic incentives rather than human
incentives so that's a great example
because you're like it's the the labor
of creating this piece of content is so
bizarre the process of it is so bizarre
and yet the that end result the like 20
second clip where the the pingpong ball
goes in at the end is like a slam dunk
for the feed because you can pay
attention to it for a short amount of
time there's an easy payoff and then you
never think about it again like it has
no meaning it has no cultural weights or
anything it's just content that attracts
your attention and then passes by once
more and I feel the same way about those
videos where it's like uh One Clip is of
you know the is running game on your
phone or whatever and then there's a
funny tweet and then there's a weird
texture video in the background it's
like right that is not a human creation
no one asked for this like no one thinks
that this is like has an inherent value
it's just like pure meaningless stimuli
all at once and I worry that that's like
how we're producing culture for these
digital platforms we're like making it
more for the platform than for ourselves
or for a viewer I agree that that's a
real risk but I have to say look still
as someone who has thrived on these
platforms to a certain
degree you know during last year I uh I
posted so much about the writers and sag
after strike right um that that I was
posting multiple videos a week about it
and the reason I did so was the first
one I posted got like 3 million five
million views and so did the second one
and so did the third one and people were
genuinely interested in the subject
matter and the videos I was making were
genuinely explaining it to people and so
they were genuinely watching it right
like they would the the video would
start and they would keep watching all
the way to the end and a lot of people
did that so it sent it to a lot of
people and you know what I tell PE you
know people say oh thank you for
spreading the word about the strike I
say well I was doing it yes because I I
was a member of the unions and I was
trying to make the strike work well but
also the audience loved it people wanted
to see it right and so was sort of the
best version of these algorithms and it
was a message that would have been hard
to get out there in a different context
right we we talked a lot about during
the strike how important social media
was to getting the word out there and to
demonstrating the uh the Goodwill of the
public towards us and that's been
repeated many times since so as much as
I'm like oh my God yes we're just making
stuff for the algorithm sometimes I look
at it and go it it's a sometimes it
seems like a good form of meritocracy
where things that people are interested
in watching are the things that are
distributed most widely for people to
watch I don't always feel that way but
but tell me what you feel is right or
wrong about that yeah there's I mean
there's so many good potentials for it
right like the barrier to publishing has
been lowered so much by the internet and
buy these platforms like Tik Tok is a
great tool for creating video and then
broadcasting it out there and just
seeing what works and for your videos
like it hit people and they wanted that
and they liked it and so they consume
more of it and got more recommended by
the algorithm um and like you know it's
hard to argue you can't say the
algorithm is all good or all bad there
are different qualities to it it's like
a complex issue I think in in this
example you're trying to communicate
something to people you're trying to
inform them about a topic and it really
works for that it works as this like
broadcast mechanism I think it works
less well when you're trying to do
something that is more about personal
creativity or like
self-expression where I don't like you
can evaluate news or information based
on how much engagement it gets like
people are watching these informative
videos all the way through what I worry
about is like judging music the same way
or judging an image the same way where
it's just about how much engagement does
this thing get like most most culture
historically the things that we put in
the cannon of Western culture are not
the things that got the most engagement
when they came out like the the most
famous example is like Moby Dick sold
like 10 copies or whatever in Herman
Melville's Lifetime and now it's like a
Cornerstone of our literary culture van
go never sold a painting like he didn't
he didn't get likes on Instagram it's
the equivalent it's the equivalent thing
and so I worry when like I don't know I
think I think bethoven
like that would have done really well on
Tik toac that grabs you right away the
hook was so good that would have really
everyone would have used that sound um
but you know it's like I feel like when
you're creating stuff for the internet
you feel that pressure that like the
thing that doesn't get likes is a
failure yes and that
sucks you know I don't think that should
be the defining factor of of what we put
out there even though it's so hard to
ignore that impulse to just try to get
the most engagement and get the most
likes all the time and it's true that if
that is the only media that we
prioritize that's going to improv
impoverish our culture like we don't
want the music for instance the the
progress of even just looking at pop
music we don't want pop music to purely
be driven by what got the most
engagement or what the algorithm decided
to put on a playlist and yet sometimes
it is there's so many artists who
suddenly their most popular song they're
like that song is popular because for Su
reason the algorithm liked it and now we
have to play this song at concerts we
think this song sucks right repesents
their artistic identity like it it takes
away your artistic intention it's like
oh I don't care about what you meant by
this I just care what people hear in it
if the algorithm like the algorithm is
not like caring about your artistic
intention it doesn't care that you
ironically made something normal or were
sarcastically doing a thing it just
cares about how people are engaging with
it and I think that's you know it's it's
not good for us as consumers either
because these feeds interpret all
engagement in the same way like right
you know there's it the feed doesn't
separate hate listening or hate reading
or you know making fun of something from
sincerely appreciating it or finding
meaning in it it's like the the
ecosystem is it's not subtle it's not
very subtle period I mean and it would
be better if it were more subtle and
were more you know uh detailed in its in
its sense of what we were doing but that
would require more surveillance so I
don't know if I want that and this comes
down to you know if you look at Twitter
uh what what causes me to engage with
something the most on Twitter when two
people are having an argument and I'm
trying to figure out who the  is
right you know what I mean you're like
okay hold on a second two people are mad
which one was the dick okay I need to go
back through this whole thing I need to
read all the replies and you get to the
end and you're like why did I care about
this I feel dirty I just spent 10
minutes trying to like litigate an
argument between two people I don't know
but since that's what I spent the most
time on it's going to show more of that
to other people it's going to show more
stuff like that to me in the future like
that is literally you know Twitter is
optimized for dunks in the qts you know
yeah exactly I I think it comes down to
like dunks and like prompt tweets the
things that are like like quote tweet
this with your five favorite breakfast
foods or whatever and it's like no one
needs this content like like this is
solely to boost engagement which then
gets boosted even more because of the
algorithmic feed it's like the Tweet
equivalent of those you know multi-
Channel videos with the you know video
game and a tweet and a weird texture
like it's just optimizing for the
incentive of the feed not for what's
actually informing you as a viewer you
know I've talked about this in the
podcast before but I'm on an ongoing
mission to lead a healthier lifestyle
that means getting out more hitting the
gym more but it also involves making
good choices about things we don't
always think about like where you get
your groceries being mindful of the
quality of goods you bring into your
home can be a GameChanger and that is
the number one reason I am all about
Thrive Market Thrive Market has been my
household's ultimate destination for all
of our grocery and household essentials
for years we were using them before they
ever started advertising on this show
the convenience of ordering online and
having everything swiftly delivered to
my doorstep is an enormous timesaver but
you know what really sets Thrive Market
apart it's their commitment to offering
brands with the highest quality
ingredients and sourcing methods I can
restrict hundreds of ingredients across
their food and cleaning categories
allowing me to tailor my shopping
experience to my lifestyle preferences
of which I have many for instance I try
to avoid sugar and my girlfriend eats
gluten-free and Thrive Market makes it
so easy to curate our shopping list with
just a few clicks to make sure all our
food meets those criteria as a Thrive
Market member I consistently save money
on every grocery order on average it's
about a 30% discount account every time
another way I like to save some cash is
by checking out their deals page which
changes daily and where they always
feature some of my favorite brands in my
last order I saved a bunch of money
reordering a bunch of boxes of banza
pasta which is one of our favorite
gluten-free pasta Brands by joining
Thrive Market you're not only improving
your own well-being you're also
contributing to a family in need through
their one forone membership matching
program you join they give Thrive Market
is at the intersection of convenience
quality and social responsibility making
it an essential part of my journey
towards a healthier lifestyle so if
after all that you want to join in on
the savings with Thrive market and get
30% off your first order plus a free $60
gift go to thrivemarket.com
factly for 30% off your first order plus
a free $60 gift that is
th
market.com factually thrivemarket.com
factually so how did we get in this
situation where we've talked a lot about
the ills of the current Internet and the
Glory Days of the early internet when it
was ruled by Serendipity and you know
people would just email funny videos to
each other or whatever right I think all
the time about the Numa Numa guy
remember the Numa Numa guy the guy who
who went like this yeah and and sang the
Numa song that was pre YouTube people
were just emailing around an avi file um
which was incredible fast forward to
dogface 420 whatever the guy's name is
who is drinking the Sunny D on the
skateboard while listening towood ma
yeah very similar people one is all
algorithmic one was completely organic
um how did we leave that earlier
internet and end up you know where we
are today what was the first step it's
such a good question I mean the when
people were emailing around like an avi
file that's like there are no
distribution channels right that's just
like one person to one person or one
person to a few people and there was no
centralized feed of everyone's emails on
earth like that would have been a
complete nightmare
but I think we gra which is basically
what Twitter became right just like see
everyone's private conversation yeah
insane but we moved from this like DIY
more decentralized internet of many web
pages that were all kind of separate
gradually into these more and more
siloed feeds so I think you can trace it
to you know the the 2000s era that saw
the emergence of social networks like
first Myspace and Friendster and then B
Facebook and Twitter and it like the
content of the internet started
consolidating into these platforms
because that was where audiences were
it's that like that's where you could
reach people you could find the
distribution and find the audience and I
think that centralization has just
continued and continued to the point
that now we're like okay if you want to
post on the internet you have how many
options a video on Tik Tok a video on
Instagram a post on the rapidly
decomposing X or threads
I'm like what else is there yeah you can
put it on YouTube but no one is out
there just putting up a website because
yeah who's going to find that like you
need you need to fit it into the
distribution channels uh and I mean
those those companies have profited
hugely from consolidating the internet
because as they Consolidated all the
attention they could sell advertising on
it and that's kind of kept them going
and kept them able to sustain their
monopolies and the the shame of it is is
that did it by providing something that
was needed like to a certain extent we
needed those distribution channels I
remember trying to I was in a sketch
comedy group in college in you know 2003
and we were making videos on Final Cut
Pro with our dvx cameras was this sort
of technological singularity all these
things came together to suddenly make it
possible for a bunch of 19-year-olds to
make like high quality comedy we were
doing that we were going viral but I was
encoding the the videos myself using
quick time and then we were trying to
find a server to put them on and servers
kept going down we kept getting kicked
off of web hosts because you know even a
a 20 megabyte QuickTime file if 10,000
people downloaded it would hose the
whole Ser it wrecks the internet like
like you could you could shut down a
server so easily back then yeah and so
YouTube comes along and says we will
host any video for free and let anybody
play it uh infinitely and eventually
started adding money know some form of
Revenue sharing to that um okay great
suddenly there's an explosion now
everyone can post video but I remember
this being the first time it felt like
the internet was truly getting
centralized to me because suddenly there
was only one site where you could post
video and no other competitor emerged I
mean there's like daily motion and Vimeo
and  that nobody actually used today
there's like Rumble for right- Wingers
or whatever but you know
99.99% of videos in that format being
watched are on YouTube and that began in
2006 or seven yeah um and that was that
was like a huge Canary in the coal mine
for what was about to happen and yet I
mean what was there to do about it
because no one else was providing
infinite bandwidth and uh storage space
for anyone to host their own video right
right it was this huge gamble like if we
pay for all the hosting that anyone
could ever need and like let people put
stuff out there for free then they will
like devote their efforts to our
platform and everyone who up a video to
YouTube helped promote that platform
helped like bring more attention to it
and bring more users into that into that
realm um but I think YouTube is an
interesting example because like it
actually did do Revenue sharing like it
yeah it sustained creators in a way that
many other platforms did not and still
haven't in in coherent ways like I I'd
argue it could sustain them a lot more
than it does but it is it is doing the
best out of any of them just in terms of
paying people like the revenue share is
a 50/50 split as opposed to on Tik Tok
you get a million views they pay you $40
right it's and you can see how that
incentivizes different behaviors like
like on YouTube you are incentivized to
create a following and give them what
they want and sustain a good viewership
and you'll make a good amount of money
from that whereas Tik Tok you're like
constantly gambling with the algorithmic
feed like when am I going to go super
viral when might I just be totally
ignored like you have to keep catching
up with what's trendy rather than just
building your own devoted audience like
there are people who's I'm fans of them
on Tik Tok like I like watching their
videos but the feed just takes them away
from me like I'm not in control of of
when and how I see them because the
platform is so powerful and that like it
feels very manipulative I me but YouTube
does that to a similar extent you know
that uh I I do have to I mean everything
I'm doing here is in order to try to
build a business on on YouTube right um
but at the same time I have to Grapple
with the algorithm and the you know this
long form podcast that we're doing is
not going to get as many hits as as
other types of content that I put here
and you know if I look at the number of
people who are if I go look right now at
the analytics from my last video I
posted you know 5% of the views come
from my subscribers even though I have
600 I have 600 something thousand
subscribers
but such a vanishingly small portion of
My Views come from those subscribers
everybody else is coming from the
suggested videos right so it's the same
deal where if I'm not pleasing YouTube's
put me in the right-and sidebar
algorithm and making the thumbnail fit
uh people aren't going to see it it can
disappear in exactly the same way it's
so capricious in a way it's like you
even though you have built this big
Community even though you've attracted
your following on a platform the
algorithmic feed and the like dominance
of it means that you can't even rely on
getting to those followers like I think
media companies all experienced this in
the 2010s when everyone was focused on
building up Facebook groups like The
Times had Facebook groups that they
posted articles to in an effort to reach
people on Facebook and Facebook totally
dismantled that and suddenly groups were
pointless and no one you no one who was
in your group was seeing your content
anyway because they had decided that
articles were not the points of Facebook
so it's like you are you don't any of
this stuff and like at this point email
newsletters or like RSS feeds are one of
the only neutral spaces left where you
actually do have a grip on that but that
could change too like Gmail could make
it filtering stronger and you know we'd
be screwed and podcasts are one of the
last uh sort of decentralized parts of
the internet as well we've been talking
about this show being on YouTube but
it's also in podcast form and you know
those folks are subscribed to an RSS
feed that I control it's filtered
through iTunes uh podcast app or Spotify
or whatever but those people are
fundamentally going to my RSS feed in
the same way that if I create a a
substack I own those email addresses and
I can take them to my new uh email
provider if I want to um and that's one
of the reason those platforms have been
successful so it's been nice to see you
know some platforms grow because they
allow people to Keep Their audience is
because they empower the Publishers or
the the the creators a little bit more
uh I'm curious uh uh you write about how
you feel the algorithmic revolution is
like affecting our personal taste do you
really think it's like changing our
personal taste that much I think so I
mean anecdotally and through my own
experience it I think we identify a lot
with what the algorithmic feed serves to
us like particularly with Tik Tok I
spoke to a young woman for the book who
was just so bombarded with influencers
wearing like leg warmers at some point
that she was almost hypnotized into
buying leg warmers and this was not an
ad it wasn't sponsored content it was
just a lot of people participating in
the same Trend and she just felt like
totally compelled and pulled to do that
same thing so I think it's it's very
tempting and easy to be like okay the
algorithm is serving me what my tastes
are like what my desires are but
actually it's it's the other way around
almost it's like we are identifying
ourselves with what is served to us and
I think that's what's confusing It's
like because we don't have to go hunt
down what we like because it all comes
to us we exert less agency in deciding
what we identify with and like figuring
out our personal taste like there's a a
labor of figuring out your own taste and
thinking about how something makes you
feel that gets lost when you're just
consuming a feed of
stuff it's easier to be told who you are
than it is to figure it out and one of
the things people like about the
algorithm and they like about content
generally is people like content that
tells them who they are I think a lot
about add content or mental health
content on Tik Tok is extraordinarily
popular it's like a viral you know
category unto itself that it seems
separate from the actual rate of
diagnoses of the conditions plenty of
people actually have them and want
coping strategies and whatnot but people
also love to be labeled um and uh people
used to say to me stuff like oh I think
I have ADD Tik Tock diagnosed me with
ADD I I'm like I think Tik Tok gave you
add is I think what happened uh yeah
it's chicken or the egg thing in that
case
what I mean saying Tik Tock diagnosed
you with ADD is like saying Chipotle
diagnosed you with eoli it's a you know
yeah there's a cause and effect problem
but uh my point being a lot of people
give the algorithm so much credit that
they say the algorithm was serving me
add content it figured out that I have
ADD it literally diagnosed me because of
what I was watching it knows me so well
it Spears into my very Soul I'm like
this thing it what like the amount of
power you're giving something that you
are literally describing as an algorithm
a mathematical function is is very
strange to me and yet we really fall for
it MH and all the signal that you're
giving to Tik talk is like what you
watch and what you click the like button
on and what you comment on it's like
it's such a shallow signal that to them
believe that that signal can communicate
the depths of your soul it's like I mean
I hope that's not true I hope that
there's more to us than just what videos
we passively consume on our phones
um and I think it's worth reminding
people of that or just being like let's
let's think twice like Tik Tok cannot uh
diagnose you like a doctor can it's not
looking at you it is just measuring what
you're paying attention to and you know
extrapolating from that and that's all
it can do it cannot talk to you you
cannot talk to it like there it's such a
one-way street that I just it it is hard
it's so convincing and it's so easy to
believe that it knows who we are what we
want but it really can't like yeah it
cannot do that it cannot do that in the
way that a human curator can do that or
a radio DJ or your friend who knows what
you like like those are all more
complicated relationships than an
algorithm yeah and so let's talk about
what we lose when we prioritize you know
that way of discovering new things as
you say it takes work to figure out who
you are and what you like its labor and
you know we have used for decades up
until the algorithmic era the labor of
other people to help us figure that out
like if you want to know what music you
like or to listen to you might go to a
music journalist or a DJ um and so many
of these people have been put out of
work I mean I look at you know Pitchfork
which I've been reading for 20 years uh
and I often thought about like oh my God
thank God this website still exists
because they're it's such a great store
of knowledge they just you know the
entire company was just gutted and the
amount of loss of knowledge there you
know I think about um the the new Andre
3000 album that came out late last year
yeah the flute album right and a lot of
people were like oh crazy flute album
Andre 3000 put out a flute album neat
kind of weird why'd he do it Pitchfork
wrote uh you know I don't know how many
thousand word review where they said
well the reason he put out this album is
because he had been spending a lot of
time with a particular Collective of
jazz musicians in Los Angeles made of
this guy and this guy and this guy one
of whom used to play with Alice cult
train and you can see the influence da d
da and here's why he made this music and
what else it connects to and that is
work like somebody had to know all that
 because they devoted their life to
understanding this one little weird
corner of jazz so that you could
understand it too and so I'm able to
read that review and and it opens me up
to a whole world of music and guess what
nobody on Spotify is doing that  no
no what kills me is that Spotify
actively discourages you from knowing
anything about the music that you're
listening to you can barely tell when an
album came out like you can barely see
the year that something came out much
less which musicians play it on a
particular track like Spotify is so
shallow that it it just erases the
context of Music itself which is really
horrifying and so you turn to a place
like Pitchfork to restore that context
to educate you to bring your attention
to particular details or like make you
aware of this greater body of culture
and I think that makes our experience of
the music better like like what what is
better just casually seeing a weird
flute album on Spotify or actually
understanding where it came from and why
you're listening to it and like why it
was made by the artist like knowing I
think I have to argue that knowing more
about the culture you're consuming is
better like it'll it'll make you it'll
make you know more it'll give you a
better experience of that thing and it's
just it's better for everyone like the
artist gets more energy from you
understanding them than you just being
like Oh yes like button like button like
that's there's nothing there I
completely agree with that but the
problem is that look we don't always
have time to go get that deeper
understanding not everybody has the time
or or ability or wherewithal to do so
it's a little bit of a niche thing for
me to want to go read that right but
what supported that work was the General
need that people had to say I want to
hear some new music what new albums came
out and which ones are good and they
would just go to Pitchfork just to go oh
that one got an eight okay I'll buy it
and now just the work a day hey what do
I listen to today um and now people
don't really need that service because
the algorithm is serving it up for them
and so the the that sort of work a day
work has gone out the window and now and
the more rarified thing on top of it
that was able to be built upon it um you
know no longer has the supporting
structure similar to people aren't
reading the classified section in the
newspaper anymore because they have
Craigslist yeah right and that was the
thing that made the money so that they
could do the pitz your prizewinning
investigative article about the
corruption of the local city council
person in your city right yes um and so
the bot like the algorithm stole the 90%
that was keeping that really valuable
10% of float does that sound right to
you I think so I mean recommendations
were a thing that the media was really
good at like like you could figure out
what movies to watch and what music to
listen to and movie critics used to be
Stars yeah like Roger eert and jeene
Cisco were like National stars and
what's more like there were many of them
like and they they lived in different
cities it was not just oh I'm going to
read what one person in New York writes
it was like wherever you lived you could
read what someone near you who who
understood your life thought about a lot
of movies or a lot of music and that
ecosystem I think was really healthy and
so now when we give that recommendation
process over to a Spotify playlist or to
a Tik Tok feed like we're losing that
human connection that surrounded the
culture we're losing the like context
and specificity and you know it's a
nostalgic argument in some ways you're
like we should have all been reading
Roger eert or whatever or we should only
listen to Indie radio DJs but I think
people crave that and now like there are
things coming to replace it like people
on Tik Tok who recommend Niche albums or
who you know play a video of one vinyl
record going around and tell you about
it like I think that's that's just as as
valid an act of criticism and
recommendation as a newspaper review but
still how do those people get paid like
we we need a more sustainable ecosystem
both under the algorithm yeah like you
know I think about like Anthony fantano
who's a music guy on YouTube and he does
music reviews and he does them very well
he gets millions of of views he's well
respected people care about his taste
and he directs people to different
artists um but when Pitchfork went under
he was like I'm just one guy on YouTube
like I don't have the infrastructure you
know I'm not paying Freelancers to go
you know uh uh you know go to a festival
or you know survey a whole scene or
whatever
like you know individual influencers are
not a replacement for this sort of more
General cultural infrastructure that
helped you know that brought Humanity
into the picture um I I also think about
uh uh just this General giving over of
creative power to the algorithm you know
when I was making my Netflix show we
said uh hey here's the show we're
pitching it's going to cost this many
dollars to make and Netflix said uh well
we think that this show is only worth
like you know 60% of that in terms of
the budget that's how much we can when
when we said well this is going to be
worth more than that because this Show's
going to be good like we're going to
spend more a little more money to make
it and we're going to make a show that's
much better so more people will watch it
and be worth it'll be more valuable to
you and they said ah the algorithm says
it's only worth this much right that was
basically the answer we got back like
the humans have been cut out of the uh
decision-making process that's not
completely true there are people who
have power you know still in the
entertainment industry but the degree to
which they're driven by this is what the
computer said is I mean you can see it
in in terms of what gets made and what
what is on on these channels on the
streamers everybody has had the
experience of the content seeming more
and more flattened and syy you know when
people say this looks like a Netflix
show that's not a compliment they're
saying it looks like Dre it looks like
uh Chum it looks like you know generic
yeah right yeah I mean the the decision
making itself I think that's what we're
talking about it's like the decision-
making itself of what gets made is also
very algorithmic like the the music
producer the Hollywood executive the
Netflix person who's deciding what to
make and how much to invest is looking
at a lot of data that's like sistic in a
way like one way that book deals get
made is by looking at how many followers
an author has on social media because
that theoretically shows how many sales
that they'll be likely to get but that
you know it's like a vicious cycle like
you need followers to make the stuff but
you need the stuff to get the followers
and so it's like there's no way to break
into that cycle or to discourage those
metrics like if you don't have those
metrics then you can feel pretty screwed
the same thing is true of standup
comedians standup comedians are
constantly complaining now that that's
important is uh you know performance on
social media and to a certain extent I
say hey look this is the media form of
the time you got to do well on it like
just get with the program you know it's
like yeah 30 years ago you had to do
well on late night television today you
have to do well on Instagram like that's
our job right but on the other hand it
is true that followers matter so much
and yet the followers are useless for
actually getting anybody to come out to
the shows like I have 1.5 million
followers on Tik Tok but if I post hey
guys I'm going to Buffalo next week
that'll get 5,000 views unless I make it
really good for the algorithm and do
some sort of crazy stunt about being in
Buffalo which is so much work I might as
well just make some other kind of
 video right so so you like the
numbers don't translate and being able
to turn people out but to the other
decision makers they look at that number
to figure out whether or not you're
bookable and that is perverse in a way
yeah I think there's like a tyranny of
data here there's a tyranny of met
where we've moved so far in the other
direction like we rely too much on
numbers where before I think in decades
past there was some room for an
executive somewhere for a producer for
whoever to just pick something out and
say okay this is worth highlighting my
gut instinct is that this is going to be
cool and surprising and the world needs
this right now so we're going to do it
and I think due to how much data we have
and due to the influence of algorithmic
feeds we like don't have that as much
and when humans picked stuff like that
when people decided I think they made
more creative decisions it was less
conservative sometimes or at least had
the potential to bring something totally
new to create a new voice to you
know show off a musician's creativity
who is just totally outside of your your
frame of reference so I think we've lost
some of that like potential for radical
cultural Innovation and that's why
things feel boring because we're not
getting enough new fresh ideas like
fresh blood we need people to to just
make decisions and be like this is
what's going to happen and it's cool and
new and surprising and I don't care that
there aren't a 100 thousand a million
people behind it already yeah and I'm
craving that so much of the time uh and
when I'm looking for what movie to watch
or television show or book to read I'm
just looking for just give me something
weird man give me something lumpy and
human that I didn't expect to get um and
things like that are successful
sometimes I think about the movie poor
things right which is such a weird
 movie and people are so drawn to
it at least a certain segment of the
population is obsessed with this movie
because of how you know it's like I've
never seen anything like this before
it's so off-putting and confusing and
gross and sexual and dirty in in all
these fun ways I understand that that
you uh I want to talk about how we can
resist the algorithm I understand that
you managed or attempted to live
relatively algorithm free for a little
while can you tell me about that yeah
was Circa like September 2022 or so I
was finishing up my book I had been so
online for so long like immersed in this
subject that it was just like I
literally have to get out of this like I
have to cut off my brain in a way from
the internet and so I did an algorithm
cleanse as I called it just logged out
of all the apps deleted everything from
my phone like decided that I would not
take any recommendations from feeds I
would just find stuff myself and like
consume it in a in a more kind of lowii
way and so I really turned to like more
traditional ways of human curation or
distribution like you know reading the
newspaper looking at magazines going to
libraries going to art museums and
galleries just like trying to have a
more direct connection to what I was
consuming than just letting the feed
deliver it to me and you know I found it
really refreshing actually like it took
a few weeks for me to get over it for
sure like my brain was missing the
constant stimulus I didn't have the like
dopamine of likes coming at me but I I
found myself calmer and like more
engaged in what I was consuming than I
was before and more purposeful I imagine
more oh I'm choosing to be involved in
this uh but Kyle how long did this last
for you are you still on it no so I
think the the initial bad period the
like you know getting over the Tremors
or whatever was like three weeks uh so
after three weeks I felt pretty good
about it and then it lasted for about
three months total at which point I kind
of felt like to do my job as a
journalist I kind of had to get back
online uh so like but by the end I was
not worried about it like if I didn't
have a job as an internet
columnist like so I have to do this
stuff I think I would maybe have used it
even less but it it it was really good
for renegotiating my relationship to the
internet and kind of doing this mental
reset in a way and just figuring out
what I was interested in without it just
getting shoved in my face all the time I
think maybe I need to do that myself
because you know as I said in my line of
work I don't have the option of not
grappling with the algorithm I need to
be posting on it and I honestly also
need to be viewing it because I need to
understand how it's working um I I'm
very jealous of friends who are just
like yeah I'm not on Instagram anymore
like that must be nice right like I I I
can't it's my career um but I think
maybe a little bit of a targeted a
targeted break would be helpful um or at
least trying to find pieces of media
outside of that like the the book that
I'm reading right now I'm reading uh Dan
charis's book Dill time which is a
wonderful book about the hip-hop
producer Jay Dilla and I found it
because I wandered by a record shop and
they had it on the shelf and I pulled it
off and I was like I kind of want to
read this book and I bought it and then
I brought it home and I started reading
I just happened across it um and that
entire book is about you know this this
man who came up with this wonderful new
way of making music and people who
discovered that organically and they
were moved by it and it spread in an
organic way in the way that we hop that
music would and I'm listening to it on
audio book I'm reading it I'm listening
to the music I'm sort of moving through
it at my own pace and I'm listening to
the related albums I'm searching on
Apple music for them rather than just
like you know my normal algorithmic
music pattern and it feels purposeful
and I'm like expanding my horizons by
doing so in I guess an old-fashioned way
I don't know um ideally it's not
oldfashioned like ideally we can do that
anytime and we should be doing it we
don't have to do it with everything
right like not everything has to be this
deep dive like research process but
there should be those things that
inspire you and like get inside your
head and make you want to go down that
path and like do the work and have this
like immersion in a cultural moment that
maybe you didn't understand before like
that's what makes culture satisfying I
think yes it it's how funny is it though
that I'm saying like I'm doing such an
old-fashioned weird thing I bought a
book in a store and I'm reading it like
I I wandered by a shop and bought
something holy  revolutionary well
like decisions that are not influenced
by the internet are increasingly rare I
feel like like we don't when I go to a
restaurant I'm often looking it up first
on the internet I'm judging their
Instagram feed I'm looking at how much
how many stars they have on Google Maps
like the number of times I've stood in
front of a restaurant scrolling down
through Yelp to get to the reviews is so
humiliating to think about the minutes
I've spent doing that yeah and it's like
we could just walk in we could just try
it and and see what see what happens and
be surprised but I think on one level
we're afraid of the mediocrity like
we're afraid of being disappointed
and Beed but it takes when you just like
walk into a restaurant without having to
look at how they present themselves on
social media like it it sounds absurd
when you say it yeah you could just like
look in the window and like look at the
 food does it look tasty are
people smiling in the restaurant you
know like the oldfashioned ways that we
that we had um it's man so how do you
suggest that people sort of break out of
this a little bit I mean is it is a
matter is it a matter of taking a
cleanse or uh what are your do you have
any calls to action at the end oh
actually no I'm sorry I want to talk
about this you talk about regulating
algorithms do you think that's possible
and something that we should talk about
I think it is possible I mean so right
now in the European Union there are
these very real laws being passed that
give users more rights to their data
they give users the right to opt out of
algorithmic recommendations and so as
they go into effect over the next few
years will totally change how social
media operates and you can see Facebook
already kind of adjusting what it does
to accommodate the European laws even in
America so I think that's happening
slowly um I also think antimonopoly
measures would be really helpful here
like if meta did not own Instagram and
Facebook and what'sapp like three major
channels through which we all or YouTube
was its own company and not part of
Google for example if the if the 99%
most used search engine was not also the
99% used like video utility right they
should these things should be competing
against each other to give us better
products and it's pretty clear that
there is no incentive to compete right
now and and give us a better experience
cuz because they have such a grip like
Google has a monopoly on these platforms
um and really how you find stuff and you
can look at YouTube you know look at the
rationale for regulating CBS NBC ABC it
was that they were using the public
Airwaves but also that media was in the
National interest and that since these
companies control all of the media
Airwaves they need to you know do
justice to the National interest to some
degree so they need to have news
programming they need to have some
educational programming for kids in the
mornings stuff like that we put those
regulations on them yeah you could make
the case because there's only one
website that is basically used for every
single video that look if if Google
decided to shut down YouTube tomorrow
we'd all be  right because it is
so we are so reliant on it even just as
an archive as an infinite library of
video it is so valuable that you know we
the public has an interest in it we
should you know we could put a few
regulations on it to make sure it serves
the public interest right and we're not
doing that like America is not the US
government is not passing these laws
they are really slow to move on any of
the stuff when they've been like faster
moving and more aggressive with media
companies like media like you're saying
with cable television is more regulated
than the internet platforms that have
now soaked up all of our attention and
destroyed the media companies like yeah
but I think like to your question too
ultimately you can just log off like no
one is forcing you to be on Instagram
unless you are trying to make it as a
standup comedian um you don't have to
consume music on Spotify you can still
go to a store and buy a VY album and
listen to it aund times like or go to
band camp and buy some MP3 exactly like
it doesn't have to be non-digital you
can totally be online there's
alternative streaming services like
Adagio for classical music or the criter
Criterion channel for you know art films
there are ways to consume more specific
things things that are less mediated by
recommendations even on the internet and
I think we just need to be reminded that
there are other options out there like
you can you don't have to just be on
these same few websites that have become
so omnipresent and you can go look for
other people right who who you know if
you want to know what movie to watch
well you could go on letter box and look
at what it recommends you look at what
your friends say but you could also you
know find some movie critic with a
substack somewhere or let's not even say
substack with a newsletter somewhere um
and you know like read what they have to
say and you because hopefully they are
out there trying to put interesting
things in front of you because they're a
person who professionally finds
interesting things for you right right
right this is another conclusion that
I've come to like machines don't get
bored the algorithm doesn't get bored of
stuff people get bored like the the
movie critic is gonna get bored of bad
dumb movies faster than the algorithm
the algorithm will never get tired of
bad dumb stuff it will serve up an
Infinity of shallow superficial
meaningless content to you whereas a
human guide do that stuff is not going
to serve you the same thing over and
over again they're they're Restless
they're interested they want to find
inspiring stuff and that's what we
should be looking for I love that see
this is why I love the newsletter today
in tab so much which I think is my
friend Rusty and I believe you know him
as well there's a wonderful newsletter
very popular where basically he
summarizes Twitter for you he says these
are all the articles that came out
yesterday this one's good this one's
boring this one oh my God can you
believe this and he like editorializes
and great he has an opinion so I don't
have to and I get I get a quick summary
of the day and I can click on one if one
seems really good I'll read it and the
rest I get to know what's going on from
a  other person yeah who's who's
got who's moving around in the world and
has opinions and thoughts and feelings
he has a perspective he has knowledge he
has experience and he's using all of
that human identity to filter what's out
there for you and that's that's what's
so valuable and that's what the
algorithms lack and this is what I try
to remind people all the time it's
humans all the way down even on the
other end of the algorithm Zuckerberg is
still somewhere there on the other end
Elon Musk is on the other end there's
people designing these things it's still
people making things for people and if
we just return to the people of it all
that's like the solution I think so yeah
I would love to return to the people
that's a good a good commandment for the
future internet
uh oh thank you so much for being on the
show Kyle it's been incredible talking
to you this one of my favorite topics
and uh uh I feel like I I I hope the
algorithm blesses this conversation so a
lot of people hear it praying praying to
the algorithm that that it promotes my
anti- algorithm book you
know well that the name of that book
here is filter World take it from a uh
human like me you can pick it up at our
Bookshop fa pod.com books where every
book is hand selected by me and our
producers based on the guest that we
choose with our human brains to have on
this show bot.com books where else can
people get it where can they find you on
the algorithm mediated internet uh so
you can get the book wherever you want
though I definitely recommends calling
up your local Indie book store and
requesting it they'll be happy it's a
better a better human connection or
getting it from an indie Source on the
internet is great too um and I do have a
newsletter which is kyle. subs.com and
really like it's better than Twitter I
like talking to my audience there I like
writing funky weird stuff in that space
until the algorithm creeps into substack
which it is slowly doing five years from
now you'll be running for the Hills uh
but until then folks find him there
thank you so much for coming on the show
Kyle thank you this is fun well thank
you once again to Kyle Jacob for coming
on the show if you L that conversation
as much as I did once again you can pick
up a copy of his book at factually
pod.com books if you want to support
this podcast directly head to
patreon.com adamc Conover five bucks a
month gets you every episode of the show
ad free you can also join our online
community and coming up soon we have for
patreon members exclusively a live book
club over Zoom we are going to be
reading and discussing the book Smoke
Gets In Your Eyes with Caitlyn Dodie and
Caitlyn will be joining us for the zoom
so excited about that if you want to
come chat with Caitlyn head to
patreon.com adamc Conover if you chip in
15 bucks a month I will read you your
name at the end of this podcast and put
it at the end of every one of my video
monologues this week I want to thank a
193 great username act 193 Stuart Pim
and Jasmine Andrade thank you so much
for your support of the show of course I
want to thank Sam Rodman Tony Wilson my
producers everybody here at headgum for
making the show possible you can find me
online once again at adamc con.net where
all my tickets and tour dates are at see
you out there on the road and in the
meantime I'll see you next week on
factually that was a hit gum podcast
