we're looking at a series of death by
Thousand Cuts in in many cases of the
combination of a rapidly changing
climate but just the expansion of humans
and their needs I mean even if we live
in a completely eco-friendly way and
have very low per capita consumption and
we live you know not in this High
consumption manner that we have today we
completely change the economic system or
it's forced Upon Us by collapse there's
still so many of us uh we still eat and
we will still hunt and we will still
take resources until they're gone and
then subsequently we will be of lower
density I don't think humans are going
to go extinct anytime soon but there
will be a point when the Earth's caring
capacity and I think we've surpassed
that by several decades already will no
longer be able to support the numbers
that are
there I would like to welcome Australian
Professor Corey Bradshaw to the program
to discuss his latest research on the
sixth mass extinction as well as human
population
demographics I would like to caution
viewers this is not an episode for the
faint of heart if I was still teaching I
would probably have to issue a trigger
warning uh it's very intense uh some of
the topics on climate mass extinctions
human population but uh you all show up
here to learn about the world we face so
it's an excellent conversation and I
hope you listen to it but it's intense
uh Corey Bradshaw is a Matthew fers
fellow in global ecology at fers
University in Australia he's published
over 300 peer-reviewed scientific
articles he's also the director of the
global ecology laboratory and a chief
investigator in the arc Center of
Excellence for Australian biodiversity
and Heritage Corey's research is mainly
focused on global change ecology how
human Endeavors and climate fu
have altered past present and future
ecosystems this episode is densely
packed with information and while it
does paint a daunting picture of what we
face it's my continued belief that to
address the situation we Face we have to
understand uh what we face and all that
it entails that being said I greatly
enjoyed this conversation with Corey and
I've asked him to uh be the anchor on a
population Roundtable in the near future
this was one of our most po
episodes uh last but not least I would
like to remind listeners that we are not
a monetized podcast so one of the
biggest ways you can support us is by
following and subscribing on whatever
platform you use to listen additionally
if you'd like to donate to our
organization please use the link in the
description all donations are tax
deductible and go directly to our
operating costs and we appreciate your
continued listenership and support with
that please welcome Corey Bradshaw
Professor Bradshaw good to see you good
morning oh good evening it's good
evening for me good uh good morning for
you in in Adelaide
Australia uh so you lead a very busy
academic life uh publishing papers
teaching articles book chapters on a
wide range of ecological topics we have
a lot of natural scientist uh colleagues
uh as mutual friends and today I'd like
to focus on the topics of
biodiversity mass extinctions as well as
human population and human demographics
uh which are among your Specialties uh
especially with regard to two recent
papers of yours which we will H
highlight in the in the show notes um
for people to look them but before we
dive into all that maybe you could uh
share with our viewers your background
what inspired you to be a research e
ologist oh I have a very weird
background actually in some ways I I
didn't go through the normal um channels
I'm actually which seems to be the case
for almost all ecologists that I
interview yeah I suppose I guess it's
it's probably normal from that group of
people uh but despite my accent I
actually grew up in western Canada and
uh my father was uh a fur trapper and uh
I spent a lot of time in the bush as a
kid in fact the first time I saw a city
I was 16 years old uh yes I've spent
most of my life in Australia but that's
how I started and um growing up with a
Trapper father um puts you in contact in
a rather consumptive way but put you in
contact with a lot of nature of Nature
and I think that's where it started I I
I was interested in how animals behaved
and how they adapted to their
environments and and I saw it sort of
the the the the gritty end of that um
but over time I realized that uh even
people like fur trappers who as again
are are quite consumptive in their use
of
nature in in in that time uh they were
actually one of the largest uh lobbyist
groups for uh reducing deforestation
rates because you cut down the bush and
there's no fur to trap there's no fair
animals to trap so there was a
conservation ethic underneath that that
uh had an ulterior motive but it was
actually quite uh efficient in
convincing government that that they
shouldn't just cut everything down so
that was my introduction um sort of the
into the deep end of conver conservation
but on that just to just to pinpoint
that they weren't trying to
conserve on behalf of nature they were
conserving because they wanted something
for their own bottom line prop so it was
still in the name of of profits and
progress Etc absolutely um but you know
if you don't have a healthy ecosystem
you don't have animals to trap and so
they were very strongly vocal uh about
keeping those ecosystems and some form
of balance and you know everything from
bushire prevention to logging to uh over
hunting um and and even introduced uh
species so not to age you but I assume
you were born in the late 60s early 70s
1970 yes so how does in British Columbia
yes yeah in the Rocky so how does the
megap today relative to the early 70s
and the things that were trapped yeah
not having lived in Canada for a long
time it's difficult for me to say
exactly what's going on but my
understanding is that a lot of those
animals are still doing relatively well
I mean despite all of the other declines
everywhere else but uh a lot of those
places that were trapped um as far as I
know still have the tree cover which is
probably one of the main things I mean
habitat loss being one of the principal
drivers of biodiversity Cline now things
have changed obviously climate change
things are warming up distributions are
changing so I I can't speak with any
Authority about a lot of the species but
I haven't been aware of any at least any
extinctions in those regions I I was in
Yukon Territory a few years and that's
one of the few geographical areas in the
world where the historic relationship of
megaphon of biomass to humans is still
largely what it used to
be iect it's very similar um I was
actually just in Canada uh in Quebec
actually the last few um last month and
I was still quite surprised how much
tree cover is there and yes a lot of
that is secondary growth uh from
overexploitation centuries ago but you
know still some very beautiful um and
very productive areas so I'm I'm still
I'm pleased to see that so carry on with
your your story sorry to interrupt uh
after that I uh was lucky enough to get
a scholarship to go to an international
school on Vancouver Island and uh that
really sort of started my pathway on the
academic side of things uh I did the
international Balor which is a kind of a
bridging program and
international uh curriculum that really
focuses on developing your own
capacities and I was in a beautiful spot
um outside of Victoria on vanov island
in this little Bay and we we did scuba
diving we did um sailing we had our lab
was right on the water so we had lots of
marine components to the to the ecology
courses I was taking and uh I really
sort of got hooked on the academic side
of things and realized that a lot of my
knowledge was actually applicable and
perhaps I could even turn it into a
career so after that I uh ended up going
to uh uh do my undergraduate at the
University of Montreal in
Montreal and that had a strong
ecological stream they they're very well
known for their especially their plant
ecology uh and a lot of
Entomology and so I became very uh
astute in the in in Discovery and and
taxonomy of the Laurentian region around
uh sort of central
Quebec uh and uh that just sort of
precipitate ated into a masters and
eventually a PhD and I decided I'd leave
Canada permanently around then so I went
to New Zealand I did my PhD at the
University of otago in
denan and I saw some pretty amazing
spots around New Zealand got to some
very remote areas I was working on F
heals at the time nothing terribly
scientifically interesting in in in
retrospect but it got me to some really
cool places and i' sort of cut my teeth
in the mathematical side of things and I
guess from there that's where I really
became uh probably more of a A
computational or model computational
biologist or modala and these days I'm
you know back in the day I used to spend
nine months of the year in the field and
now I'm mostly coding and listening to
death metal when I do
it and
that's given the topic um okay so
um I had earlier this year
um a science journalist named Peter
Brandon on who talked about uh the five
previous mass extinctions and many minor
extinctions um can you just give me a
bird's eye view uh speculate where where
are we with respect to a sixth mass
extinction event what what is the stance
based on your lifetime of scholarship
and and Research into that topic yeah
I've written about that quite a bit
recently and uh it it's it's good to
understand the Deep time aspect in fact
I'm doing a lot of deep time
paleontology these days even back to the
Ed acine so over 500 million years ago
been just working on a lot of devonian
stuff so in the 3 60 to 400 million year
range um and and how do we know stuff
from 360 million years ago just from
fossils yeah pretty much it's in the
Rocks um you've got to be a bit of a
geologist to do good deep time
paleontology all in the sedimentary
material
and the Precision I mean the the the
preservation in some of these lugish
data these these amazing preservation
sites are just Gob smacking so you can
you can really track the evolution I'm
working just published my first paper on
the evolution of celic cants for example
and the the history the record there is
is astounding goes back to over 400
million years ago and we can pinpoint
very minor evolutionary changes and and
you know even stem tetrapods read up to
you know the emergence of the first
reptiles
amphibians so you can pinpoint the uh
evolutionary trajectory of cants when
they had adaptations and were better
swimmers or whatever else just from
using today's science yeah and we know
when things went extinct precipitously
and that's how we really track these
mass extinction events and and a mass
extinction event by itself is a little
bit of an arbitary um designation so
it's at least 75% of species going
extinct within about two and a half
three million years now why that because
those were the big ones that sort of
stuck out it is arbitrary there are lots
that are fewer or lower proportion
extinctions 50 40 35 in that range uh
and the the Tim frame you know 2 and a
half 3 million years doesn't sound like
it's a a mass extinction that happens
Suddenly It's not like the sort of the
dinosaur bite impact and the Cretaceous
but you know in geological speak that's
that's an ick so these are these are
rapid Extinction events yes they can
take millions of years now so there's a
lot of smaller extinctions in fact
probably well between somewhere between
20 and 40 depending on what sort of
threshold you decide to
use and they they occur quite regularly
through through the geological um
history regularly as in they're frequent
or regularly as in they could be
predicted time wise time we yeah we
can't predict them that's the thing it's
it's uh it's a very uh we people have
looked for patterns and and there are
some suggestions perhaps some sort of
cyclicity in the in the orbital
relationship in the solar system about
you know how far we are from the Sun and
various other things but it's if there
is anything going on it's it's um it's
very minor compared to the randomness of
these events happening but how many of
those 20 to 40 minor extinctions and the
five big ones were related to uh carbon
pulses probably quite a few um I mean a
lot of the early ones of course were
only Marine so these were these were um
lack of oxygen and and even temperature
related uh changes in in chemistry of of
the ocean uh and these are usually
shallow Seas where most of the the life
was concentrated around the edges of
Continental masses and so if you get
these uh even subtle changes in
atmospheric concentrations of different
gases and or changes in the saturation
point of oxy in the water you can
precipitate these huge die offs that
that can span the entire
Globe uh and we see the evidence of that
time and time again throughout the
entire geological history so with that
caveat um How likely is it that we're
headed for a minor or mass extinction in
coming hundreds of years um given what's
built in yeah well this is something our
colleagues and I have argued quite
strongly that we're actually in this
mass extinction now uh now have we
achieved a 75% reduction from some
previous Baseline whether that was you
know the onset of the anthropos scene
and that isn't even really um well
understood or at least there's no um
there's no agreement on when that might
have happened but if we go back even to
the sort of the Fertile Crescent the
development of Agriculture and humans
12,000 years ago give or take we took
that time frame as a sort of a baseline
we haven't achieved a 75% reduction in
biodiversity that is number of species
or even other metrics of biodiversity
for example the distinctiveness The
evolutionary distinctiveness of
species but if you look at the
extinction rates that happen between
these mass extinction events and again
we can we can uh estimate those quite
well from the fossil
record uh what we have even just what
we've recorded not not taking into
consideration the species that we miss
because many species of of course have
very small ranges they're very tiny they
live in a very cryptic lifestyle and
most extinctions actually go unnoticed
until well after they've occurred so
even if we just look at the ones that we
definitely know gone extinct that we've
observed we're looking at an Extinction
rate that's about sort of an average of
about a thousand times the rate that
occurs between these mass extinction
events that's what we're in now and
everything that we look at points the
fact that it's perhaps even larger than
that so while we're not we haven't
achieved that threshold yet we're on the
way and even more strikingly is that
it's not going to happen in 2 and a half
million years it's going to be a century
scale event so this is potentially the
largest Max Mass extinct or I'd say the
the most important or the the highest
magnitude mass extinction event that has
ever occurred on the in the history of
planet Earth it's happening now we're in
it but it'll take some time to
precipitate fully for for more reasons
than than one it's also the high before
this mass extinction began you know
let's just bookmarked 20,000 years ago
we were at the highest level of philm
Genera species diversity ever from the
scientific record right yeah if you look
at just total number of species that's
true if you look at philogenetic
diversity so the the the uniqueness The
evolutionary uniqueness no actually we
achieved that in the Cambrian so
540 million years ago so we call that
disparity verus diversity so there was
more evolutionary uniqueness and
evolution is this kind of weird things
things pop out that that work for a
while and then they don't seem to work
as well as some others and so they sort
of drop off the scene and then other
things come up for example the plads the
bone bone plated fish that are you know
dunes and and the you know those massive
bony plated armored fish that you see
sometimes in museums or or even in film
uh they they just were gone at the end
of devonian and they never reappeared
whereas things like cants which are a
very Ancient Ancient fish L Fin fish
they managed to survive right through to
today so some things manage to to work
and other things don't you know a lot of
people think that evolution is this
process of constant sort of perfection
and adaptation to some Pinnacle or
Optimum doesn't work like that it's
actually the opposite it's evolution is
a penalty so if it works fine evolution
is not going to really screw with it but
if it gives a slight disadvantage that's
when it gets knocked on the head and it
might that form that particular form
might never reappear again or it might
form in another different way for
example the evolution of eyes that's
happened five or six different ways
through different groups of species that
have absolutely no relationship to one
another Al so there wasn't an eye that
evolved somewhere and then all the eyes
after that came from that single
ancestor no it happened about four or
five different times yeah wow that's
kind of Co so there's lots of examples
of that um through through morphology
now I'm not I'm not a paleontologist so
I'm think I'm talking a little bit
outside of my area of expertise but I do
work closely with a lot of
paleontologists I do know that blue eyes
were uh epigenetic uh epigamic um which
means sexual selection preferred um
mutation not that long ago and all the
people in the world that have blue blue
eyes did come from one person who had
blue eyes not that long ago yeah I'm I'm
not sure if this is correct but I I was
under the impression too that there was
a link to neander tal uh jeans um
associated with that also also Ginger
hair so uh as it turns out I had my DNA
tested and I'm quite high on the neander
I am too I am too neander Bros unite
yeah well Corey actually means caveman
in in
Scottish so works really well
yeah um
so I'm going to talk a lot about
extinctions and and biodiversity and
such but uh finishing this this intro to
the topic of course the uh measurement
and the impact and uh the data on mass
extinction and species both their
population sizes and the number of
species our system is going to impact
them in a backloaded fashion because
while energy Surplus has allowed us to
expand around the planet and like you
said earlier the the places in the world
that have their forests removed
obviously are going to lose meapa and
insects and birds and other things but
what happens on the Downs slope of the
carbon pulse if we have to go back in an
Easter Island sort of way and use forest
for Timber Etc so you know we're
impacting climate and uh and habitat on
the way up but we're also going to
impact it on the way down so my fear is
that you know the animals that are very
remote from human habitations will have
a a reprieve but the ones closer are are
not especially the megap in Africa and
places that are near uh economically
poor areas I don't I don't see how
they're going to survive I'm I'm going a
little off tangent but do you have any
opinions on that yeah no I I couldn't
agree more that we we're looking at a
series of you know death by Thousand
Cuts and in many cases of the
combination of a rapidly changing
climate but just the expansion of humans
and their needs I mean even if we live
in a
completely uh sort of eco-friendly way
and have low very low per per capita
consumption and we live in you know not
in this consumptive um High consumption
Mana that we have today we completely
change the economic system or it's
forced Upon Us by collapse then we're
still there's still so many of us uh we
still eat and we will still hunt and we
will still take resources until they're
gone and then subsequently we will be of
lower density I don't think humans are
going to go extinct anytime soon but
there will be a point when this the
Earth's caring capacity and I think
we've surpassed that by by several
decades already well no longer be able
to support the numbers that are there so
there will be Mass die offs there'll be
Warfare um there'll be natural disasters
and life per se per for a lot of people
will not be that Pleasant so we'll
regress to those sort of perhaps even
Neolithic kind of um times um that could
be a century scale thing but it's
unlikely just given our numerical
dominance that we'll go extinct right
away but humans are a flashing the Panet
in an evolutionary sense anyway so you
know we're not here for a long time
we're going to talk about some some dark
things I suspect but but let me throw in
a little Rainbow of sorts um you said
that these mass extinctions um happened
in geological flashes of time over two
or three million years and there were 20
to 40 of them so over 500 some million
years um there were these very two to
three million year periods of mass
extinction and yet
up to 20,000 years ago or the neander
tals 40,000 years ago we had the the
most biological diversity ever on the
planet so things do recover uh on Earth
including an abundance of flourishing of
life um so whatever happens in this six
maths Extinction well maybe not whatever
happens there could be nuclear war and
and a whole lot of Confluence of events
but things will evolve and there will be
new life
um maybe not complex life like dolphins
apes and and humans but can you give us
a a bright story um before we talk about
some of the other
constraints yeah just given the
complexity of life and the fact that
we've gone through these dips these huge
dips and diversity over many many
hundreds and millions of
years it it it it it gives me actually a
lot of comfort um ironically and I I
will quote from Paul erck here um who I
just saw last week actually I I passed
through California on my way back um
back home and he always says you know uh
the planets fine it's not in trouble
life isn't in trouble humanity is but
life itself so after a mass extinction
it opens up millions of new ecological
niches that are exploited through
basically the trial and era of
evolutionary change and so spe uh
Extinction begets speciation
we always see the massive pulse in
speciation and even the the rate of
evolution increases after a mass
extinction event so life will persist
until the sun explodes and wipes out
Earth entirely from the solar system and
that's several billion years down the
track so we don't have to worry about
inmediate immediate term but life will
pretty much always persist on the plet
like you said will another sensient
species emerge from that it's it's it's
possible but I I tend to look look at um
our our big brains and our sents is is
merely one of these disparity forms that
have come out that provide an
interesting chapter in the history of
life but aren't necessary for life to
persist in any sense whatsoever there's
nothing nothing have high value that we
can attribute to sence per se from a
life perspective it's just it just
happened and we're using it to our
advantage But ultimately to our
disadvantage do you think there's other
planets out there that have life and
complex life and oceans and biodiversity
I think it's it's pretty much a
statistical given the just the sheer
immensity of of our own Galaxy let alone
the entire universe that there's not
some other form of life out there would
be almost in infly small probability and
so being a numbers guy I I I can't
accept the fact that they wouldn't be
life is it in a microbial form or
something analogous to that is there
complex secet systems well uh I suspect
there would be quite a an array of
different types of systems I suspect
probably the most common form of life in
the universe would be
microbial um and that probably in most
cases wouldn't get much beyond that uh
in some cases in the rare cases you
might actually get ecosystems
established and and some sort of trophic
relationships between different species
um whether there's the opportunity for
this weird senscience experiment that
Evolution can kick up uh is is entirely
an open question I I tend to think
probably not but you know if you if you
if you went just on the probability I'd
say that yes plenty of Life out there
but also on the same probability
framework um the massive distances
preclude us ever from discovering it so
if we do discover life elsewhere um
it'll be a big fluke and it'll only be
because it's next
door in in in a galactic sense yes
ethically I think we have to uh treat
this planet as the only place that
Harbors uh complex sensient life um
because that is sacred I mean I'm I'm
getting beyond the science but you know
well we don't have any evidence to the
alternative yet so I mean if you're just
playing the numbers of course it makes
sense but we have an a samplize one and
that's the planet earth right um so
let's dive into your work you have uh a
lot of your work looks at the impact
of um
coextinctions uh and the overall rate of
Extinction and biodiversity I I don't
know what a coextinction is can you
explain that and why it's important and
relevant well I'll take you back to um
2017 working with colleague of mine
giovan strona who's now at the Joint
research center of the EU he's based in
Italy obviously Italian name um good
friend and and one of the best
computational ecologists I've ever met
well we were sort of discussing a paper
that had come out up saying um that tidy
grades the the little you know uh water
bears the tiny they're they're
multicellular obviously but if you've
ever seen a photo of a tidy grade
they're the cutest little things they've
got little Claws and little round bodies
like the Michelin Man and there's many
different species and they exploit a lot
of um niches in the soil and and then
Lala uh and there are immensely
resilient little little little dudes
they you can boil them you can freeze
them you can shoot them into space and
they they just go into this little
cocoon and they can survive all sorts of
extremes and so the the point of this
particular paper was that no matter what
happens on Earth you know comet hits us
or you know nuclear war whatever at
least we're going to have tardy
grates because they physiologically the
there they're they're little juggernauts
they're amazing little things the second
favorite creature on planet for me um
but I have to ask what the first is oh
well velvet wormus velvet worms no
they're V worms they're the coolest they
are the bridge between the um the the
true worms and arthropods and they have
the coolest hunting technique on the
planet what they do is they they have
two little siphons on the side of their
mouths and when they they detect prey
they spit this kind of gluey mass it's
siphon it all out and just just envelop
their prey in this gooey mess and then
they just sort of suck it all in and eat
the thing that's attached in the glue
they're yeah absolutely um I I now see
why you like death
metal yes weird things I like weird
things but you know I'm a classic geek
scientist so there you go anyway okay
water back T grades yeah tidy gr so we
looked at this paper and went as as
College we said well that's all fine you
know they are resilient and if you take
them out of the system and you can do
stuff to them fine but that's not
actually how ecology Works ecology works
in the relationship to other species in
the system just as much as it does to
the the the physical environment the
temperature the water availability the
and so the food really is what drives
ecological systems now you can be really
resilient to extremes in temperature and
and precipitation and so on and so forth
but if you have nothing to eat you die
right it's pretty clear so everything
eats something else or everything is
related to something else think of
parasites and their hosts without the
hosts there's the parasites can't
survive you think of uh flowering plants
and their pollinators just a bee and a
and a flower you know without the the
flower the bee goes extinct and without
the bee the flower goes extinct
predators and prey you know you you let
your cat out at night and it eats all
the birds and the and maybe some rodents
um without you know the the prey the
Predator dies and so there's all these
relationships that exist and it gets
more complex than that there's a lot of
different symbioses you know plants
growing on other plants and and these
these these hyp specialized
relationships so if you look at a
species in isolation or in vacuum and
you say okay it'll survive yet you fail
to take into consideration all of its
neighbors and all the species interacts
with then you're going to vastly
underestimate what the total Extinction
rate might be from some sort of dist
so we call these dependencies in an
Extinction sense if one goes extinct and
then things depend on
it and no longer have that thing to
depend upon then they will go extinct
too these are secondary or
coextinctions so you might have like a
maybe this species was overe exploited
maybe it was a pre species of something
else and the pre the Predator over here
goes oh I've got no more food if it's
specialized on this species that no
longer exist it drops off the
perch and that can Cascade throughout an
entire system we we have something
something called trophic webs people
call them food webs or food chains which
is that's a
simplification so you get thousands of
species in a community and they they'll
interact either directly or through
these chains of relationships so one
might eat something and then that's
being eaten by something else and that's
being eaten by something else and so on
and so forth so you can actually get
this key species down here that a lot of
things depend on if it drops out then
all these things some can rearrange some
can can eat other things but a lot of
them are specialized so they drop out
and then all the different relationships
to all those other species that that
depend on it will then also precipitate
these changes we use network analysis we
actually use the same computer
techniques we do to um analyze you know
internet relationships we do the same
thing with ecological Networks so so I'm
sure you've seen this uh short animated
video which Lizzy will find and put in
the show notes that I used at my uh at
my class which showed a relationship
between ants and and plants and how
there were certain ants for certain
plants and sometimes they had seven or
eight others and then you saw if there
was a little drop in the species of ants
or plants there was not much of an
impact but they more of a drop than it
cascaded through the ecosystem
yeah and that's another term we use
Extinction Cascades and that's been
known for quite a long time but we come
let's come back to titer grad in this
particular paper so what we did is we we
actually developed uh these massive
virtual worlds of of interrelated you
know uh virtual species so this we're
talking computer games essentially and
we coded these large again it's model so
they're simplified systems but we we try
to get something as ecologically
realistic as possible and then we then
what we did is after we established all
these different relationships we then
took out species so first we did it sort
of at random and then we looked at these
cascading effects through the system uh
then we we we tried to play God a little
bit and we went sort of all evil and we
we took the most important species from
those ecosystems so those are the ones
with the most connections and then we
took those out first we we you I would
assume those would be those would be
really low on the trophic pyramid as in
their food for a lot
you can get um predators that actually
have many different prey and they keep
different prey species numerically in
check without the Predator the prey go
on to overshoot and destroy the
ecosystem exactly and then all these
other things that depend on that
ecosystem will die out too so it's not
necessarily the lowest trophic levels or
the you know uh the ones that are the
being eaten by everything else uh and
it's true though that plants are a key
component of these these systems so
we'll come back to plants later but then
we uh we also did things like we we then
we took the next most important and so
on and so forth and then we heated up
this system and we looked at thermal
tolerances so how much could you heat a
species up until it died you know some
species a little bit above their their
temperature range and they like turtles
they die in instantly or you weren't
heating up the species you were heating
up the environment in which we were
heating up our virtual Earth yes but we
coated in all of these different thermal
tolles is actually there's huge
databases on what species what type of
species can handle both in terms of
upper range and lower range so cold and
hot ranges and once they exceed that you
know there can be behavioral adaptations
there can be changes to their
distributions you know they can move
latitudinally to get the most Optimum
range that's actually what's happening
but in if we heat the system up and say
okay once you exceed this threshold you
you die uh or you you know we did a
cooling one as well just just
as as a point of comparison and what
struck us was um two things when you
don't account for the secondary
extinctions if you just look at what's
causing the primary extinctions from the
exceeding the thermal to tolerance uh
compared to if you take into account the
coextinctions you can underestimate
overall Extinction rate by about 10
times in other words yeah you you have
10 times more
extinctions than you would otherwise
have just from the primary extinctions
so so most of our ecological climate
system science is using too narrow of
boundaries um and not the precautionary
principle everything is way way way more
connected than the common narrative yeah
now that was a very theoretical sort of
heating the planet to 20 plus degrees or
cooling it minus 20 degrees and seeing
these massive changes but the the other
striking thing about that work was that
when we took when we we we played evil
and tried to cck the system as quickly
as possible and compared that to the
heating trajectory they were almost
identical so if you were to choose the
disturbance that precipitated the most
extinctions through Extinction Cascades
it would be heat heat it's not cold yeah
so yeah it's it's quite depressing now
that was a that was a very big
theoretical paper in terms of how we
structured it but we didn't did a
subsequent work and we looked at heating
over the coming century and we took a
very um much more ecologically realistic
uh virtual Earth and we created yeah it
was geographically explicit so we we
covered the entire planet and and we
only looked at terrestrial to start with
but we basically looked at within the
time frame of this Century uh the the O
underestimate from primary extinctions
is about 50% so just in that with the
next you know 70 80 years what's been
predicted to go extinct by the end of
the century we're probably going to be
at least double that predicted by who
well predicted from the um the thermal
tolerances of just those primary
extinctions so there quite a bit work
because of the coextinctions and the the
tardigrade effect that if that species
is gone then there's the food web
implications so is is uh is there such a
thing as the the inverse of that a a
positive a negative coextinction that a
species disappears and it's better for
uh the
ecosystems well that's probably an open
question a lot of respects because well
there's been some work on the the
influence of invasive species in
potentially replacing ecological
function in some of these systems so
what I mean ecological function let's
say you lose a key predator and then
some other species comes in and takes
that role in that ecosystem it could
potentially replace that and and and
save uh the the community from from that
coextinction
Cascade uh but in most senses what we're
seeing is quite the opposite so you add
in another species and even though it
might replace some of the ecological
function it's different enough to
actually cause more extinctions so we
haven't actually seen evidence of that
yet let's talk about insects um I had a
uh butterfly specialist Nick Hadad uh
from Michigan State on and he gave some
just horrifying statistics on insects so
lay it on us um Corey what is this
situation my understanding is that we're
losing insect biomass 1 to 2% a year and
does that at some point play into your
coextinction uh thesis have you looked
at that well yes um and no uh the yes
part is that uh from from an ecological
perspective once the insects go you're
looking at uh a bottom up effect so
we're talking bottom from that that
trophic perspective who feeds on whom
that you could precipitate a lot more
extinctions quickly actually it's and
it's even below that the plants are
probably even more important because
many of the most insects are hius right
so they're eating the plants and then
things eat those insects and so on and
so forth so we as ecologists as the
ecological Community probably never
really expected that insects would be
declining at the same rate as
vertebrates um simply because they have
high reproductive rates uh they you know
one female can produce millions of eggs
in one clutch they have um theyve
adapted to almost every single Niche you
know the highest diversity 50% of all
animal species are beetles you know
those kind of Statistics that are just
mindboggling 50% of insect species or
animal speci 50% of all animal species
are one order of insect colop which are
the beetles
wow yeah it's it I mean most most of the
biomass terrestrial biomass on the
planet is well plants then bacteria but
then then invertebrates so most things
most things are insects on on on the
Continental scale if you if you're not
if you're just looking at animals well
in insects we take them for granted Like
Oxygen or or water but 1 to 2% a year if
that number is even in the ballpark you
you just you're a numbers guy that's 50
years and it's game over or less and
most of our ecological networks have
pretty much ignored those lowest trophic
levels the plants and the insects so our
10 times um overestimation or
underestimation of Extinction rate is
probably being conservative because we
haven't accounted for that insect and
plant biomass change so it's much much
worse than even our worst case scenarios
that that's kind of the point of this
this conversation and we never expected
the the insects to be at the same sort
of Extinction uh rates that the
vertebrates are because of those life
history traits that allow them to
exploit these niches quickly but we're
seeing that now the problem is that we
haven't been looking at insects as well
as everything else and the fact that
they're so variable in time you can get
you know an explosion of cicadas or
something and then you know the next
year there's none to to to be able to
determine Trends with really variable
data like that you need a lot of time
and research money and and bodies and
equipment and all that and globally it's
actually quite controversial the extent
to which um insect changes and and
reductions are happening but everywhere
that people have looked well and it's
only a handful of places we're seeing
these precipitous drops and you'll you
know you hear a lot of anecdotal
information there's a lot of science
still to be done in this area but the
the signs are extremely worrying let me
let me ask you this well of course where
I live uh in the midwest USA I remember
40 years ago growing up you'd have to
clean your windshields off driving
around wind screen analogy is quite
commonly used yeah oh well just CU
people remember it that I I mean almost
everyone you talk to notices that and it
there might be a lot of Truth in that
and it's just unfortunate we haven't
actually got the numbers associated with
those it's anecdotal it's not science
but with the science so the um living
planet index uh I think was a few years
ago said that we've lost around 70% of
the populations of of animals um since
the year
1970 globally um but that was really uh
different based on the area like North
America is only like 25% Latin America
and South America and parts of Asia were
70% and some places 90% what about
insects does it follow the same sort of
numbers or don't we know those are only
vertebrates The Living Planet index only
looks at vertebrates and that's it it's
major limitation um it it's a very good
index uh but as you say it's so highly
spatial spatially variable we have
nothing like that for insects and people
are doing a lot of work to try to get to
something like that but we we just
that's a big unknown
unfortunately uh it's probably in that
same sort of category of um terms of
reduction of individuals and that's
really what The Living Planet index is
it's how many individuals in populations
so so are you um as a scientist who this
isn't your core thing but numbers are do
you feel confident that 1 to 2% loss in
insect biomass annually recently is is
an adequate um description of what's
going on I I I think that's plausible uh
I I think there would probably be high
uncertainty on those numbers and the
other component about because of that
rapid life history of many insects they
in many cases they could potentially be
driven to extremely low abundance and
then rebound from those whereas that
would just knock out any vertebrate we
don't really know what in breeding
depression um how that affects a lot of
insect species most of our work on
genetics and in breeding depression and
that's basically if you have a very
small population the chances of you know
having a sexual relationship with your
neighbor increases the the the
relationship between them because they
they're probably going to be kin and we
know we there's all sorts of jokes and
movies and everything made about that uh
Mutiny on the Bounty same sort of thing
post post Mutiny on the Bounty this
inbreeding um it's not good for species
and we know what these inbreeding
coefficients are for for many vertebrate
species and some species are extremely
susceptible to it for example mammals
and humans we we don't deal well with
inbreeding uh uh other things like
shocks seem to be relatively resilient
to them uh a lot of plants they they can
happily reproduce vegetatively or
clonally for a long long time without no
real observable impact we don't know
what happens with
insects I'm going to have to have you
back um because we haven't even gotten
to the questions that I want to ask so
I'm still going to keep asking other
ones so there are other kinds of
extinctions right there's something
called ecological Extinction where a
species no longer plays the the
functional role in its ecosystem even
though we still have you know a few
hundred of of them I think there's 390
right whales left uh as an example but
then I wonder if there's a a functional
Extinction where there might be 200 of
these megap left so the species exists
but it's so genetically inbred I think
uh cheetah has come to mind that at some
point they don't become healthy and and
there there's not a viable enough gene
pool what what is the science that that
that's all called and is that relevant
to our story yeah so this comes back to
our inbreeding um discussion but
basically when you get down to very
small numbers the the chance of
inbreeding increases dramatically and
what that does is it tends to reduce
your genetic diversity so how variable
your DNA is across the entire chromosome
and and in itself it usually isn't a
direct problem yes you can get the
expression of for example um what we
call homozygous um alals that have both
a d a dilus effect and when they're
expressed together they can create all
sorts of diseases or they can you know
you might not grow a particular
component of your body properly or you
have a physiological um you you're
missing an enzyme That's essential for
for example uh digesting proteins or
there's a million different ways that
can
precipitate but more more commonly in
breeding depression doesn't have that
direct what we call delerious or lethal
effect what it does is just by virtue of
having reduced variability and you
across your genome means that when
things change there's less of a template
to or less a smaller toolbox that you
can then borrow from to to adapt to that
change and I'm talking on a generational
scale not an individual life scale
lifespan so if things change for example
climate and you're heating up and you
have uh if you have a very healthy
genome you're you're genetically diverse
in your population there's chances are
that some of those individuals in there
were going to have the genetic
capability to adapt their enzymes for
example to deal with increasing heat and
maybe increase your thermal tolerance
but when the population size is small
and therefore your genetic diversity is
low you have fewer Tools in your toolbox
to deal with change and so that really
is what drives these long-term
susceptibilities is that you you have
even though things are getting worse you
have less adaptability it's a little bit
like politics you know we have big more
and more problems to deal with but in
across the world we're seeing the rise
of conservativism and reduction of
capacity to deal with these mounting
problems it's the same thing in genetics
and the irony is in the word
conservatism is is the word conserve to
getting back to Insects how important
are pollinators and what's the story
there well you know there's been quite a
bit of back of the envelope calculation
of of the value of pollinators just to
our cropping systems for example 80% of
all of our crops require some form of
animal
pollination um and it's about 70% for
all flowering plants and most of that is
from insects and in fact 50% of all of
that pollination that occurs for our
crops is provided by one species apis
mifer the the European
honeyb uh without that species we would
probably lose at least a third of our
food
production couldn't couldn't we use
drones or such well they've they've
actually tried that um and it's not very
efficient uh as you can imagine if
you're dealing with small flowers on
things uh it's it's extremely difficult
to pollinate properly so there have been
estimates of what the the net value
worth of pollination globally and it's
in the trillions of dollars annually and
that's probably an underestimate because
we couldn't even do what insects
actually do for us and and mainly bees
so you know when you see things like um
Hive syndromes where you know bees are
are are being reduced to very small
numbers uh you get mites all sorts of
things that compromise B production and
you know in many parts of the world
including the US most much of the
cropping is due to the fact that people
move around beehives and allow for that
that pollination to occur without that
you would get you would reduce your
total crop yields by massive amounts
okay that is an introduction uh I'm sure
we could have talked a lot longer on the
details of the various uh unfolding
extinctions or population declines in
nature um but what's causing it what are
the biggest driving factors across the
board on some of these issues that we've
discussed you mentioned habitat loss
with forests what what else well the
legacy of habitat loss basically from
the expansion of mainly from expansion
of human agriculture so yes we we do
also expand in terms of urbanization and
just just carving out a place to live
but most of the damage has occurred
through the expansion of Agriculture and
much of that has happened since the
1950s because that's that's been the the
massive of pul pulse we've gone from you
know 2 billion to over 8 billion in that
time frame and so just the increase in
the amount of land required to feed us
has has caused most of those extinctions
in the terrestrial realm
obviously uh but we've also had and and
that's probably the more proximate
um cause of most extinctions but of
course we have overe
exploitation uh that just basically over
hunting so you take your bison examp or
your your passenger pigeon or your great
orc you know there's many many examples
of massive over hunting great orc I
didn't think those were real no the
great
orc sorry it's my accent auk um oh Au
what is that like a big cow cow no no
it's it was a a large seabird um that
were that populated most of the North
Atlantic and it was over hunted for
mainly for its eggs um and partially for
the the adult birds and its meat um and
this is actually a really interesting
story because while it was really
widespread and and not susceptible to
you know small perations around here and
there across its range it got to such a
small number and the last colony was on
a little iset off of Iceland and that
isid blew up in a volcanic explosion and
that was the end of the species um that
that one explosion was the the the
ultimate cause of its Extinction but the
reason it went extinct is because its
entire range had been had been
reduced uh so anyway back to we're
saying uh the these extinct overe
exploitation invasive species is
probably one of the biggest contributors
today and that is via changing the
Dynamics of these systems so they come
in and they eat things they also
outcompete things they change soil
chemistry they completely restructure
communities in for example lakes and
rivers could you give an example a
modern example of an invasive species
that had a dous effect on the existing
species well I'll give you a great
example from Australia um we we
introduced cats and foxes to Australia
um some 200 and so years ago and cats
when they were released here went sort
of woohoo and spread to all parts of the
continent and they are the principle
driver for the highest mamalian
Extinction rate of any country in the
world yes Australia is number one we
have the highest rate of mammal
extinctions globally and it was mainly
because of
cats are they you mean they're living in
people's houses or these are wild these
are feral cats these are yeah cats that
have gone F also people in people's
houses but mainly they're wild you know
what we call feral so they've been
released and they've gone wild so they
kill mammals as well as Birds presumably
y birds as well we have um a lot of
threatened Birds because of but the main
effect has been small mupi small mupi
mammals um foxes to a lesser extent but
then we also have things like rabbits
that have destroyed soil chemistry and
and um top soil erosion across the
country we have car that have invaded
our freshwater systems and we don't have
a lot of fresh water in Australia and
they've completely changed those
ecosystems and and precipitated
extinctions of other fish species um
just by their sheer abundance not just
their predation uh we have uh weed
species that have overtaken vast tracks
of of forest and they choke out native
species so they did the list goes on and
on and on but this happened before
humans there were I I suppose the speed
at which new species could be introduced
uh came on boats with humans there were
stow away rats or whatever else but but
these bursts of invasive species also
happened before humans yes true yes I
mean we we call them tend to call them
vagrants instead of invasive species per
se just that's I guess just the Lexicon
but things would be blown off truck you
know a flying bird and manage to
establish a small population somewhere
you obviously takes more than one
usually get back to that inbreeding
conversation we had earlier uh but most
of it is through Commerce most of the of
the transplanted species are through
Commerce through shipping through
airplanes through just people walking um
driving and you can get inv B of species
even within the same country one side of
the country will have a completely
different biota than the other side and
people will exchange those and that can
cause massive disruptions in those very
delicate systems globally invasive
species cost our economies about $1.5
trillion
annually that's just the economics we're
not even talking about the economies
cost the other species yeah exactly but
just just to show you that we we we Al
do a lot of work on the economics of VAR
species and there are a massive drain on
our global economic systems as well okay
habitat loss
overexploitation invasive species um and
now climate change and and now climate
change of of all of those and climate
change is already precipitating
extinctions um climate change is
overtaking all of that so even at even
at 1 and a half degrees Celsius only
only oh yeah well one and a half is a
pipe dream now we're looking at more
like two to four by the end of the
century now was are the most realistic
um projections so and at I I well we
could pick a number because like like
you said on on the coextinction and the
vertical and horizontal relationships
with everything no one has a freaking
clue let's just say that we stop at 3°
C what does that just that number let's
speculate that that's where it stops uh
you know could be two could be four we
don't know um paint us a picture of of
what that means to the other nonhuman
species on the planet uh in a few
minutes well again without trying to get
too predictive about proportions or
anything we we're probably looking at
least half of species on the planet
going extinct within the time frame
that's affected by that change uh if we
3 degrees cus yeah yeah um in the past
it was sort of predicted to be more like
in the 10% 15% range but now given that
understanding of coextinctions it's
probably well above that so I I would
say 50% would probably be in the in the
right area do do do do the average
climate scientist who's looking at
Glacier melting and Arctic ice and other
things do they understand what what you
just told me from an Extinction
perspective probably not but I think
most climate scientists are um
their dacks basically that that we we
every time we come close to uh
understanding a projection we we we we
exceed it and so if you look at the
predictions back in the early 90s to
where we are today we've exceeded
everything uh we're seeing these
increase in pulses I mean what was it um
Sunday was the hottest day on the planet
ever uh this Sunday and then Monday was
the hottest thereafter so we we're we're
still being blown away by
how conservative our models have been
and that's partially politics and we can
get into that about about you know the
ipcc and and the fact that we've
downplayed the severity of this because
it's not politically palatable for most
people um even the language that the
ipcc uses in its reporting it reduces
the certainty with which we report these
changes so most scientists you know they
have a hard time getting out of bed in
the morning when they understand the
gravity or the extent and the magnitude
of these changes that are happening in
their own
lifetimes so we we're a depressed Bunch
um yeah let let me talk about that for a
second Corey
um I host this podcast so I know these
things you obviously are a ecological
researcher you you you work on this
every day but especially for um lay
people around the world listening to
this
podcast this episode this can be a
freaking gut punch I mean it is it is a
slow
unfolding tragedy horror movie H how do
you cope with that and and keep your
jovial attitude and I
mean at some point is this helpful to
tell people what's going on 50% of
species if we are at 3 degrees celus
plus a whole lot of asterisk and and
other unknowns I think we have to
communicate this is our world our planet
and yet to some people this is almost
tooo much to bear and I'm I'm borderline
one of them to be honest yeah and it's a
perfectly normal response and uh the
ability to deal with change that you
incapable of altering that's the other
component and there's there's actually
an entire branch of psychology devoted
to this we can get into it in a little
bit but basically the the the idea is
that it's it comes back to uh ER Beck's
book back in the um in the 1970s it won
the book of prize on the um the uh
basically the idea that people deny
their death it's was called the denial
of death and how as an individual you
have aspirations you have dreams you
have um uh you enjoy life you you raise
families you have most people have this
positive outlook on and achieving
something yet for all that to disappear
because you die cuz we all die and so we
have this we buil-in psychological
denial of death and that's why death is
so such a scary topic for most people
but now now let's magnify that to
planetary death or at least death of
life so we can't even handle it on an
individual level so so our little brains
really can't handle the severity of the
the the loss of life at this scale so we
become even more denialist and in fact
it's cognitive dissonance R life it is
it's a complete cognitive and it's for
it's for our mental health that we do
this so I don't blame people for putting
their head in the sand and and as a
parent too in fact parents are the worst
culprits because you know no matter what
you do invest in your children you you
you make sure that they eat well you you
you invest in their education you teach
them about life and for all that to mean
nothing that they're going to still be
facing these Horrors in their lifetime
is almost in inconceivable in the head
of a parent that there's nothing you can
do to give your kids a leg up yes
there's some buffering from wealth and
from education but everyone's
susceptible so that that cognitive
distance is even magnified from most
parents' perspective so you translate
that to an entire population you can see
why people are ignoring what's going on
and don't want to hear the story no
matter how much we beat our drums and
say look it's bad uh we have to tell the
story but we also have to realize that
people's reaction isn't going to be
right we best do something then because
that's not how people respond
normally and I guess that's given me a
lot of it it's turned my frustration
into at least an understanding of our
own behavioral responses to emergency
and yes you can sugar coat things and
you can tell them that you know if we do
X it'll be maybe not as bad and that
that's actually become My Philosophy if
I can if I get out of bed in the morning
and and the the work I do even changes
one small thing for the better I say the
future's going to be shitty but maybe I
can make it just a little less shitty
and that's kind of my philosophy of life
now and you have to accept that it's
going to be catastrophic but how big of
a catastrophe are we talking maybe we
can limit its damag to some extent and
once you accept that it's actually
easier to do your work and to be not
depressed about it I mean still
depressing don't get me wrong I've had a
lot of therapy um I do a lot of exercise
and martial arts to you know that's my
yoga you know it's just yoga with
violence um I listen to death metal I I
mean these are my escapism I make wine
you know I I have my I I enjoy my family
I have my little dogs you know I I do
enjoy life uh so that keeps me
functioning as a human being but I have
to face this every single day regardless
let me ask you this uh you were
interested in animals and biology and
ecy you told us your academic history
I'm sure when you started out at a as a
bright-eyed bushy tailed non-tattooed
20-year-old that um you were just
interested in the science and and the
Wonder and beauty of it all but at some
point between then and now you
understood the sixth mass extinction and
the you know 3° celius plus or minus
even if it's two degrees um it's a huge
deal for other
species right so you so this is unfolded
during your own intellectual and
emotional
Journey yeah actually when I started out
in Academia I really did not like
conservation biology or even
conservation biologists I thought they
were sort of The Fringe of Science and
that they uh these people were sort of
um worried for nothing and that the the
real science was more the empirical
stuff and you know I was I was very much
involved that but the more I started
looking into it the more I realized how
wrong I was and that that was more
probably one of the most important
sciences that we could possibly do and
that's what drew me into that and then
the more I mean yes I'm applying the
mathematics and I still enjoy the
empirical aspects of it the scientific
components that's that's really my
passion but you can't help but be
affected by that mentally and
emotionally it's impossible because
we're like ambulance you know paramedics
we see death and destruction and maming
and injury and suffering every single
day and you talk to your average
paramedic and you know they have a hard
time mentally dealing with that every
single day you know post-traumatic
stress disorder from from military
people you know it's there's many
different professions that have this
kind of response and we just one of
those so uh we've talked about animal
extinctions some mass extinctions I want
to talk about uh human uh population
levels and and the impact of that and
also policy but let me ask you a
difficult question uh put you on the
spot um just because I'm curious as to
your philosophy on this if you could
push a
button and every human in the world
could understand what you do about
animal uh insect uh wild populations and
climate change and what climate change
is going to do to those would you push
that button or
not everyone would understand that's
what the button would do yeah it would
understand you couldn't affect their
caring that would be another another
button but everyone going understand it
like oh I believe this is the case yeah
well absolutely I think in you know
information is nothing but an advantage
it's how you deal with that information
is is is comes the moral and ethical
components education I'm not sure I
would press it I would press it for
those people that have levers of power I
don't know if the average person
benefits from hearing this story I I'm
I'm open-minded to it but I I I I'm not
sure because people are already at wit's
end with all their worries and and
everything else going on in the world no
I do I do see your point and and I can
certainly understand that some people
wouldn't be mentally capable of dealing
with that but I think the the advantages
would outweigh the disadvantages o o
overall I think if people actually
understood and especially their their
particular relationship their lifestyle
relationship to healthy ecosystems and
why we can breathe and why we're happy
and why we can make money and and why we
can travel and why we can see beautiful
and appreciate beautiful things art
being one of them that's you know art it
comes from natural systems that's why we
embrace
it if that understanding was there that
we could see the link to our own
well-being I think that would
precipitate A Lot More Action so I yes I
agree some people would
be in desperation but I think overall it
would be a net
benefit so so moving on to um Global
human population you've also written on
this you had a review paper come out in
March of this year and in that you
looked at the United Nations uh model
projections that said that human
population is expected to Peak at 10
billion people sometime this number uh a
25% increase from the current 8 billion
based on your systems ecology work How
likely do you think that is well you
know even if you look at the a lot of
people have been working on this if if
you look at the sort of demographic
consensus that really is right in sort
of the the best information that we have
and even even if we went through and
I've done this is previous work even if
we go through a massive war and even if
we have you know child mortality double
over the over the next Century or so
even if there are three or four major
pandemics that make Co look like the
common cold it won't even affect the
trajectory and and that's the thing we
have this massive demographic momentum
why is that well there's just so many of
us and the fact that you we we're still
increasing the the our fertility rates
but but our You' our fertility rate
peaked in
1965 it peaked in globally yes but if
you look at many other nations like for
example Nigeria where it's tracking at
five to seven uh children per female and
much of yes south south southern sort of
Latin America has reduced South Asia has
reduced a lot but but mainly the sort of
that Middle East um subsaharan Africa
area is still massively increasing so
globally we're again it's changes by
region but globally we're locked into
increases at least till the end of the
century I would say that the best case
scenario that we H I disagree with that
I disagree with that and I'll tell you
why in a second but go on okay well I
mean all the models point to that and
regardless of what we do the models
include uh a proper accounting of the
carbon pulse and how oil especially and
natural gas underpin our actual food
system do the models include many of the
countries you mentioned and here I'm
arguing with an expert I'm just throwing
out some
things the models include the fact that
the the wide boundary implications of
climate which you just said at 3 Dees C
is going to uh eliminate 50% of of the
species what about countries like
Nigeria and Saudi Arabia that have high
growth rates under a three I mean how
are they gonna how's that going to work
okay well I'll give you I'll give you an
a good response to that that I think
will explain this
simply the number one predictor of
female fertility on the planet and this
is work what we've done what do you
think it
is uh I'm talking a national scale
um lack of Education
nope income
nope religion nope not even
close I thought I would have thought
that myself what the number one
predictor is child
mortality so the higher the child
mortality the higher the the number of
the fertility rate increases precipitate
it's not even linear it's actually a
threshold effect so getting it around uh
I think it's about
03 child mortality there's a huge spike
in female fertility and that's the
insurance policy effect if my child that
may not even be a social conscious thing
that's just a biological reaction
exactly so as ironically as our child
children die faster and I'm doing a lot
of work on child mortality and child
health and as it relates to both
demography and climate change and all
those things are peing ye yes we we've
hit a plateau but now they're starting
to go up again um the the ironic thing
is that as you kill children people's
fertilities increase and you see a
regression back to that that demographic
change that that people change uh
through the development cycle and this
demographic transition will go backwards
so we if anything we're going to see
increasing rates of human population
growth
closer to these extreme events and that
will eventually
equilibrate because you know your caring
capacity is lower and your your overall
mortality rates will be higher but
people will compens overcompensate for
that just by fertility alone so we're
going to we're going to go to 10 billion
uh much poorer much poorer humans than
the average today I expect you think too
that you know from a demographic
perspective and I do a lot of work on
you know reducing invasive species and
we try to kill populations like cats on
islands and we just did a project on
pigs on Kangaroo Island here in South
Australia and we try to maximize the way
we can kill these populations to remove
them from very ecologically sensitive
areas and if you get a demography like
humans the the quickest way to do that
is to Target young reproductive females
in other words those are the those are
the individuals that count from a demog
graphic perspective males are irrelevant
and so are people beyond their
reproductive uh years so you don't have
to
kill um every I mean basically if if you
have a massive mortality event but
you're still keeping the core of that
young fertile female intact that's what
drives populations all the other stuff
is kind of demographically peripheral
that and that's a very empirical way of
saying that you know um we have this
system where females are driving the
demography and that's always been the
case just based on our
biology uh so if if that component is
maintained even over a short period like
if you manage to survive from say the
ages of 14 to 25 or even 30 you most of
your reproductive lifespan is that is
encompassed by that period so if you die
thereafter not a problem from a
demographic perspective your population
will still grow your age structure will
change yes
but your overall trajectory
won't so had we just started the
interview now I would have two hours of
questions um yeah this opens up a huge
area well let's start here and then
backtrack um if we had a reality round
table right now with you and Elon Musk
he's saying kind of the exact opposite
that the human system needs more babies
otherwise we're going to implode um what
is is your response to that that's
exactly what a CEO would say in our
economic system the number of consumers
increases his profit margins and that's
the only thing there's if you look at
all the evidence for how population
affects average wellbeing of the
individual in every single case more
people equals a lower um a lower
well-being we have housing crisis we
have transport crisis we have political
crisis we have refugees is moving in
that increases people's perception of
their jobs being stolen that their
resources are being taken so we have an
uptake in extremist politics we have um
we have school issues you know the
number of schools being built we have
infrastructure problems we have
expansion of Agriculture and then
precipitating more extinctions every
single element you look at in terms of
human higher human population densities
in terms of disease and children in
terms of um uh the availability of food
and the distribution of wealth every
single one of them reduces average
well-being the only thing it increases
is profit margins in a completely
capitalist Society that's it well it it
it increases the market the market needs
Babies to buy diapers then toys then
teachers when a CEO of a of a
corporation tells you they need more
people because it's good for society
it's good for them and that's it until
until we are at a 3 Dee world with half
of the species including pollinators
gone there are no profits no that's
exactly right so it's a short-term
response but the best thing we can do to
increase the well-being of people in the
planet today is to reduce our densities
that you if you look at all the the
highest uh uh well-being indices in
almost every country in the world the
places with the highest well-being
indices are those with the lowest
population densities so you said reduce
our densities is that um meaningfully
different than reduce our
populations all that means is that we
should basically impart large scale
culturally appropriate non-coercive
Family Planning
globally and that we should open up our
immigration policies to include people
that can work to to provide for example
the the labor shortages it's an easy
problem that's an immigration problem
it's not a fertility problem it's a it's
a choice countries make um you know you
places like Japan places like Italy that
have declining
populations in Japan's case in
particular that's mainly because of
their immigration policies they don't
allow people to come in to take up those
those those labor shortages we do it in
Australia as well and in Japan Jeremy
Grantham was on the show and he said
people aren't interested in having sex
anymore as as one well look Australia if
you took out the immigration component
we would be just at replacement
right now replacement is like 2.1 babies
yeah 2.1 is y yeah but we're growing at
1% perom that's that's net
immigration 1% people per anom yes yep
that's our population right now is
growing at that rate and that's almost
entirely immigration I think the number
I looked 10 years ago if you take the um
the the deaths and if you take the
births and subtract the deaths 10 years
ago it was like 85 million
net new human babies per year I think
it's down to 81 million per year or
something like that that's correct yeah
so we we've entered a new phase in fact
we entered that phase in the early 60s
where um and this is work we have
ongoing at the moment that shows that we
went from a what we call
a these are technical terms I'll try to
explain them well from a depensation
phase to a compensation phase now let me
explain what that means depensation and
population Dynamics means that when you
add individuals to a population the
average fertility or the average rate of
increase also increases so this is the
idea of a minimum number of people that
Society needs to function well right
Beyond a certain point the per capita
competition starts to kick in and
therefore every subsequent increment in
population size actually decreases
population growth that's because there
is no more facilitation component to
adding more people more people is a net
detriment because actually fertility
ends up declining we've passed that
phase in
1962 and ever since then the entire
Globe has been on this downward tra
trajectory that more people added lower
population growth rate such that even if
you if you extend that out to the to
zero growth I.E stability that still
puts us in the range of about 10 billion
people by 2080 end of the
century does this Rhyme or track with
other species as well I I
assume this is pretty much the the
standard amongst all species the only
difference is that in humans we've
artificially inflated our carrying
capacity through technological
innovation over the course of because of
fossil fuels I would say of fossil fuels
yeah if you also look at that that
transition from depensation to
compensation
that pretty much was contemporaneous
with this transition from using more
than one Earth per year in terms of the
global ecological footprint so we
transition to net users of resources as
opposed to net
replaces so now we're we're operating at
the sort of uh I think what's the
average about Two Earths per year um
we're taking about double what we could
possibly replace and it's up to you know
six times in the US that's just the the
daily and annual flows that assumes away
the the anci long and minerals that
we're adding yeah so so let me um here
here's a a very Salient question in
discussions today uh for those people
who are very aware and concerned about
global
heating uh and understand the global
economic Juggernaut what is the
proportion uh uh impact of of uh
population growth on climate change in
comparison to just the consumption of
existing populations how would you break
out uh the impact on on climate and
Emissions between uh those two but uh
about 80% of our total emissions
contribution to
heating is from increasing population
20% from increasing
consumption so you add the because the
that's the other thing people don't tend
to realize is that the average per
capita consumption rate globally here
has doubled since 1970 pretty much so
not only have we increased by four-fold
almost well three-fold since then but
the average per capita rate of
consumption is doubled so not only are
there many more people but on average
we're using twice as many resources per
person so it's not the opposite and so
when you look at the contribution to
warming and we've done this relationship
um about 80% is dued simply to the
number of
people because it's it's growing at a
much faster rate compared to actual per
capita consumption rates it's quite
striking um that that uh I can provide
that paper to you at some point if your
listeners we'll put it we'll put it in
the show notes yeah um so I assume that
if we are headed and you you were pretty
confident that barring a nuclear war um
you know including pandemics and wars
and famines and stock market collapses
or whatever else that we are headed to
10 billion because of the momentum that
you described so what would be the
environmental impact if if we continue
to have the same levels of of resource
consumption per capita with you know
Energy Water agricultural impacts at 10
billion that we have at 8 billion
obviously I've answered my own question
kind I think you have
uh yeah it's not a Rosy picture put it
that way I we're getting into the Realms
of you know trying to predict
proportions and and percentages and
things like that are quite difficult but
the there I guess to encapsulate or
summarize this there isn't a single
metric that we can see today that's in
the right
direction in other words all of these
things are conspiring to go exactly the
opposite that we want them to or that
they should be going and that means that
all of these complex interactions will
multiply and cause these unforeseen
outcomes that we can't possibly predict
even with a very you know complex model
because these are these emerg These are
basically this is you know um the
butterfly effect in complex adaptive
systems we have these interacting
elements that will interact in such
complex ways that it's difficult to see
how that will be anything but magnifying
the predicted extent of damage that we
will see by the end of the century or
Beyond so I I I don't like I said it's
hard for me to see any way out no matter
what we do there there's it's almost to
the point now that you accept again I
come back to my sort of Mantra you
accept that the the future will be
terrible but you can perhaps make it a
little bit less terrible for some people
and that doesn't mean you should hoard
resources and exclude everyone sort of
like the the extremist right-wing
politic uh approach to things but it
does mean that that Solutions need to be
uh of sufficient magnitude that they
address certain things like for example
food wastage you know that seems like a
very a very small thing but you know if
we managed to eradicate food wastage or
at least reduce it substantially we
would need we wouldn't need the
agricultural expansion that our growing
populations will demand quite to the
same extent so we'll have fewer
extinctions as a result so that's a good
thing doesn't mean people won't suffer
it just means that we'll have a slightly
less catastrophic um
outcome so what what are the policies
that um could make a difference in this
and by the way here's here's my view on
on
population um I think there well you
just told me the facts it's 80% due to
population numbers and 20% due to
consumption
obviously I think uh the wealthier
Nations should use less um and we
probably shouldn't have as many uh um
people having babies worldwide but I of
the of the three timelines that I talk
about pre-crisis Bend versus break and a
more uh stable state in 2030 50 years
from now I think population the
discussion of population isn't going to
happen in the in the near term and if it
did if we stopped having babies
worldwide for whatever reason that would
precipitate the financial um overhang
and and Wars over resources Etc because
it we it's it's been a a a musical chair
Ponzi scheme the the financial
representations of biophysical reality
so I I think climate change is hard
enough to convey to people the
population story you've told is is
another order of magnitude
harder true but if if you take that
perspective of and I'll I'll quote you
stopping having babies that's not
actually what what one should Advocate
at all I think a family planning so that
you manage your family size to a point
that is acceptable to you as a human as
an individual but also takes into
consideration the Legacy effects so if
you recycle if you don't do overseas
trips if you buy an electric car if you
hang your clothes out to dry instead of
using the dryer you eat vegetarian blah
blah blah all the things one individual
can do the effect on your emissions or
an order of magnitude lower than having
to deciding to have one fewer children
in your family so zero instead of one
one instead of two two instead of three
Etc exactly if if if we had a policy for
example say two is great more than two
maybe we we want to think about that
that doesn't preclude people from
fulfilling that evolutionary need to
reproduce which we all have I mean that
dictates all of human behavior basically
we're not saying people don't have
babies we're just saying think about how
you how the kind of life you can give to
your children and part of this is is
reducing child mortality you know
there's there's an ulterior motive there
because it does reduce fertility it's
the strongest effect in reducing uh
female fertility and having the ability
to make those decisions are the family
level for both men and women That's
essential so and it has to be done
culturally appropriately it has to be
done in in in a non- chive way it has to
be ethically um acceptable it's there's
no one kind of has to be done globally
doesn't it it has to be done globally
but it's a it's a sort of a tailor made
approach that's what family planning is
about per region and it considers all of
the other components the religion in the
society the economic development level
the the cultural comp components um
belief systems various other things and
there plenty of examples where it's
worked very well without being an
imposition and you know middle-aged
white BLS like myself living in rich
countries aren't saying you should stop
reading because that's not what we're
saying at all uh we're saying that we
need Family Planning so 2.1 maybe you
could briefly explain why 2.1 children
per female is the replacement rate
globally if if you get married and you
have 2.1 children and everyone did that
that the population would stay the same
is that correct yes well that accounts
for both the fact that you're going to
have female and male children males
don't reproduce per se they don't
produce babies they produce sperm so you
can only have as many babies as there
are a number of women right and until
Men start getting pregnant that's not
going to
change uh and then the small point. one
there accounts for the global mortality
rates in children okay and what is is
2.1 would be uh even what is the what is
the number now the fertility rate
globally globally it is if I recall
about
2.8 2.9 okay somewhere in that vicinity
yeah so it has been declining globally
but it's still high enough that we won't
make that transition in most countries
um until quite later down down the track
so how important is
education um especially for women and
can
education uh Trump or
overcome
the financial market economic imperative
that drives our
society yes well this is a little bit
problematic for for several reasons
because it's it emancipation of women's
rights and giving people the economic
freedom to make decisions in their life
and and not be coerced and be in control
of their own bodies um and and improving
their own well-being both economically
and otherwise through education these
are all Grand things you know you make
better informed decisions generally
speaking your family members have better
lives there's less suffering um and you
have more freedom and you experience
more of life and so so these are all
great things the the the flip side of
course is that when you increase your
economic standing you increase your
consumption rate
so that's partially imposed by the
economic systems that we have um so that
there's it's it's almost impos that you
increase your consumption as your
education and therefore and your per
capita wealth increases you you there's
a great example of that in in in terms
of refugees when refugees come from low
consumption countries on average and
they move to high consumption countries
they adopt the same consumption rates of
the high consumption country their host
country within a few months and this
happens globally so the it's it's
imposed by the system you can't even
choose not to be a consumer when you
move to these countries because that's
the system that's there and if you have
if you have more means you have you end
up spending more it's designed to make
you spend money and therefore consume so
it's it's it's a it's a it's a
multi-level problem and is a very again
complex set of systems but it's it come
fundamentally comes down to giving
people the choice to make their own
decisions and that education is
essential component of that and that's
incorporated into the best practice
Family Planning programs that are
available and and access to birth
control um that freely I assume is a big
part of it too it's more than just
access because access alone will not
shift fertilities per se it has to be
accompanied by actual education Family
Planning programs and that's a huge
cultural component to that as
well okay so here is a um uh an of
stated assertion I'd like your opinion
on it um if people understand our
ecological uh
Brink and understand the scientific uh
thesis you've outlined here
and they realize that globally we should
um continue our evolutionary imperative
of having children and doing the acts
that cause having children but uh
2.1 global average is is the more
sustainable uh um outcome number those
people around the world that are equal
it and have a value system that care
about future Generations in the
biosphere will actually choose to do
that whereas the people who don't have a
value system about dolphins oceans and a
livable Earth might have six kids um so
how
how's I hear that a lot what are your
responses to that framing yeah well I
guess part of the educational component
is just showing the net benefits of
smaller families for those people and
and that the average well-being per per
individual in the family it actually
comes right down to that that if people
realize that you know a very crowded
house has fewer diseases for children
for example there's fewer Hospital trips
there's less competition among siblings
um there's usually a better pot of
resources available for the
extracurricular activities of the
children in the family and the list goes
on and on and on they have a better
quality food uh so except except let me
ask you this so you said earlier there
was a biological imperative um that if
there's low fertility rates that results
in more babies what if we go from 50 to
100 Years of economic growth to the
backside of the carbon pulse there will
be an economic equivalent of low
mortality it's low economic Vitality
that doesn't that could that imply the
the impulse to have more children to
support you as you get older and such
well if we also have simultaneously uh
focused on reducing child mortality in
those situations so while you might not
have a lot but if you focused on
preventing and most child mortality
occurs in the first year of life right
if we really put the emphasis on child
health and the the the raising of
children to that age you would have less
of an impetus to invoke that
subconscious insurance policy in terms
of fertility so I I you can't you'd have
to do both so we're we're in a mess um
but what you're telling me is of all the
things that we could do
to improve the odds of uh avoiding a
Gastly future that
um reducing infant mortality is one of
them that's a big one I'd say probably
the next biggest thing is a complete
restructure of the economic system in
which we work and and that's that's a
big ask because um it's it's it's its
tendrils have penetrated every orifice
of every component of society so it's
not something that it's a quick fix I
personally think the worst invention
that humans ever came up with it wasn't
nuclear bombs and it wasn't you know
chemical warfare it was actually
incorporation so the creation of
companies and public a companies
companies going public so that you
Outsource the ownership to people that
aren't making the decisions you divorce
ethical decision making from profit
maximization and so I I think the worst
thing that ever occurred is the creation
of a stock
market that one brilliant
idea provided the template for the
destruction of the planet and that to me
was the when it really started because
there's no way that you can incorporate
good human decision making that's
morally e environmentally ethical when
your decision makers have nothing to do
with those decisions all they want is
the bottom line I don't know how much
you know of my work Corey but one of the
lines in my movie and and I say it often
is we've outsourced our wisdom and
decision Mak to the market exactly so I
I I think we're on the same page there
this the another thing we could do is we
could make all political donations
illegal because there isn't a single
democracy on this planet it's all shades
of a plutocracy and as soon as you can
buy decisionmaking for ma profit
maximization then again you have the
same effect you do you have decisions
that are for the few and not for the
many and that includes a societal
well-being and so those three things
alone reducing child
mortality getting rid of public
companies and making political donations
illegal would make a huge dent in
reducing how shitty our shitty future is
going to
be what kind of changes have you made in
your own life in your personal life
being uh aware of these things to be
more aligned uh with the future you'd
like to see or you think individual
choices are not relevant in the in the
scale and scope of what you're
describing individual choices are
relevant I think um but they they have
to be gauged relative to these you know
the scale effects obviously so I think
if I was you know traveling overseas
every second day and and I were I had 16
children and I
was you know embraced in all sorts of uh
consumerism that I could possibly think
of
if I managed to say for example make
political donations illegal it would
sort of dwarf all of those negative
effect so you want to be a net positive
for the planet exactly but at the same
time those personal choices are really
important not just for you know I'm a
hypocrite like all humans I'm alive so
I'm a hypocrite you know it's the I I
like that old meme it's very old now is
you know the woman holding a sign at a
at a rally and it it said Save the
Planet kill
yourself that's a bit extreme but
fundamentally she's right uh so you know
just being alive you consume right so
there are choices to to yes I as an
academic I fly overseas and that's
that's bad um I I have a car that's bad
public transport isn't available I live
on a farm one of the reasons I bought
the farm is to produce more food so I
would rely Less on you know importing
food from
elsewhere uh I like my wine so I make it
myself you know I made choices I have
one child you had two choices of buying
Farm you bought the real farm instead of
buying the farm yes exactly but you know
I have one child um I try to limit my
consumption I I eat locally um I you
know there's there's small things I can
do but you know from the as an
individual you know I support the the
the parties with policies I think that's
one of my biggest uh influences is my
vote and in Australia you you are
obliged to vote we we don't have a
choice so that's a good thing
is there um you know like climate change
probably even more than climate change
natalism and and overpopulation is a
very
heated um and uh uh contentious topic
that doesn't make it into the national
stage because it's very threatening talk
about cognitive dissonance have you seen
any change in that in your lifetime of
of studying these things well I I mean
the first popul paper I ever wrote I
received death threats quite regularly
from that um it's biggest hate mail
campaign I've ever received as soon as
you start talking about human
Reproductive Rights it gets very heated
very quickly and that's wrapped up into
culture and religion and all sorts of
things politics so that comes with it
what you know some of the bigger changes
I've seen in my in my life um the for
development agencies in the United
Nations uh which were very active in
Family Planning right up until the
90s um and then a massive shift happened
where the Catholic Church actually got
involved and um it became basically an
athma to even mention the word Family
Planning thereafter and that still has
an effect and even today when we deal
with development agencies in the United
Nations one of my colleagues was just at
one of the United Nations meetings and
there they actually the United Nations
precludes their employees from even
mentioning it so it's a policy
that is starting to break down because
there's a lot of people in so-called
lower income countries that are you know
well educated and are seeing the
benefits or at least seeing the
detriment of of high populations in
their countries are starting to say look
this isn't just white people in rich
countries from the West telling you know
doc people in low-income countries in in
the South how to do business because we
actually can benefit from this so we're
working with a lot of local people now
that's starting to come out in the
conversation but it's a very it's still
very heated even in the development
circles and these are very uh educated
and and ethically and morally upstanding
people that but that really want to
better the world but even their politics
are so tight around this subject that
it's almost impossible to get them to
speak about it publicly let alone
privately so we still have a lot of work
there
definitely what's the um what's your
best speculation at a sustainable human
population over the long term that's a
very interesting question there's been a
lot of work done on that over the years
uh from today from an ecological
footprint perspective from a de
demographic momentum from an from a
well-being perspective and from an over
consumption perspective all things are
kind of pointing into that two to three
billion range perhaps slightly more
perhaps slightly less which was
approximately what we were back in the '
50s uh just before the well just as the
baby boom was taking off so if we manage
to get us globally again that's highly
geographically variable um because some
places are have higher productivity than
others but on average globally if we
sort of stuck to that kind of number
that would be a good Target it would
certainly provide adequate consumers for
markets to be more or less free with
some limitations of course um it would
give people a very good lifestyle and
and benefit um and well-being our health
would be better uh our long-term food
production would be more sustainable we
would be able to reel in a lot of that
climate change momentum and perhaps even
fix it we'd even be able to restore a
lot of
ecosystems uh but will we come to that
by Design or by disaster I tend to think
the latter um rather than a planned uh
sort of Target that's my base case too
that we continue to grow population for
another 30 years or so and then there's
Giga famine in the in the back half of
of the century but um Rex Wier has been
on the program he was one of the
co-founders of Greenpeace and he did the
math with me and like we said we're
growing 80 million net new humans per
year so that's 800 million per decade
but if we did what you said earlier a
campaign on
education uh especially of women um
Family Planning education access to free
contraceptives that you could reverse
that um and go to a negative 1.1% per
year which actually works out to around
800 million per year with no Draconian
early deaths or famine or Wars or
anything so in you know 30 40 50 years
if that were true we could be at two
billion uh in theory
yeah I think actually if I if I looked
at some of the reduction it would put us
probably more like the middle of next
Century that would be viable to to reach
some of those numbers but yeah we're
talking about the same I mean the next
century is is like a fantasy sci-fi
novel I mean I don't even know what 2030
is going to be exactly no but but yes
that the time frames are look are sort
of in the hundred-year range that we
could possibly do that yeah okay if if
if it were designed I feel more like
though that um a lot of that will be
imposed yeah and not in a nice
way well you're not the first to suggest
that on this show um I don't no
definitely not this has been uh eye
openening and
um enjoyable uh we've never spoken
before and you're you're a good bloke
let me ask you a few closing questions
and thank you for your time uh this
Adelaide morning uh do you have any
personal advice to listeners um either
those who are very familiar with what
you've said or those that you Just
Dropped a Bomb on their life uh with the
last hour and a half what what do you
advise people who are becoming aware of
of our
reality I think I could say to most
people that indifference is probably the
worst path to choose
so you
can
avoid uncomfortable conversations and
topics uh but ultimately even though
it's uncomfortable ultimately you can
improve your own wellbe and that are
your families if you put a little bit of
emphasis on what these biggest scale
decisions mean for you and you know most
people that I don't care if you were
brought up in the inner city or you are
you know hard right winger or you know
left Lefty greeny you put someone out in
the bush somewhere in a nice day and
they feel good you know and you just you
don't even have to see a lot of animals
you know a butterfly might FP by it's
it's it's a good feeling we we we
evolved in these kind of systems and we
feel comfortable there just the fact
that you have some green space and get
away from people um and you want to
maintain some element of that into the
future and your children can benefit
from that it's worth making a bit of
noise about how we can change these
systems for the better so I think
ultimately it sounds selfish but I think
we the humans we think in a selfish or
at least a very nuclear way the people
around us and our own lives and if once
we realize that we can make our lives
better by consuming less and being um
more involved with the decision- making
that affects our
societies then I think we have a chance
of of of a future that's not awful or
ghastly as we like to say
well you wrote you wrote some papers
with the title Gastly in them we'll
we'll put them in the show notes um what
about young people um how would you
change that advice for someone in their
early 20s listening well I have a
17-year-old daughter who is in fact
right at that age and being my daughter
of course she's been aware of this since
she was 5 years old and I remember
making her cry when she was about six
just telling her about climate change
alone and feeling feeling very bad about
it afterwards but she know she's made
many decisions already and you know 17
you make a lot of decisions that don't
necessarily manifest later on but most
of her generation they
shun Mass consumerism that I've seen
anyway they do not want families um they
don't want to drive even even in
Australia they don't they don't want to
drink or take drugs which is blows my
mind it's it's it's why would that be
you would think that that would would be
an escape just on a on a cultural
demographic observation yeah it's a very
interesting topic I'm not sure that I
have any of the answers but they seem to
be in a little bit of a shell shock
about the future and they're really
focused
on
being good people uh I think and and I
think I do have a lot of Hope with the
younger generation seeing that is that
they're not you know chomping at the bit
to make the most money or to see the
most places or have the biggest family
just that ownership that consumerism I
don't see the same that when I grew up I
could be WR the seed of a cultural
change there I see it too yeah and
that's encouraging and I think while
they're they're generally they're very
sensitive you know at the university the
students coming in now that you have to
walk on eggshells because the slightest
thing will put them off you know Co
really knocked them for six as we say in
Australia they're they're very
susceptible and their resilience is very
low and you can understand why and they
they've generally very freaked out about
the fure
um but they're they're also thinking
about it not in in a form of desperation
they're actually changing how they live
so do you are you teaching right now I
am yes what what is the name of the
class you teach or more than one well I
teach into quite a few but I I do
everything from biodiversity
conservation to Restoration ecology to
teaching stat statistics and Mathematics
and modeling to talking about you know
Global um Food Systems and things like
that so touches on all El of environment
so the topics that we discussed on this
podcast you tell your students yeah I'm
I'm actually a little bit Infamous for
freaking out people in the second and
third years so they say oh would would
wait till Corey's classes because he'll
he'll give you a so do do people choose
to take your class or do they have to uh
well depending on which stream they're
in yes they often have to take it but uh
it is it is quite interesting to see
that most them are quite up to speed
with the fact that things are bad they
don't quite get the gravity or the
magnitude of how bad it is and I think
that's what really kind of shocks them
but almost always there's someone at the
end of one of these classes that says
what are you doing to tell more people
about this that's the question that
comes out the most and I'm thinking well
I'm doing a lot but clearly I could do
more you know if if it takes second year
university students to get this message
I'm clearly not getting the out as much
as I should I agree with you um so let
me ask you this and I know we're we're
running a little over here um it was my
experience when I taught reality 101 for
nine years at at the University of
Minnesota that they signed up for it
because it was kind of cool uh because
we were talking about climate change and
energy in the environment and then
during the class they were totally
shellshocked cuz I told them things that
they had never thought about like
Plastics and peak oil and and money's
relationship to net energy but at the
end of the semester they're like I
learned more depressing things about our
reality than I had imagined but I
actually feel better about it because I
have a context for understanding uh how
things fit together and it sucks but I
feel better for understanding it do your
students feel something similar do you
think I I get some feedback occasionally
that that the kind of information that
we give them is often very useful for
their immediate families and friends and
connections and that when people go oh
you know don't worry about that stuff
it's not a big deal and they can well
actually XY Z and ABC and this is
happening this is something they they
they feel empowered that they can
actually start elicit change within
their own peer groups and their own
families and I think that's that's where
it has to start because we are social
beings we operate in small nuclear
networks we don't have influence at the
political level most of us and so if we
can affect some small change within even
the perspective of our immediate
neighbors and our families that that's
an empowering feeling and so I think
that's what I hear from students often
is that they can do that
now few more questions what do you care
most about in the world Corey Bradshaw
other than velvet
worms what I care about most in the
world I I think just to look outside and
see the beauty that I've of natural
systems that's that's makes me the
happiest you know when I
see when I see destruction when I see
you know I I it just it affects my soul
I can't describe it any other way and so
just maintaining some sort of naturalist
naturalness but when you look outside
and see the beauty of the forest and the
ocean and the cuab Buras and the
Platypus or whatever you see do you
simultaneously see a few echo of it uh
And the emotions of of discounting that
back um because of your research and
awareness of of the future of global
ecosystems when I went to South Africa
for the first time and I went to the
Krueger National Park I took a photo of
a white rhino running away in the in the
Dusk and it the way it worked out is
that it was kind of fuzzy and a little
because it was low light it almost
looked like the the Rhino was a ghost or
becoming one and I use that as an
analogy often in my talks about the
ghost Rhino that's disappearing I got to
see that Rhino that day will I be able
to see it in 20 30 years maybe not and
so but I I took great pleasure in the
fact that I could see that animal and it
might be gone but I took pleasure in in
the moment and I can do stuff to
hopefully P you know maximize its
resilience and potential for persistence
in the in the future but I I saw it then
and so I took pleasure in that then I
take a lot of photos um that's you know
it's not very fulfilling from that
perspective I like seeing things in the
flesh but at least I can look at the
photo and say you know that's a
beautiful thing I saw that I took that
photo I was there I took some pleasure
from that and that keeps me kind of
going you know if you could wave a magic
wand and there was no personal recourse
uh to you what is one thing you would do
to uh improve human and planetary
futures
if I could do one thing I would I would
make all political donations illegal
that to me would be the biggest impact I
could I could possibly make on the
planet if I could Snap My Fingers we'd
have democracies actual
democracies be more than I could ever
hope to achieve in my lifetime as a
scientist well here here um so uh this
has been great uh I would like to have
back because I think we just scratched
the surface um if you do come back what
is one topic that is relevant to human
Futures that we didn't discuss today
that you are passionate about or a nerd
about that you would be willing to take
a deep dive on well I think I think that
um there's a lot of more deep diving to
do just on the
population um child health climate
change
interactions and we're just starting to
explore those in more detail and I think
that we could get into a lot of
arguments about certainly net benefits
and detriments in terms of population
density and the evidence underlying
those we could go into a lot more detail
there I think um but if that's if
there's an appetite for that perhaps
yeah it's part of our future and it's
quite relevant so we'll we'll try to do
a a population round table and I will
invite you back well I would certainly
if that if that incur is definitely
getting some better representation too
both in terms of gender origin race it's
absolutely I think that's a really good
idea and you get different perspectives
but you also see that it's a bigger
problem and it's yeah I you know I can't
help the way I look or who I am but I
it's it's I'm very cognizant of the fact
that I'm I'm a middle-aged white man
from a rich country and regardless of
the evidence you need to open that
conversation up to a broader group um
I'll set it up Corey okay that' be
brilliant and I can even potentially
suggest names too Nate um if you're
interested thank you so much I hope you
enjoy your uh Adelaide weekend and
continued my friend thank you Nate
lovely to meet you and I appreciate the
the chance to talk if you enjoyed or
learned from this episode of the great
simplification please follow us on your
favorite podcast platform you can also
visit the greats simplification
for references and show notes from
today's conversation and to connect with
fellow listeners of this podcast check
out our Discord Channel this show is
hosted by me Nate Hain edited by no
troublemakers media and produced by
Misty stinnet Leslie bat Luts Brady hyen
and Lizzy serani
