Ilia seter the former co-founder of open
Ai and their Chief scientist arguably
one of the most Brilliant Minds they've
ever had on staff came out of hiding and
made a rare public appearance on Friday
December 13th at a conference in
Vancouver called the conference on
neural information processing systems I
feel like I say this in almost every
YouTube video now but what he shared is
absolutely mindblowing and no that's not
clickbait and that's not an exaggeration
in his talk he declared that we are at
the end of an era and what comes next is
going to change everything I've listened
to the talk I've listened and watched
several YouTube breakdowns about the
talk for me these are some of the
highlights you're going to hear them in
this video first I want to take a second
to address something there is a growing
disbelief I have noticed on almost every
platform I'm on from X to LinkedIn to
right here on YouTube Especially since
one of my recent videos about Google's
Quantum chip hit over 200,000 views in
just a few days and it seemed to attract
a lot of people that simply don't
believe this is happening they don't
believe that we've tapped into the
Multiverse they don't believe in
parallel universes they think that ASI
is a gimmick of an idea we will never
see In Our Lifetime and let me tell you
I'm going to make a very bold prediction
if you don't like it you can turn off my
YouTube channel forever I'm going to
predict right here and now that
everything you hear from me and these
top experts I quote from Ray kwell to
Ilia suser to Dario amade to Sam Alman
literally everyone notable in the AI
field right now as I've studied all
their talks all their stage appearances
all their podcast interviews they're all
lining up and the one prediction I'm
going to make is that everything Ilia
and other Minds like his are talking
about that will happen absolutely will
come true and yes that means that
parallel universes are real just because
you don't understand something or you
don't see it in front of you that
doesn't mean it's not true I mean if you
literally believed that then you
probably shouldn't believe I'm real
because you haven't physically met me
how about any of those Zoom or Google
meets you've had over the last few weeks
are any of those people real just
because you can't see touch feel
interact physically with something is it
doesn't mean it's not real because I
strongly believe that everything these
Brilliant Minds are talking about will
come true every single statement made
about Google's Quantum chip is a massive
breakthrough for Humanity if we have in
fact stabilized cubits and we have the
proof is in the quantum chip being
released for commercial use for people
to still deny that AGI is a hair's
Breath Away ASI is Right Beyond it and
my belief is that we will see AGI In Our
Lifetime and possibly ASI too my other
belief is that AGI might already be here
it's just in slow release so again I
urge you to turn off these channels turn
off the internet and just put your head
in a hole if you want to stick to a very
narrow belief that none of this will
come true I have spent I can't tell you
how many hours not just watching the top
YouTube videos reading the top articles
as they release listen listening to the
Keynotes by these top Tech Founders but
also reading foundational books books
like abundance by Peter diamandis a
revolutionary look at how the world
works and how it is despite Humanity's
often unnecessarily pessimistic point of
view well the world Works positively and
it works in abundance and I believe the
technological advancements coming our
way Mark the dawn of the greatest era of
abundance we have ever lived in infinite
resources at our fingertips that we
never have to labor for we can turn our
thoughts into reality with just a single
text prompt and with what Ilia
identified that is coming that we will
see in our lifetime yeah amazing things
are on the way I have such a strong
belief that this is coming in our
lifetime that we will see things like
free and abundant energy by the year
2030 I would stake my life on it at this
point and I know that's an incredibly
bold statement but I say that in the
hopes that some of the pessimistic
narrow point of view followers that come
my way will open up a little to the
possibilities of what are advancing
towards us whether we're ready for it or
not and just because something doesn't
work today the way you would expect it
to work in the age of ASI that doesn't
mean the ASI isn't just around the
corner all right so that was a bit of a
rabbit hole so let's go back to the
other rabbit hole which is the topic of
today's video what ilas suer is saying
about the future of what's coming our
way a few of the key Revelations I'm
going to point out from his talk are how
we've hit something called quote Peak
data end of quote and what this means
for AI development and no it doesn't
mean we're facing an insurmountable wall
you got to hear what he says about it
I'm going to share it with you also he
talks about how future AI will be
radically different from anything we
have today and why super intelligent AI
an AI that can reason better than a
human I'm talking genuine reasoning not
just simulated machine-like reasoning
which is what we have now but real
authentic reasoning that surpasses a
human brain well Ilia talks about how
that's going to be unpredictable in ways
we can't even imagine that is a great
point to highlight also why current AI
is just scratching the surface of what's
to come and no one that I can find
except one or two are articles here and
there has highlighted what ilas said
about crypto in his talk at Vancouver so
you're going to hear all of that in this
video but first who is Ilia suer a very
quick 30 second overview for those of
you not super familiar Ilia is I believe
one of the brightest Minds AI has ever
seen why because back in 2012 Ilia
co-authored something called Alex net he
wrote the groundbreaking paper
introducing this what is Alex net a
convolutional neural network and it
significantly Advanced what we have
today in AI it was the first major
demonstration of the capabilities of
deep learning and it sparked widespread
interest in what a neural network even
was he also co-developed significant
architecture which revolutionized NLP
itself NLP is natural language
processing and his work has directly
touched and impacted the field of
generative AI as a whole where from a
simple line of text we can have image
video audio Etc Ilia left open aai in
the spring of 2024 to start his own
company which is valued at over a
billion dollars today that company is
called SSI safe super intelligence
Incorporated on stage Ilia first talked
about the advancements of AI as a whole
he talked about the original work he did
with others in AI centering on an auto
regressive model trained on text a large
neural network and a large data set the
Deep learning Dogma that Ilia presented
that he and others had found out was
that a 10 layer neural network can
replicate any task a human can in a
fraction of a second and what Ilia said
was a huge Discovery was that they
discovered that biological and
artificial neurons can actually be quite
similar and artificial neurons can be
designed to mimic function and work just
like a real AKA biological neuron this
alone was a huge breakthrough think of
it like imagining up in your mind the
best Castle you could ever think of
maybe it floats in the air maybe it has
wings it's just outlandishly crazy and
there's probably no way anyone could
build it that is what scientists
engineers and Brilliant Minds like Ilia
set out to build when they built the
artificial neuron you know the crazy
part it actually happened mankind has
replicated one of the greatest things in
existence the neuron in a brain and
we've done it successfully ushering in a
breakthrough where we can literally
handoff work to the machines because
they can think faster better at a
cheaper safer level than we ever can I'm
quoting some words in that last sentence
from my good friend Dave Shapiro it IIA
continued to go through much of the
science behind what we have today
including the transition from
lstms to Transformers powering gbt
itself the generative pre-trained
Transformer then Ilia went into the
scaling hypothesis and the age of
pre-training that he says later on we
have left we are literally entering
another age we've left pre-training
behind but pre-training was what led us
to the break bre throughs that gave us
gbt2 and gpt3 this idea that larger data
sets larger networks would power the
next evolution of gbt was in fact
correct it has shaped modern AI but much
like ilas says in his talk this December
data is the new fossil fuel of AI but it
also became our limiting factor because
as AI ran out of data pre-training no
longer worked and so this is where
around the 9ines Mark in Ila's talk that
he points to the Future direction of
where the new data is going to come from
and how we are leaving what is now an
old Paradigm of AI and entering an all
new one to produce the next evolution of
what AI can do and completely eliminate
that bottleneck of running out of data
how are we going to get past this
limiting factor ilas says the future
will be found in synthetic data
generation which is something we have
heard from other experts and inference
time compute and whenever Ilia goes into
the future of these things this is where
things get a little crazy he talks about
this idea of genuine reasoning where AI
can Reason Not the machine like
pattern-based kind of cold sometimes
inaccurate reasoning we have in the
models today which is not classified as
humanlike reasoning even though yeah it
can reason through a math problem better
than I could but what coming to these
models will be genuine humanlike
reasoning and ilas says that that will
bring unpredictive capabilities that are
very similar to biological scaling
patterns where we as humans can get
completely unpredictable we can
hallucinate the power of reasoning in
our human neural net has never been
replicated till now and what's coming is
true humanlike reasoning which will
produce a whole another set of enormous
benefits but also potential problems
that we're going to have to navigate
through I want you to listen to what I
think is the most important clip from
Ila's entire talk about the future
direction of AI super intelligence and
reasoning here it is if you
believe the Deep learning Dogma so to
say that artificial neurons and
biological neurons are similar or at
least not too
different and you believe that real
neurons are slow then anything that we
can do quickly by we I mean human beings
I even mean just one human in the entire
world if there is one human in the
entire world that can do some task in a
fraction of a second then a 10 layer
neural network can do it too right it
follows you just take their connections
and you embed them inside your neuronet
the artificial one so this was the
motivation anything that a human being
can do in a fraction of a second a big
10 10 can do too I'll take um a bit of
Liberty to speculate about what comes
next actually I don't need to speculate
because many people are speculating too
and I'll mention their
speculations you may have heard the
phrase agents it's common and I'm sure
that eventually something will happen
but people feel like something agents is
the
future more concretely but also a little
bit vaguely synthetic data but what does
synthetic data mean figuring this out is
a big
Challenge and I'm sure that different
people have all kinds of interesting
progress there and an inference time
compute or maybe what's been most
recently most vividly seen in 01 the o1
model these are all examples of things
of people trying to figure
out what to do after
pre-training and those are all very good
things to
do I want to mention one other example
from biology which I think is really
cool and the example is this so about
many many years ago at this conference
also I saw a talk where someone
presented this graph but the graph
showed the relationship between the size
of the body
of the size of the body of a mammal and
the size of their brain in this case
it's in mass and the that talk I
remember vividly they were saying look
it's in biology everything is so messy
but here you have one rare example where
there is a very tight relationship
between the size of the body of the
animal and their brain and totally
randomly I became curious at this graph
and one of the early one of the early so
I went to Google to do research to to
look for this graph and one of the
images and Google Images was this and
the interesting thing in this
image is you see like I don't know is
the mouse working oh yeah the mouse is
working great so you've got this mammal
right all the different
mammals then you've got non-human
primates it's basically the same thing
but then you've got the hominids and to
my knowledge hominids are like close
relatives to the humans in
evolution like the
Neanderthals there's a bunch of them
like it's called homohabilis maybe there
there's a whole bunch and they're all
here and what what's interesting is that
they have a different slope on their
brain to body scaling
exponent so that's pretty cool what that
means is that there is a precedent there
is an example
of biology figuring out some kind of
different scaling something clearly is
different so I think that is cool and by
the way I want to highlight this x axis
is log scale you see this is 100
this is a th000 10,000 100,000 and
likewise in grams 1 gr 10 G 100 G th000
gr
so it is possible for things to be
different the things that we are doing
the things that we've been scaling so
far is actually the first thing that we
figured out how to scale and without
doubt the field everyone who's working
here will figure out what to do but I
want to talk here I want to take a few
minutes and speculate about the longer
term the longer term where are we all
headed right we making all this progress
it's an it's astounding progress It's
really I
mean those of you who have been in the
field 10 years ago and you remember just
how incapable everything has
been like yes you can say even if you
kind of say of course deep learning
still to see it is just unbelievable
it's
completely I can't convey that feeling
to
you you know if you joined the field in
the last two years then of course you
speak to computers and they talk back to
you and they disagree and that's what
computers are but it hasn't always been
the case but I want to talk to a little
bit about super intelligence just a bit
CU that is obviously where this field is
headed this is obviously what's being
built here and the thing about super
intellig is that it will be different
qualitatively from what we have and my
goal in the next minute to try to give
you some concrete intuition of how it
will be different so that you yourself
could reason about
it so right now we have our incredible
language models and they unbelievable
chat Bots and they can even do things
but they also kind of strangely
unreliable and they get confused when
while also
having dramatically superhuman
performance on evals so it's really
unclear how to reconcile this but
eventually sooner or later the following
will be achieved those systems are
actually going to be agentic in a real
ways whereas right now the systems are
not agents in any meaningful sense just
very that might be too strong they're
very very slightly agentic just
beginning it will actually reason and by
the way I want to mention something
about reasoning is that a system that
reasons the more it reasons the more
unpredictable it becomes the more it
reasons the more unpredictable it
becomes all the Deep learning that we've
been used to is very predictable because
if we've been working on replicating
human intuition essentially one of my
favorite things to do these days is to
stay up late and push the limits of what
AI can do on Saturday December 14th I
had a breakthrough with AI personally
myself that I want to tell you about
which prompted a thought that Ilia
actually confirmed in his talk that I
caught up to shortly after I had my own
AI breakthrough so what was the a
breakthrough well Sora from open AI came
out that week I generated this what I
would classify beautiful clip in mere
minutes from a flux Laura that had been
trained on my face my likeness somehow
we were able to get past open ai's
policy on Sora where you can't upload an
image of yourself or anyone else for
that matter there could be copyright
problems and I would even say deep fake
danger Potential from taking somebody's
image and being able to instantly create
lifelike video but somehow I was able to
do it by replicating myself as a queen
in the realm of fantasy and we had this
beautiful clip to show for it whenever
this clip became real and I published it
and I watched it on Loop I began to
think about the future of film
entertainment and then that led me to
the Future future of how we connect the
future of communication between us as
humans I would argue that art words
music is in fact the Bedrock of
connectivity between us as humans and
being able to generate beautiful things
in all three Realms music writing and
art from a simple text idea is so
revolutionary I believe it's hard to put
into words I mean think about it the
busy mom that doesn't have access or the
time or the funds to a Hollywood
production set actors script writers
that Mom can open one of these models
and type in her idea and instantly
generate a beautiful piece of art and
that's just one finite example you apply
that across the world and let's say
Quantum brings us to massive energy
breakthroughs that are a thousand times
more powerful than any fossil fuel we
currently have
I believe 2 plus 2 is four and this new
world hurtling towards us is going to
have all the capabilities we are
dreaming of because of the breakthroughs
in each area we've even gotten past the
limiting factor inside artificial
intelligence of running out of data we
are in a post pre-training era which
happened literally months after
identifying the limiting factor of
pre-training itself all right so follow
me here so this crazy AI breakthrough I
had was through asking this one question
if AI is capable of generating something
so beautiful in mere minutes what's to
stop me from realizing every single one
of my creative dreams so I went back to
one of those dreams and it was to
publish a fiction that went up against
every mainstream fictional narrative
we've seen from movies like The
Terminator from books like as much as I
love it the enforcers the machine stops
every single book TV show movie that has
been built on the cyberpunk dystopia yes
even Utopia era of technological
revolution has portrayed it as a
dystopian evil of some sort I mean why
else would you buy a ticket to that
movie if the machine was benevolent it
wouldn't be as fun to watch but I am
getting tired of this narrative I think
that it holds a lot of us in slavery to
fear of the machines and I believe that
machines will be capable of our greatest
Liber ation from all the work we
shouldn't be doing because we are human
beings not human doings and in our
natural state of being is when we
actually produce our best thoughts our
best work our best outputs and if we can
tap into the power of the machines as
our most powerful resource on Earth
pretty soon we're going to be able to do
unbelievable things and in that I
believe unbelievable good ask yourself
why is every narrative around artif
arcial intelligence and Technology
presenting it as evil what if that is
just another way to keep us subjugated a
product of the system and programmed for
profit-driven motives so after I asked
myself that question well what's to stop
me from creating this book I've been
wanting to create for years what if I
could create it in minutes I went to
Claude where I have a project trained on
a 100,000 words of Julia's content
that's a lot of my books that's a lot of
my video scripts a lot of my raw
thoughts about the future B B on all the
books I've read and all the content I've
consumed so I went to that you could
call it a model it's a project and I
began to work with Claude to write this
book and what happened is that in one
hour I had a book fully written that
rivaled em Foresters the machine stops
that rivaled the action in The
Terminator the Sci-Fi nature the plot
the characters of this book were so good
I don't even know how much time it would
have taken me to think of this on my own
and then I went and cloned my actual
voice in 11 Labs it took me a couple
days to get the voice clone dialed in
the writing of the book which is
arguably much harder was way faster I
had the book completely done in less
than an hour and as of recording this
video This Book is off to my book
formatter for a full release on Amazon
in every format by this Christmas 2024 I
can't believe I'm even saying this I
want to give you a little preview of the
audible version of my book which will
release
100% in my voice but it's not my human
voice everything you're about to hear is
an AI clone of me the words have been
written by Ai and the voice is an AI
clone of my voice so check it out I
present to you a sneak peek of my new
fiction releasing this Christmas called
Liberation through the machines we're
going to wrap up on this little bit of
narration you can actually purchase this
book now it's on pre-order on Amazon
look for it in all form to release on
December 25th 2024 my friends welcome
welcome to the AI it's a brilliant time
to live in I believe it's up to us to
harness it for our advantage I'm here to
help you do just that I'll leave you
with this preview of my AI clone
something extraordinary is happening on
December 9th 2024 I watched as Google
announced stabilized cubits in their
Willow chip the first Quantum processor
designed for commercial use we first
identified quantum mechanics in 1900 now
124 years later we're holding Quantum
chips in our hands 4 days later I
witnessed Sora breathe life into an
image I'd created months ago through
flux Laura in 15 minutes I had a
beautiful movie trailer something that
would have taken a full production team
weeks months lots of money to create and
on December 14th I watched in awe as
Claude and AI trained on over 100,000
words I wrote crafted the book you're
about to read these aren't just
technological advances they're keys to a
door we've forgotten exists a door
leading Back To Human sovereignty we've
become machines ourselves haven't we
trapped in Endless cycles of work
separated from our families exhausted by
tasks that drain our souls we've
accepted this as normal necessary
inevitable but what if it's not what if
the machines we've been taught to fear
are actually our path to Liberation what
if all this technology isn't meant to
replace us but to free us free us to
create to love to live to be human again
what if the future my 10 and 2-year-old
get to live in is one where they never
for a single second have to be enslaved
remember when you were a child before
the world taught you that your worth was
measured and output in those golden
moments when simply existing was enough
watching clouds drift across summer
Skies feeling grassp between your toes
laughing for no reason but the Joy Of
Being Alive somewhere along the way they
convinced us that our value could be
measured in spreadsheets and profit
margins they turned the sacred dance of
human existence into a Relentless March
of doing doing doing corporate Towers
became our new temples productivity our
new prayer but listen your worth isn't
in your output your value isn't in your
velocity your essence isn't in your
efficiency you're not a machine built
for profit you're you are not a cog
crafted for Commerce you are not a
resource to be drained you are a miracle
of Consciousness a symphony of Stardust
a poem written in flesh and spirit we've
forgotten how to be because we're so
exhausted from doing we've lost the art
of presence in the pursuit of production
we've traded our Birthright of Wonder
for the heavy chains of endless tasks
but what if what if we remembered what
if we reclaimed our divine right to
Simply Be what if we restored the
balance between doing and being being
between creation and contemplation
between productivity and presence your
value was never in what you could
produce it was always in who you are it
always will be human being not human
doing remember this story you're about
to read came to me in a Moment of
clarity while watching my AI generated
film loop on repeat I began to Envision
a future where technology doesn't
enslave us it empowers us where AI
doesn't replace human creativity it
amplifies it where quantum computers
don't control Our Lives they give us
back control of our time em Forster
wrote the machine stops in 1900 warning
of a future where Humanity becomes
enslaved to its machines now over a
century later I offer a different Vision
not of stopping the machines but of
letting them Lift Us higher of embracing
them not as Masters but as Wings in
these Pages you'll meet a queen who sees
Humanity's pain and offers a different
path you'll meet some humans critical
thinkers that are brave enough to
question the narrative you'll see a
world where technology serves its true
purpose not to make us more mechanical
but to make us more human this book was
born from collaboration between human
inspiration and artificial intelligence
proof itself that the future isn't about
us versus them it's about us and them
dancing together towards Something
Beautiful The Liberation is through the
machine but first we have to be brave
enough to embrace it
