think about the history of humanity for
99.9% of the history of humanity life
sucks we live in today what we consider
subhuman conditions and why is that
because we hadn't understood what type
of beings we are and what do we need in
order to live a good life so capitalism
comes after another great achievement
which is The Enlightenment where people
figure out two things the first is
that we are we live in a world that
is is ruled by relations of cause and
effect that we can understand things
because we have a mind and this mind is
our tool of understanding how this world
works but also how we can change this
world that was the one great achievement
the second is that to do that we need
Freedom so and achievement on the level
of thought what type of world we live in
and what type of beings we are combined
with a political achievement which is oh
therefore this type of being needs to be
free this is what capitalism in very
simple terms it is not a you know
perfect competition or whatever the
economist will tell you first and
foremost is what type of being are these
humans and what type of Life what type
of environment
do they need in order to live and Thrive
so capitalism is this environment this
playing field in which human beings can
live a good and flourishing life that's
how I understand it in very simple terms
I'm picking up on your comments about
the modern intellectual Zeitgeist and uh
University teaching but this stretches
all the way through secondary primary
not merely is it a collectivist impulse
that every student is BR beaten into but
something more serious and I would
suggest at least as dangerous which is
an antihuman Impulse as well they swing
between them on an intellectual
something like a human being isn't
particularly special they're just a
slightly more intelligent chimpanzee
there is this Continuum of intelligence
from the Cockroach through to the dog
through to the chimpanzee and then
humans are just the next point on the
graph if you were drawing an exponential
of compute p or something of the
hardware but it's simply not true we are
categorically different as yuron was
saying we are not driven pre-programmed
by our genes of course we have genes but
we are not condemned to obey our base
instincts we have ideas or memes we can
fly free of our genetic impulses and
people do this all the time if there's a
gene for anything it's a gene for
survival or there's a gene for eating
but everyone knows the impulse of going
on a
and in evil situations people know of
situations where you have suicide
bombers so we can fly free of these
genetic
impulses but not only are people
regarded as just a little bit more
intelligent kind of ape but worse than
that that people are a virus so on the
one hand we are just a slightly more
intelligent ape nothing particularly
special but on the other hand we are
uniquely
destructive now if we are unique
destructive and let's give the People
Credit who say that where does this
unique capacity for Destruction come
from it comes from great power and
wealth and where does that come from
well it comes from our capacity to do
the thing that no other creature has
ever been able to do on this planet
generate Grand explanatory theories
about anything absolutely anything the
phenomenal thing about this human mind
is it begins to reflect the rest of
physical reality
we can point telescopes to the other
side of the universe essentially and
detect these things called quazars quasi
Stellar radio sources things that look a
little bit like a star and we can figure
out what those things are black holes
that are absorbing material into them
and Shining brighter than many many
galaxies inside of our minds we can
build a model that over time comes to
resemble the physical reality there on
the other side of the Universe about an
event that happened billions of light
years away billions of years ago this is
a phenomenal fact about what human
beings are that no chimpanzee or dog or
cockroach even
approximates and that capacity not only
allows us to generate knowledge but the
knowledge allows us to generate wealth
and wealth defined non parochially is
something like the repertoire of
physical Transformations we are able to
enact which means the amount of things
were're able to do we might have the
idea that we want to let's say go to
Mars we might have the theoretical basis
about how to go to Mars but we might
lack the wealth we might not have the
resources yet to do it and so we need to
generate the wealth to do that wealth
generation is at the heart of how it is
that we make progress in an enlightened
Society many other societies have almost
become enlightened over time but have
fallen by the wayside Athens is a good
case in point what happened to Athens
there was a flourishing for a time a a
tradition of criticism where people were
arguing with each other about how to
improve ideas in that Society then
things went wrong we can draw a bright
line between places that tend in the
direction of wanting to improve their
ideas and other societies that want to
remain in stasis stagnation who adhere
for example to a holy book who adhere to
a political political Doctrine and do
not want things to change there and so
therefore you you can't have free speech
in such societies you can't have
democracy in such societies because
anything that challenges the status quo
would immediately lead to an enlightened
Society such as ours and these are the
genuine enemies that we're encountering
at the moment and so I say we're going
to talk about more than just capitalism
here and so might be a useful point at
which given we are in Sydney and given
we're in Australia we're just having
great problems at the moment finding
political Clarity on the issue of the
one democracy the One Shining Beacon of
the Enlightenment that exists at the
moment in the Middle East in um in that
part of the world and yet for some
reason our political leaders have become
incapable of standing up and supporting
Israel against the forces of stasis
stagnation violence death and
poverty can you explain TR this to iron
first can you
explain why is it that in a place like
Australia which is a a an otherwise
Beacon of democracy and progress and so
on and so forth nonetheless still have
the our so-called intellectuals
especially but our political leaders
can't find it within themselves to stand
up in front of the population of
Australia and say we are on the side of
Israel and to hell with um uh Hamas
Hezbollah Etc yeah I mean I I don't
think I don't think Australia is unique
in this case I think this is common
throughout the Western World United
States may be a small exception but even
there not consistently but certainly the
entire Western World the entire set of
countries that one would consider
relatively free Democratic societies
liberal democracies are all basically
unwilling to stand up and and
unequivocally side with Israel when
Israel deserves an their unequivocal
support and I think the reason for that
is simple we really can't even stand up
for our own system right we have no
understanding of why our system is good
why our system is right what is good
about Australia what is good about the
West what is good about the
Enlightenment what is good about
capitalism we have no willingness to
defend any of those things why would we
be willing to defend it on the other
side of the planet in the Middle East of
all places and in addition what is
happening in the Middle East is a
complete expression of kind of the IDE
ology we've been taught so I said
capitalism is kind of this floating
thing it's lost its moing intellectually
what are the intellectuals telling us
about the Middle East what are they
telling us about life more broadly well
they're telling us that if you're
successful and if you've done great in
life and if you've achieved a
lot then somehow you're
bad um you've exploited other people
obviously you're the
oppressor and you really really need to
apologize and if you're a failure and if
you've not succeeded and particularly if
you belong to a group that may be in the
very distant past or in the less distant
past were oppressed then you obviously
are the one being exploited you're being
oppressed and these successful people
should be sacrificed for your sake so
that you can be pulled up and they can
be pulled down and the ideal ultimately
for all of these people is somehow equal
outcome and galarian vision of the world
not egalitarianism in a sense of
political equality but in a sense of
equality of outcome equality of of of of
how we all end up so if you're
successful you're guilty if you're a
failure you're virtuous you must have be
done you you're you're the good guy we
must sacrifice the able to the so-called
virtuous now think about this in the
context of the Middle East before
1967 Israel was a country filled with
pathetic
poor
failed surv barely surviving Jews right
they just survived the Holocaust they
had this tiny little country nobody
believed they'd survive a decade nobody
believed they could thrive in this
desert surrounded by enemies everybody
loved Israel I'm sure Australia loved
Israel Europe loved Israel the only
people were so so on Israel were the
Americans they didn't you know there was
ex arms embargo between 1947 and 1967 uh
on on Israel uh by the by uh the
American
administrations and then 1967 happened
1967 for those of you who don't know
there was a war called The Six Day War
in which Israel was attacked by
basically seven Arab countries and wi
and Israel wiped them out destroyed them
in six days six days completely shocking
the world and suddenly the world looked
around and said these Jews are strong
they're capable they're rich they're
successful they obviously must be the
bad guys
now let's look for somebody who's
suffering in miserable who did they
exploit they must have exploited
somebody because you can't get rich
without exploiting people oh
Palestinians they must be the victim
they're poor they're
suffering and and Europe flipped
completely from being Israel's best
friend to being the Palestinians best
friend and and rejecting Israel
completely nobody cared about the
Palestinians before 1967 nobody suddenly
they became the cause of the entire
Global
left so altruism I man identifies this
morality of altruism altruism is a
morality that basically has been with us
since the birth of Christianity it's the
idea that your moral purpose in life is
to sacrifice for those who don't have it
as good as you your the purpose in life
is to uh help others but not to help
yourself helping yourself is selfish and
we know that's bad no mother has ever
taught their kids to be selfish you're
supposed to be
selfless so there's this morality that
says be selfless
sacrifice and when you meet somebody
immanu K and and Augustine comp the
French philosopher both said something
very similar they said if you meet
somebody who's happy successful Rich
done well in life don't trust
them because they must have been selfish
you can't achieve any of those things
without being self-interested without
pursuing your own
values you can't trust people like that
the only people you can trust are the
poor and the suffering this goes back to
Christianity the meekel inherit the
earth they they have not exploited
anybody they have not taken advantage of
anybody they've not been self-interested
otherwise they wouldn't be so poor so
they are The Virtuous and today in
modern society we've got something
called uh in modern what race Theory or
modern academic Theory we got something
called
intersectionality where we look at every
any individual we choose an individual
and we look at all their different
characteristics and we determine how
oppressed the particular characteristic
is in society so if you've got a certain
skin color if it's white well you're not
oppressed you're the oppressor if you're
black you've been oppressed if you're
gay you're being oppressed if you're
heterosexual you're not and and you you
add up everybody gets a score right and
the more oppressed you are the the more
we love you and the more uh unpressed
you are the the more successful you are
the more we hate you and Israeli
Palestinian whole issue fits perfectly
into that how can we defend how can we
argue for a country that is so
technologically advanced and
sophisticated as Israel and as rich as
Israel is we can't defend that and their
enemy are these poor miserable
Palestinians I mean your heart goes to
the poor and miserable you can't defend
the rich and successful it goes against
everything we are taught at our
universities it goes against our code
that we've held for 2,000 years and um
so it's not surprising at all again what
we need to reestablish in the west are
the pillars reason self-interest those
are the pillars that established where
we are today once you take those pillars
away all hell breaks loose and what
we're seeing today in the world is all
hell breaking loose
