intuition cannot clothe itself in the
armor of
logic but I hope I demonstrated to you
that the armor of logic is wide mesh
chain
mail in fact it's chicken
wire in fact it may be chicken ship
so hey everyone denit fredman
here here's another Terren lecture for
you
hope you will enjoy
this the first thing I wanted to talk
about was uh because the winter because
the summer solstice is a great Pagan
celebration and because I think we
self-consciously celebrate it with the
sense that we are participating and
something which goes slightly against
the grain of the Dominator culture in
which we're embedded and because that
culture has made a paragon of reason I
thought it might be fun tonight to just
talk a little bit about uh about reason
and
intuition and the forms and the politics
that attend each so let me dig into this
a little and think
aloud reason which is uh always held up
as the path to True
understanding has two
forms they are called deduction and
induction and all forms of Reason can be
subsumed under these two
types now deduction which is considered
the stronger form of reason is called
reasoning from first
principles and it works like
this you start from an idea which cannot
be
proven you accept it as given and you
reason outward from it an example that
is familiar to all of us would be uh
ID's elements of plain
geometry you start with what appears to
be an incontrovertible truth or what we
agree appears to be an incontrovertible
truth in the case of uid propositions
such as parallel lines never
cross never
meet well uh you can imagine a railroad
in your head and run your mind along it
to infinity and then you've inspected
the infinite Railroad and lo and behold
at no point did the rails cross so you
accept this as true then you can reason
from it now in the case of the ukian
proposition that uh parallel lines don't
meet you test the truth of it by
carrying out this imaginary inspection
of the items involved and verifying that
the statement appears true in all cases
that you can
imagine but other forms of other
branches of human knowledge
also use
deduction interestingly enough
theology
theology so theology reasons like in the
following
manner God
exists this is perhaps not Christian
theology this is a generic theology
God exists because Christian theology
would seek to go further back and prove
in some cases such as in scholasticism
that God exists but let's just start
with the given assumption that God
exists and then a second assumption and
God loves
us given these two
assumptions then deduction goes to work
and elaborates an explanation for why
why we are not with God how we can get
to God and so forth and so on so
deduction is useful notice that my two
examples have been drawn from in the
case of uid mathematics in the case of
uh the second case from theology a
branch of uh
philosophy so deduction seems to have an
important role in these AB ract systems
but remember I said it was one of two
forms of reasoning that are ordinarily
dealt with now the second form of
reasoning is to my mind more
interesting the second form of reasoning
is
induction not deduction
induction and
induction for those who believe in it is
thought to be without doubt a superior
form of reasoning to
deduction because it leads to a control
and a manipulation of real consequences
in the world okay what is induction and
how it works and how does it work well
it works like this
um when I hit the water with a shovel it
makes a splash
every time I hit the water with the
shovel it makes a splash therefore this
is the leap the therefore therefore
shovels can be used to make water splash
now notice what is interesting about
this in in contrast to deduction is that
there is no untested first principle you
don't State something and then reason
from it you make repetitious
observations and then those observations
which are most repetitious you raise to
the status of
laws
induction and this
uh was abhorent to philosophical
thinkers because it doesn't have this
Aristotelian Purity that deduction has
it doesn't have this mathematical
Elegance it's mess see it's all down in
the world observing and comparing and
repeating experimentally procedures but
nevertheless out of inductive reasoning
comes the structure of modern
science okay
uh but now there's a funny thing about
induction it's making an unstated
assumption about about
time it is making the assumption that
time is
invariant because what is it is saying
is if a precedes b in a thousand
cases then it is likely that a will
precede B in the Thousand and1st case in
other words it's a probabilistic theory
it assumes that probabilistic laws give
moment mtim to repetitious observation
now the question is is this so and the
answer is well it's so in some cases but
not in the most interesting cases the
most interesting cases I believe are the
cases which lie in the realm of primary
experience of being the felt experience
of being and in that realm the realm of
love affairs divorces lawsuits religions
political upheavals and that sort of
thing induction is no good guide at all
one love affair does not explain another
one marriage does not illuminate another
one revolution really does not shed
light on another there may be
generalizations but when you live
through these things what you take from
them is uh the
uniqueness of the experience
the first principles that are reasoned
from in uh
deduction whether in the realm of a uh
deductive mathematical system like uid
or a rational theology these things are
seen to rest on foundations of sand
because of this problem of the
Axiom in mathematics
the Axiom appears fairly secure because
it's it's
self-evident such as parallel lines
never meet it is it's it rests on its
self-evidence to make its appeal to
reason you see you can see that it is
true though no one has ever figured out
how to prove this you can see that it is
true but when you move from the realm of
a
to the realm of uh theological first
principles the appeal then is not at all
to the obviousness of it but to the
desirability of it that God exists that
God loves us we hope these things are
true but they are certainly not
self-evident in the scheme of things
from the point of view of most of us so
what this should shows then I think is
that in the matter of deeper
things deductive reasoning rests only on
the appeal that hope can lend to its
case Okay so for me this is a critique
of
deduction now what about
induction I referred to the fact that
its premises rest on this notion of
temporal in variance which seems to be
true only for the grossest of
phenomena science has made great hay in
that
Dimension by uh creating laws which are
essentially predictive laws of cyclical
phenomena that uh Define for us what
part of
reality goes around and comes around in
other words we we can predict simple
phenomena involving the mechanical
orbits in gravitational fields we can
make simple predictions about the end
results of certain chemical processes
certain nuclear processes so forth and
so on but when you lay it against the
background of Nature and experience it
begins to look like pretty thin soup
it's no basis for claiming epistemic
preeminence and this is the point that I
want to make science claims epistemic
preeminence that means that science
doesn't say we are an ideology like
Buddhism and Daoism and the Taro they
say we are a meta system we shall judge
all other systems in our
scales well this is
politics but not good philosophy because
there is no basis for this claim to
epistemic
preeminence
so this somewhat Egghead Rave is uh
supposed to pass for a pagan pmic uh on
the uh summer solstice because it's an
attack on the foundations of Reason
itself and as you know when reason goes
uh barbarism and Madness uh cannot be
far behind
and as a self-declared philosophical
Anarchist as in fact the founding member
of the on ponar Anarchist International
our motto is chaos is
order uh I believe that it's entirely
appropriate to carry out an attack on uh
reason okay so then what are we left
with well well what we're left with is
uh
intuition
intuition and what is it and how does it
work well it's a feeling into things
that comes to
answers and leaves no
Trail that's the thing it leaves no
Trail so you you you have it but you
haven't the argument for it and so its
power must reside in its uh
truthfulness so the power of intuition
lies in its ability to express truth in
contravention to the forward flow of
logic and
kazuy well is it always to be this for
you know how the Dao is presented as
this Eastern concept that you can barely
wrap your mind around and that hovers at
the edge of intelligibility well really
in these soall obscure
Oriental uh philosophical stances always
turn out to have a corollary in Western
thinking and the coraly to the Dao to
Daoism is
intuitionism is you know an ability to
sense the the constraints and
opportunities in the moment and act
through it
intuition and intuition is always
presented in the Dominator society as
one vague two feminine three
unreliable but this is simply because of
this bias toward deductive and inductive
systems whose falsity I have just
demonstrated to you in fact in the felt
domain of experience called living
intuition is how most of us even the
most self-defined as non- Inu are
operating intuition is a kind of field
processing of both the foreground and
the background of experience it's a
Gestalt understanding that is
subliminal and that lead leads the whole
organism through an invisible set of
codess towards the maximizing of some
kind of a goal okay end of act one the
second uh
act um opens in the middle of the 19th
century with science responding albeit
unconsciously to an understanding of
what I've just said the inadequacy of
reason the necessity of intuition and
yet all this going on in a domain of
Victorian gentlemen with beards to their
belts and a world where pianos wore
pants so you know it it worked its way
out uh subtly in the notion of
evolution and
evolution is a very interesting concept
that even those of us who profess to
believe in it I think don't fully grasp
uh you know what comes in this
package uh we all are
taught that uh in the 19th century a
great struggle was waged between science
and religion because science had the
audacity to suggest that human beings
were descended from the great apes and
we all know who took what sides and the
kind of polemics that were raised and we
all know the happy ending of this story
with the great Triumph of modern
evolutionary
biology
however that to my mind looking at it
from the point of view of a of a
philosopher uh is
all sham or it's like the 11:00 News
version of what what actually happened
that's how rather silly people
understood the great intellectual
Watershed struggle of the 19th century
that is not in fact what it was about
that's not what it was
about the outrageous
assertion of the evolutionists of Darwin
particularly and his school was not that
human beings were descended
from the great apes in fact the
outrageous assertion wasn't even
contained in the part of the manuscript
that was called The Descent of Man you
recall it was called the Origin of
Species and The Descent of Man and where
the real kicker was lodged was in the
Origin of Species why because Darwin set
out to show that nature
could be the product of processes
without
purpose that
was the bit that brought the roof
down Ordinary People couldn't understand
this this is called the so-called
teleological issue but this is what
brought the Christian Church roaring to
its feet in confrontation with
evolutionary biology the assertion that
nature could it be accounted for by
processes that were not guided toward a
higher end by a higher power that's
simply random uh molecular processes and
then pressures of environmental
selection could cause to come to be
animals plants and ultimately human
beings but the fight was over teleology
the fight was over whether or not not
the universe has a purpose toward which
all creation moves
ineluctably or whether nature is what
the darwinists called it which was
trendless
fluctuating trendless fluctuating so it
was an attack on God not the Divinity
not the Divine status of man that was
peanuts in this poker game it was an
attack back on the need for God per se
as an efficient cause in the Machinery
of universal
being well it's a very interesting
question and a very interesting uh
struggle because we are still caught up
in it American transcendentalism while
all this was going on in England
American
transcendentalism was exploring the
transcendental Realms of the human
Spirit cast against the background of
the American landscape and this um
question of the tilos in nature was you
know to make
friends lifelong friends into enemies
and Sunder families Alfred Russell
Wallace who was the co-discoverer of
evolution with
Darwin really deeded him he he uh had a
fever he was a professional butterfly
collector as I was once in my youth and
on the island of Tate in eastern
Indonesia Wallace fell into a malarial
fever and at the height of this fever he
wrote down a page and a half of
scribbling which when he came down from
this illness and read it it seemed to
hold up up and what he had discovered
was what all biology was seeking what he
called the solution to the problem of
the
species and he looked at this thing and
what it was was a description of natural
selection and it seemed to work well
Wallace was uh from the lower classes
had made his living in England as a
surveyor was essentially a field
biologist because he was not accepted by
the gentle man scientists of England he
didn't know where to turn so he fired
off a letter to the only person he could
think of to ask who was the greatest
biologist of the day Charles Daran at
home in England in his garden working
over 20 years of notes on the problem of
the species when Darwin got this letter
from this unknown character postmarked
ambon East Indies and read it he paled
visibly
uh and he went to his friend Sir Charles
Lyle who was the great the greatest
geologist of the day the proponent of
catastrophism and one of the great w was
to develop into one of the great
Defenders of Darwin's theory he went to
Charles Lyall and said uh I've been
working 20 years years on this idea this
came in the post this this is it it's
all here and Lyle said don't worry my
friend we will schedule two papers to be
delivered at the Royal Society they will
be delivered on the same evening and
yours shall be
first and so it was and so it comes down
to us as Darwin's theory of evolution
but in fact in a way for
philosophical purists it may have been
better that way because
Wallace who was uh in many ways a deeper
thinker than Darwin uh was a a Fabian
socialist was fascinated by paranormal
phenomena uh as well as being interested
in
electricity
biogeography um
anthropology uh truly one of the last of
the great polymaths Wallace was unable
to take the final step on the question
of
thology and he said I cannot believe
that random processes ameliorated by
natural selection can give rise to a
creature such as man so this was the
break in the 19th century and it it
arises out of the earlier foundation of
the struggle between intuition and
reason I mean I think our intuition must
Place Us in Wallace's camp that there is
a teos of some sort there is an Omega
Point toward which all creation however
unsteadily moves and it is because of
this uh Omega point that we do live in a
cosmos and not a kayos not simply a
raging confusion but something that is
structured and ordered well in spite of
the fact that Evolution was seeking to
serve the most rigorous scientific
desires to exclude tileology and to
exclude God from the process of the
natural world uh
it introduced a bizarre concept which
cut against its own purposes the concept
is a kind of progress in
nature where previously none had
been so that uh from Aristotle to the
19th century what you have as a theory
of nature is What's called the Great
chain of being or the great ladder of
being and it stretches from God through
the archangels the sbim the cherubim
down man then the animal kingdom the
vegetable Kingdom so forth and so on but
it is
imagined as static as put in place by
the Fiat looks of creation set in place
for all time what what uh Darwin did was
to see it as not a great chain of being
but as an escalator of being he added
the notion of progressive movement
toward higher and higher forms more and
more complex
manifestations of the uh
intrinsic ingression of novelty into
actual
events and this
idea is very very interesting and cogent
and pregnant with possibility for all of
us and our world you see what it is
really is it's a recasting of an idea
that had been banished for several
centuries from Western thinking it is
the
alchemical idea that nature is driving
to perfect itself this was what the
Alchemist believed they believed that
through time
uh lesser Metals became
gold and that what the Alchemist was
trying to do was to compress time he was
trying to to catalyze a natural process
so that what took thousands in their
imagination of years in the body of the
earth could be compressed into days or
weeks in the almic of The Alchemist well
as science defin find itself in the
throughout the 17th and 18th century
under the impetus of deart and uh and uh
Kant and all of these people uh this
notion of uh the world as a distillate
apparatus was given up but it returns in
the idea of evolution and uh we inherit
it in the social world now this is a
delicate point there is something called
social Darwinism otherwise known as
fascism social Darwinism uses a very
vulgar understanding of evolutionary
Dynamics to justify class
oppression by saying that uh it must be
right that some people have their foot
on other people's necks because isn't
this what nature is about struggle of
the fittest and survival of the the
longest Fang the swiftest claw the
sharpest tooth well the answer is no
absolutely not this this rests on an
understanding of nature that was in
Vogue 150 years ago that is not in Vogue
now that's what you see when you look at
nature at the at the in the human
dimension
but when you analyze nature as uh an
integrated system of chemical reactions
Gene transfer cat catalytic
self-regulating activities hyper cycles
of energy nutrients and Metabolism when
you analyze nature from that point of
view you see that it seeks to
maximize
cooperation connectedness Mutual
interdepend ability is the thing which
holds the whole thing together and the
species that is most successful is not
the species that can dominate all others
it's the species that can make itself
indispensable to all others look at the
uh evolutionary success of the
bacteria you know they settled in for
the Long Haul and no higher form of life
can operate without them and so the the
possibility of of bacteria becoming
extinct is laughable I mean they'll be
the last to go because they have made
themselves
indispensable this idea then of
evolution has strongly entered the human
world and science hates this I had
somebody once say to me if it doesn't
involve genes it ain't
Evolution and you should not use the
word Evolution to describe Progressive
change they didn't like that they said
evolution is a technical term used by
biologists and it applies to genetic
material only books do not evolve social
systems do not evolve corporations
relationships do not evolve this is a
misuse of the word well since then uh
evolutionary thinkers like CH wadington
Eric Yan West
Churchman uh Paul fire Rob and uh uh
irin llo have uh I think by the sheer
force and volume of their writings
overwhelmed this notion and reclaimed
Evolution as a much broader concept than
it was understood to be in the 19th
century evolution is now understood to
be the triumphant March out of Chaos
into order connectedness self-expression
and self-reflection that begins with the
first moments preceding I mean following
the Big Bang in other words we have uh
chemical we have Atomic Evolution
evolution of atomic systems as electrons
settle down into stable orbits we have
chemical Evolution into more and more
complex molecular forms which finally
become po polymers these polymers
further evolve into complex energetic
systems capable of
self-replication motility and eventually
you know the writing of operas so what
we see when we look at uh the universe
is that you have to be blind to this
Progressive tendency that has worked its
will with the random plasma of pure
electrons with the chemistry of stars
with the molecular chemistry of
primitive planets with plant and animal
life with human epigenetic coding
systems carving dance ritual
vocalization magic and this process
proceeds right up into the 20th century
with this phenomenon that we all uh give
uh some Credence to the notion that we
are living in a period of compressed
time well so what what are we to do with
that I think what we have to do is begin
then to design this process it is now
moving fast enough that it is within the
the Ken of each one of us to see
Progressive consolidation of change take
taking place in the world around us we
as human beings I think are destined to
be the design and control element in
this thing in this Global guyin process
never mind that we have done it so badly
up to now
because now meaning the 20th century is
a completely different kind of epistemic
world than any world that preceded it
and to the degree that we can
shed the inherited behavior patterns of
uh previous centuries previous cultural
Styles and actually take hold of the
tools present at hand we can uh guide
and control this evolutionary
process uh culture
it is in a sense the the
software of the
infrastructure of the global
civilization which is the
hardware we don't need to make major
design revisions in the hardware the
hardware is how we produce uh and move
around food how we produce energy the
major restructuring there is simply a
matter of cleaning it up making it more
efficient less toxic less enslaved to
the notion of making a buck more
enslaved to the notion of uh serving
human needs so the hardware
structure can be uh pretty much
redesigned along the lines that are
clear to even the engineering
mentalities Among Us what is not so
clear is that culture can be redefined
as software and radically Rewritten so
that it runs much more
smoothly uh now notice that I did not
say that we were software or Hardware we
are neither we are the user and this is
the important thing to remember we are
not scripting ourselves into some kind
of machine future we are designing
the future that we want to have rather
than allowing the blunders of our
grandparents to dictate the kind of
future we will have we're very late
waking up to the necessity for this this
is because we tend to operate along very
shortterm
uh goals it's very hard for us to put in
place a project that uh looks 40 or 50
uh years ahead it was interesting a
couple of years ago there was an article
in the whole earth review about uh uh a
chapel at
Oxford that uh the the main beam of this
Chapel which was an oak beam about so by
so uh was rotted through with worms and
had to be
replaced and it was no problem because
800 years ago an English king planted an
oak tree that was to be grown for the
specific purpose of replacing this beam
when it should need to be replaced and
so this 750 year old oak tree was cut
and the beam heun and put into place and
uh the it inspired them to plant another
oak tree
which uh is not a bad
idea okay well um so that's maybe enough
about Evolution now I want to talk about
Revolution which is also in the solal
theme because uh what the solstice marks
is the return of the heliacal rising of
the sun to a certain fixed star against
the background of fixed stars in our
calendar system what it really
celebrates is uh the longest day of the
year the day when there is when the sun
makes its most
Northerly
uh its deepest incursion into the
northern
latitudes it's interesting the theme of
revolution is dealt with in the ching
and sense of of course the iching was a
one of the five Confucian Classics you
might turn to that passage expecting a
discourse on
political uh
reformations and when you look at the
hexagram Revolution it says uh nothing
about political guidance to
revolutionaries it says instead uh the
magician is a calendar maker
he measures the seasons and he sets them
right and uh and so the last idea maybe
that I want to leave with you tonight is
uh a few thoughts about the calendar
because uh I have fastened on to the
calendar as an interesting vehicle for
changing people's conceptions of reality
I don't think we realize how thoroughly
our worldview is dominated by the
unconscious
preconceptions that are uh built into
our
calendar the Chinese understood this
this is why when there were great social
Revolutions a new calendar was always
put in place we have used the present
calendar with a minor correction uh for
2,000 years for one entire Z dical age
and uh we
assume I I assume we
assume that we use this calendar that we
do because it must be a very good one
and it must be the best of all and it
must be the simplest and it is true that
when you look back into time you do find
bizarre calendrical Arrangements uh for
instance I don't know if you knew this
but Roman months counted up to the
middle day of the month and then like a
rocket launching counted down to the end
day of the month this is why the middle
day of Roman months which was called The
Ides was considered an unlucky day
because that was the day that the upward
switched to a downward count well we
would find this very clumsy but notice
that what our C the
the logic and we've talked about logic
reason and deduction uh this evening the
logic behind our calendar is that it is
a good solar calendar well what do we
mean by a good solar calendar well uh
calendar makers will tell you that a
good solar calendar is a calendar such
that uh on the same day of every year
the Sun rises in the same place against
the background of the fixed Stars this
is what we mean when we say the sun is
in Aries we mean that at dawn the
constellation Aries is blotted out by
the heliacal Light of the Rising
Sun but the sun is this
solar
masculine
apollonian AR type it is the archetype
of the ego as God it is the archetype of
the center the unity solar calendar is
set up so that we do not have what is
called a
precession a precession is where the
days slip against the background of the
fixed Stars our the notion of our
calendar is that it is an agricultural
calendar and we want our great
agricultural holidays to always fall in
the times of harvest and planting so a
solar year must be used but what this
does is it has an underlying assumption
which is false and which is has been
inculcated into our psychology with to
detrimental ends and it is this that
this obsession with fixing the solstices
and the equinoxes against the fixed
stars is the effort to build a structure
on the very largest level the level of
the planet itself to build a structure
that is fixed that is
enduring and the great pride of our
calendar is that we say it does not slip
that means it's fixed and enduring well
you may not know that the reason it
doesn't slip is because there's a fudge
factor in it uh we're all familiar with
the fudge factor of leap
year that every four years we have to
add a year to keep it okay but how many
of you knew that uh every Century year
divisible by
400 is also a leap year even if it
occurs out of sequence the year 2000
will be such a leap year it is a century
year divisible by 400 so was
1,600 and so in that case you have a
leap year even though the previous or
the following year may be a leap year so
there is a fudge factor in the high and
mighty solar paternal calendar that
keeps it on track well uh somewhat
factiously what I propose at least as a
thought model is an entirely different
year length
384
days now 384 days is an interesting
number it's 13
lunations precisely 13
lunations and uh so we would have
therefore a need for a 13th month in the
calendar and I propose that the 13th
month follow August And precede
September and be called
remember and the month of remember will
be a month of great nimonic celebration
and recovery of the past it will be a
celebration of the past well okay now we
have 13 months that's wonderful but we
have purchased this 13th month at the
expense of 19 days that overshoot the
solar year what about that well instead
of viewing that as a problem as it has
always been viewed let's view it as an
opportunity what happens if you use a
day length 19 days longer than the solar
year Well it means that the great
festivals of the solar year Easter
Christmas the 4th of
July will let's call it independ
day so we don't confuse ourselves cuz
it's going to move that these great
festivals uh will do what is called
precess each year they will come 19 days
later against the solar year than the
year before so in such a calendrical
system you would be as a child Christmas
would occur let us say in Winter by the
time you were in your middle teens
Christmas would be occurring in
springtime by the time you were in your
mid 20s Christmas would be occurring in
high summer and in your mid TW uh 30s it
would occur again it would occur in
Autumn and through a life of 60 or 70
years the solar festivals would migrate
through the seasons well this may seem
trivial to you and hey it may
be but
uh the the psychology of it is that it's
trying to build in at the highest level
a truth which we have lost sight of
which is the idea that everything
flows that everything is
impermanent that flux is the
only
uh standard flux is the only thing you
can depend
on if we gave ourselves permission at
the highest and deepest psychological
level the place where we measure time
and the spectacle of our life as spread
out against the grid of the history that
we live through if we were to give that
permission to be portrayed on a grid
that emphasized flow
transience change and Rec cursion rather
than this constipated solar Square
against the fixed stars then what we are
really doing you see is changing
archetypes we are changing archetypes
and what are we changing we're changing
the apollonian solar paternalistic
Dominator archetype for the feminine
Oceanic
intuitive giving and taking taking
archetype of flow and life and death and
completion through
change rather than
completion which seeks to Stave off
change and then is inevitably swept away
and therefore somehow touched with
pathos well maybe that's enough um maybe
there are questions uh this was somewhat
Meandering I'll recap it for you to try
and give you the illusion that there was
a
plan
um we began by celebrating the solstice
with an attack on reason and logic and
uh in favor of the Primacy of intuition
in spite of its
um
nakedness intuition cannot clothe itself
in the armor of logic
but I hope I demonstrated to you that
the armor of logic is wide mesh chain
mail in fact it's chicken
wire in fact it may be chicken ship
so so the Primacy of intuition and how
that intuition led into a peculiar
episode in 19th century science where
committed atheists found themselves uh
serving the recovery of the alchemical
ideal through the notion of nature as an
engine of tilos and
progressivism and then from that the
notion of our own Century as the
concrescence of this uh teologico
process that is leading everything into
deeper and deeper modes of
self-reflection and connectedness and
then finally to put the snake's tail in
its mouth to return to the theme of the
solstice uh and to offer again a
counterpose to the calendar of reason
the calendar of solar paternalism to
offer instead a potential calendar in
celebration of flux change growth and
feminism uh which are the value vales
that are going to have to be maximized
if we are going to open a dialogue uh
with our souls and the soul of the
planet and uh and save ourselves from
the lethal
momentum that uh so many hundreds of
years of Dominator culture have imparted
to the Machinery of our civilization I
mean we must awaken and these little Pro
games about logic and calendars and
shifting perspective on these various
issues this is just a way to promote
cognitive activity to say you know the
the path out of the SVA Ura the path out
of the dark wood in which we find
ourselves is uh cognition thought
thought getting smart fast uh we have to
dance sing calculate and drum our way
out of the circumstances into which we
have fallen and uh to the degree that we
can celebrate um the
irrational the feminine the
unconscious the
transpersonal and even the Psychedelic
to the degree that we can celebrate
these things we are giving permission
for the order that is in nature to
manifest the plan wants to come to be we
have to get out of the way and what that
means is uh all the tricks in the book
to diminish ego to diminish ego as a
cultural ideal I mean ego is not a male
problem it's not a yepy problem it's not
a white people problem it's just a
problem and uh until
we get this higher
perspective we are going to uh continue
to Rattle the bars of our cage the
higher
perspective
uh depends on seeing things on a scale
of thousands of years and uh potentially
minions of light years a Cosmic scale
the correct scale the scale on which we
are truly operating I mean the minutia
of our personal lives is that it's that
our lives are an opening into a
transpersonal
opportunity you know I mean I've said
this in my smaller class I take the
notion of
Tantra seriously if by Tantra what we
mean is the shortcut path that life is
some kind of opportunity it's an opening
between
unbridgeable chasms of the unknown and
yet out of chaos for 20 40 70 years we
come into a domain of immense
opportunity it is a conundrum it is a
puzzle it is is something to be figured
out and I have the faith that if we can
figure this out we can uh somehow not
only make a better world for our
children but in some other profound way
we can even undo what has been done and
this would be the ultimate uh the
ultimate dream that somehow
we can discover An Elegant
Escape that
will leave us with the clear
understanding that uh the problem was an
illusion it was an
illusion it was the last
illusion what is what what in your
position is uh the effect of no myth uh
what what has happened to our society do
you think by virtue by we have the
obvious Cooperative evolutionary process
about us
everywhere and yet we don't have a myth
to
F what will happen to us if we don't get
a
myth well we do have a myth we just
don't call it that I mean our myth is
the faan myth that uh reason can ring
the secrets from nature and thereby make
man a God and this is the myth of modern
science
uh all of the alchemical dreams of the
16th century transformation of matter uh
prolongation of life so forth and so on
have been achieved by 20th century
science uh the problem is that our
myth is a fatal one that's what I'm
saying where's a myth that fits the
evolutionary concept that you're I hear
the calendar as a myth would fit yes
well this is what we do what happens to
us if we don't get one well what happens
to us if we don't get one is we just
drive this bcle right over the
cliff in the next uh in the next 40 or
50
years uh the the myth that is trying to
be born in science and it has to be born
there because that's the dominant Church
the myth that is trying to be born in
science is The Rebirth of the
spirit the spirit has been banished from
science and not that long don't don't
think that it's been that long as late
as the early 20th century there were
people like
d in Germany who were
embryologists who were looking at the
morphogenesis of form and they said
there must be what they call the Ilan
vital there had to be a vital spark
there had to be a indestructible
something there well then of course DNA
came along to explain that no no it
isn't that at all it's just these
proteins are uncoded and so forth but
um Spirit has never really died in
certain branches of biology and
psychology you see there are problems
for science the chief problem is this
one that I can hold out my hand that I
can tell you that I'm going to close it
and that this
happens what you see is mind over matter
what you see is free will you see mind
willing matter to behave
and it happens within the confines of
the body Paranormal Activity appears to
be going on nobody none of these Hot
Shots can explain how you can conceive
of turning your hand into a fist and
cause it to happen right there is the
defeat of 2,000 years of rational
scientific
philosophy and they just say yes that's
right but we make great fighter
ples so
um I see uh rert sheldrake is very
important in the process of building a
new scientific myth because what he is
saying is on one level completely
outlandish on another level he completes
a program that has been going on since
the
1850s tonight I talked about biology and
evolution but there were parallel events
in the 19th century going on in the
field of the study of magnetism and
electricity and people like Faraday and
Helm Holtz and James Clerk Maxwell were
discovering
Fields well fields are
extremely
um sort of metaphysical phenomena I mean
they are
invisible they pervade all space uh they
can't be seen and yet instruments can be
seen to detect them and not only that we
can transmit music and voice hundreds of
miles right now this room is
interpenetrated by hundreds and hundreds
of longdistance telephone calls high
frequency radio Transmissions high
frequency television we see none of this
if we we had told if you had told
someone in the 1850s that in the 20th
century people would live in an ocean of
invisible vibrational energy carrying
messages over thousands of miles they
would not have believed it sheld Drake
is simply saying that the part of
reality that science has hither to been
unable to account for is going to have
to be accounted for by adding a field
into the already allowed fields which
are the electromagnetic field basically
the electromagnetic spectrum well uh
this field which sheldrake wants to
establish is called a morphogenetic
field it means that somehow the history
of this glass is
attendant upon it the history of the
glass has followed it here this evening
as has the history of the pillow and
your history and your history and that
we are in fact not uh that the past is
present in the present that in fact the
present is somehow a Cascade of effects
coming out of the past not along the
lines of causal declension cause and
effect but also in this other way and uh
I think that there's a lot to this and I
think that uh uh eventually sheldrake
will be heard as yet he's unable to
stride to the Blackboard and write the
equations for the morphogenetic field
but this could come in time and when it
does it will
elucidate the hidden Dimension that so
bedevils our understanding because it
will
explain why things are as they
are that they are as they are because
they are a wavefront out of the past
meeting uh the the uh boundary
constraints of the present
situation the the whole my own personal
effort to restart a dialogue on the
Psychedelic issue is because I believe
that
psychology has uh
reduced its field of uh expertise
unnecessarily by seeking to see
everything as an adjunct to the
functional or dysfunctional human
personality in other words the we don't
know what the mind is the notion that it
arises out of the brain is something
that the reductionists hypothesized with
SH Harington in the
20s my God they've had 60 years to make
good on this and they've gotten
nowhere you know how long do you beat a
hypothesis before you Proclaim it a dead
horse you know same thing with molecular
biology I mean DNA was decoded in
1950 35 years ago and you know has
molecular biology taken a significant
step sense I mean yes I know about
operons and all that stuff but that's
really the details no understanding of
the mechanisms of Life have emerged out
of reductionist biology and and no
understandings of the mechanisms of Mind
thought and cognition have emerged out
of reductionist
psychology so what we're going to have
to admit and this is a tough thing but
this is what goes along with
intellectual revolutions is the
inadequacy of the present models and the
Paradigm
reformers are in for big trouble because
these paradigms can't be reformed these
paradigms have to be junked it's junk
it's worthless I mean it's fine if you
want to make fighter planes but what
does that prove about your knowledge of
the nature of being it doesn't prove
anything it's just a cultural artifact
so I think the myth that is seeking to
be born is The Rebirth of the spirit and
it's a strange thing because we all feel
it we all know it but we live in such a
topdown Ecology of knowledge that until
Time Magazine proclaims The Rebirth of
the spirit nobody's going to cop to
what's going
on yeah intuition is this same kind of
thing I mean the feminine is the same
thing I mean I don't want to burden this
group because you haven't stuck with me
over days and days but what I'm saying
in my what I think of as course is that
we had a symbiotic
relationship as recently as 20,000 years
ago with a vegetable mind a a a an
organized intelly a goddess a spirit
whatever you want to call it a a a mind
that was brutally truncated our
symbiotic relationship was brutally
truncated by climatological and
historical factors that caused us to
fall from that State of Grace ecological
balance symbiosis into you know the
wandering herd of car thieves that we
are
and
uh our our own we our existential
discomfort our
angst is a product of this severing of
our relationship to Spirit we are the
children of a dysfunctional
relationship that we have to bring to
the surface and and you know if you are
what I imagine an ordinary person this
will be begin to sound prep this will
start out sounding
Preposterous begin sounding menacing and
I hope end up convincing you uh
we are
worthless without a
stabilizing uh umbilical connection to
the Mind At Large in nature and the way
we have always achieved this is through
Shamanism natural magic and ecstasy this
is in fact what ecstasy is ecstasy is
being in the presence of the other and
the other is not a philosophical
hypothesizes notion the other
is the thing we share this planet with
that we we as a culture have not
glimpsed for a thousand years because
we've returned treated into walled
cities and walled languages and walled
idea systems we knowwhere come
tangential to the Flesh of the earth
when we do alone in the wilderness uh
then it overwhelms us it moves us it
terrifies us because we have been so
long away from it so this is what the
reclamation is about the spirit is not
some Mery fairy notion floating above
everything I mean the the spirit is
something which when it enters into your
uh crosssection of reality it leaves
your knees knocking and your heart
pounding I mean the the path with heart
is the path that
astonishes and that uh that sense of
astonishment can only come from another
from uh a lover or an other it cannot
come out of the self so is the other
questions on all of this your section
where you're covered Evolution mhm you
see you impli that this was the time to
really take some um intention with
respect to the direction of our
Evolution and I wonder if maybe that's
just an illusion whose time has
come and it's part of the illusion of
separateness and the process will go on
and this is part of the the process to
have the illusion that we actually been
play
with well we won't know till we try but
what we have very very suddenly almost
overnight put in place is number one a
entirely global system for collecting
information about reality and ourselves
we never had this before we didn't even
have it 30 years ago uh now you can find
out what's going on you can go if
necessary anywhere you need to go within
72 hours you can be on the ground almost
anywhere on Earth checking out what's
going on in the meantime uh
anthropological data sociological data
climatological data demographic data
political data defense strategy data all
of this stuff is available we now know
at least what cards are in play and this
is the first time this has been so we
are now a global culture you know from
the rainforests of the Amazon to the
wastes of the Kalahari from gnome to
Santiago it's one family one people a a
a nuclear power explosion that happens
in the western Soviet Union is is
measured 2 weeks later in Johannesburg
and everywhere else on the planet so I
think we are living under extraordinary
conditions that there are opportunities
in place the other thing is you know
we're connecting 9 million computers a
month are being connected together now
people think that computers are Office
Machines but all of our technology is an
excretion of the imagination
all of our technology is the
condensation of ideological intention
and the fact that we now have turned our
attention to information the true stuff
of reality is a hopeful sign for three
centuries we've been obsessed with
matter we thought that was the true
stuff of reality well it turns out
that's just you know nonsense a flawed
uh philosophic iCal premise gave us this
bias in favor of materialism but with
information changes can really be made
and also information informs people uh
I'm very
much uh enamored of the notion of the
meme a meme is the smallest unit of an
idea it is to ideas what genes are to
proteins genes make proteins memes make
ideas and uh the way you uh encourage a
meme is the way you encourage a protein
you replicate it there are two ways of
replicating memes you can tell somebody
and they will tell somebody or you can
tell two people you can repeat yourself
or you can tell a bunch of people people
and the idea is that we are now the
global meme pool is now in place all
ideas are in
competition and it's a Level Playing
Field this is to my mind what accounts
for the overnight evaporation of
Marxism this was a meme which could not
survive on a Level Playing Field when
the playing field was leveled meaning
when a free press was allowed
that was it for that Meme that was like
you know trying to sell flying pigs uh
uh in
Brooklyn just people are too
smart so it's not going to happen so I
believe then that memes compete with
each other and that the best ones uh are
the ones which rise to the top I have a
real faith that on that ideology in this
case will mirror biology and that more
and more complex and well adapted and
efficient and co-adaptive and mutually
self-reinforcing and uh Mutual uh
Community feedback and all of these
things that the memes which support the
which maximize these uh evolutionary
goals will fall naturally into place and
so uh the this thing which happened in
China was a struggle about the meme meme
because
democracy is the idea that gives
permission for all the memes to compete
I mean democracy is very close to the
heart of any Anarchist you know Plato
said you can always tell a democracy
when you approach them from the sea
because Unchained dogs run on the warf
well what he was referring to was the
chaos and the disorder of democracies so
uh releasing memes into a competitive
environment is very important every
government on Earth no matter what a
bunch of repressive totalitarian
militaristic clowns they may actually be
they have to give lip service to the
idea that they support a free press and
free exchange of information and so
forth and so on the battle over that has
been won now it's about how we interpret
what we call Victory nevertheless uh as
the little people in the world I think
it behooves all of us to seek to promote
this process wherever possible if you
have a good idea say it for God's sake
say it I mean we're drowning for lack of
good ideas we need every good idea we
can get if the future is not going to be
made of good ideas it's going to be made
of bad ideas and we've seen enough of
what that can bring history is a
digression history is the briefest of
all natural phenomena it began 10 15,000
years ago and appears as though it will
quench itself within 500 years it is
obviously
a self funneling process that digs its
walls higher and higher because it is
going towards some kind of transcendence
it is a metamorphosis it is not a steady
state history is some kind of process
balanced on a pinnacle and it either
goes back I suppose into uh speechless
animal organization if we blow up the
world or it it turns into something else
but it is not something to be maintained
it is transitory and designed to be so
it's like a birth it's a pro it's it
tears the planet apart it contorts the
people undergoing it it you know before
it's over uh the heavy metals are ripped
out of the surface of the Earth the
forests are cut down this thing happens
and then let us hope it is over and we
and we go to some less materialistic
less destructive phase uh this is why
you know the question that the
psychedelics raise for each of us as
individuals is the question that the
culture is going to have to answer
collectively in time as well it is what
are we when we can be anything we can
imagine I don't know I think we are
surrounded by mystery I think the the
the psychedelics because they enlarge
the dimension of mind they bring the
mystery in close they allow us to
contemplate possibilities that we would
never have contemplated because they
give us the power of the imagination and
the data how can we take these new uh
datum that enter experience and
integrate them meaningfully into
ourselves well I think that the the way
you do this is by realizing that the
drama that is unfolding must be a human
drama so for instance uh the the
entities that are glimpsed in these uh
exotic psychedelic states that inform
from the shamans and so forth it we we
say it's another dimension and we
hypothesize then that these are
extraterrestrials or demons or plant
Spirits we never
face the fact that to redeem our own
anxiety they have to be something more
than plant Spirits they have to be
something more than demons they have to
be uh something more than friendly
extraterrestrials uh my own private
opinion about this is I think that that
what psychedelics in these high do
correct set setting situations carry us
into is an Ecology of Souls
this is what we're
seeing I mean if that's not a shocking
enough way of putting it how about this
what we're seeing is the dead those
people those things in that place are
our
ancestors it's as though there is an
ecology and a cycle of energy that
reaches Beyond visible life there is an
Ecology of many dimensions that life is
transformation into a transcendental
realm that those
self-transforming jeweled elf machines
that are uh manufacturing The Talking
fabri Eggs and the Liquid Crystal lates
of multiple fractal Dimensions those
are dead
friends these places lie just over the
hill this is what uh is meant when it's
said that shamans know how to pass
through the doors that the dead pass
through daily that the adventure of
being I think is not going to stop with
saving the rainforest or feeding
everybody or going off to our tourists
that the inventure of being persists
through time this would explain the
freakish
immediacy and the weirdness the charge
the numinosity of the contact in
hyperspace if this is an Ecology of
souls if what we are seeing is in fact
what we always thought we would never
see or know which is uh information
about the next stage of existence then
this is a tremendous salutary Force
pouring into existence and when you
think about it isn't this the most
likely hypothesis we know how improbable
extraterrestrials are and uh and the
only organized intellect kees we have
ever contacted or had familiarity with
are people therefore isn't it likely
that what we're dealing with are people
people well then hypotheses multiply
perhaps they're people from the future
perhaps that's the future and then we
like that because it holds everything in
the dimensions we're familiar with the
idea that it's the dead is a little more
Hackle raising a little more peculiar a
little more heartful a little more hard
to assimilate and probably closer to the
mark that it is an Ecology of Souls
that's where we go that's why they can
make objects out of language it's
because it is the flesh becoming
word and then the word becoming flesh
that this is a cycle between two
dimensions of existence and only the
shamans know what is happening because
only they operate outside the confines
of profane history only they make the
journey into the Matrix where for some
reason the living and the dead are
co-existent well this you know just
seems like raving Madness except that
this is what every Anthropologist has
collected in his note books from every
preliterate group
worldwide they're into the ancestors not
extraterrestrials not voyagers from the
far future but the dead and it is um it
has the Ring of truth to me this would
explain this intuition that the
psychedelics somehow have a historical
role to
play
because deny it as we may wish to we are
in a great dying
It is Well
Advanced so then you know there's this
sobering realization that my God what we
feared most is possibly about to happen
well then if we believe in the Dow if we
believe in uh the unobstructed unfolding
of things from the first moments of the
universe then what we have to do is take
hold and and face the
music and I don't think it's that bad
but I think there's a hard swallow in
the transition there is a leap into this
other
possibility so it is not simply an
opportunity for a political revolution
or a social Revolution or an ecological
Revolution it's all that it's much more
it has to do with deconstruct in the
dualism of life and death
itself and creating the onos of a new
reality that is based on the presence of
Eternity that's what eternity is
eternity is the present at hand
Hyperdimension beheld and it is found to
be a domain of magic and caring and M
Hiser that mingles life and death as the
only possible way of overcoming the
contradiction it has
always in hindsight appalled me as I
when I go into the truly deep
psychedelic
places how casual one becomes about
death not that you seek it but that it
seems almost a Tre trial issue because
these two things are seen to be all of a
piece there is
continuity but there is
astonishment we do not recognize
ourselves the shaman alone has the
privileged vantage point to know what he
beholds and I think that's how we Define
where we are on the shamanic path do you
know what you behold I mean some people
come down and
say pretty pictures other people come
down and say dancing mice
hieroglyphs do we know what we behold we
need to know what we behold because
inevitably we
become what we behold
