I got you with the title I promise this
is not just going to be old man doesn't
like what the kids are doing these days
and wishes they'd get off his lawn but
it's also not going to be academic
linguist tries to convince you that
anything goes and everything is fine and
nothing matters there's a lot of that
going around too and regular viewers of
the channel will know that I am deeply
annoyed at my colleagues' tendency to on
your leg and tell you it's raining so
I'm going to make another claim that
sounds spicy gen Alpha slang is stupid
and that's okay I'm a millennial and
ours was too that second part is really
important yes some slang is stupid but
that's okay so I need to talk about what
exactly I mean because it's not what you
think all slang is to a large extent
based on just not understanding stuff or
intentionally doing stuff wrong scare
quotes very much intended these are
pretty much the two Pathways for making
slang so today I'm going to talk about
what slang even is how it happens and
whether gen Alpha slang is Sigma or mid
I'll have a word by word explainer of
most of the purportedly gen Alpha slang
you're likely to hear at the end so
stick around for that if you're
interested in it I'm Dr Taylor Jones and
this is skibbidy Jones I'm just kidding
this is language
Jones if you're watching this you've
probably seen one of those videos where
they ask some white 10-year-old about
life and the kid just spews gibberish
the drip wasn't as good probably like
mad lit on God you don't need me to tell
you that every generation has their own
catchphrases and slang that they use
precisely because old people I guess
that includes me now don't or at least
they think that old people don't more on
that later but what's going on when a
child explains that Riz is when you're
look maxing well first we have to Define
what slang even refers to because we are
very much not on the same page about
that then we can get into where it comes
from how it works and what should be
done about all these skibby Kender
pardon my French first there's not a
great linguistic definition of slang
there's dictionary definitions but
linguists don't all really agree and
dictionaries just describe how people
use the word anyway they're descriptive
not prescriptive and they're usually
very late to the party the important
thing I want to say here is that the
word slang is used to describe way more
things than it should be so as a
linguist I'll say that for the purposes
of this video today we can Define slang
tentatively as words and phrases that
come into Vogue among a subset of the
population which they may use as
signifier as of identity whether it's
age group race sexual orientation or
whatever and they eventually fall out of
fashion because people are consciously
aware of their use slang is what
linguist would call marked people notice
it what it isn't is different dialects
or how different social classes or
ethnic groups speak but those often get
conflated so just so we're clear if you
take something like black English it's
an entire set of Interlocking Systems
and it has its own slang but what makes
black English or Appalachian English or
Yiddish English or whatever a dialect
and not slang is that they all have
phonological patterns that affect the
pronunciation of every word they all
have their own syntactic rules with
different grammatical patterns and
they're fully Interlocking Systems most
of which work below the level of
Consciousness for most people we're not
usually aware of it that lack of
awareness actually helps create slang
words as I'll explain in a minute so
slang is something people are sort of
self-conscious about using sometimes it
sticks around and becomes a permanent
feature of the language like cool which
started as slang in black English in the
1930s and was picked up by the white
mainstream in the 1950s and sometimes it
gets really popular and then people drop
it completely because they think it's
old hat like dig which comes from the
same language variety at the same time
possibly originally from a wooff word
meaning to understand but now it's only
used as professional jargon by Jazz
musicians you dig and there's different
ways that slang comes into being but
almost all of them come from
misunderstanding something somewhere
along the way or in intentionally
choosing to Break Stuff let me explain
first a lot of language change comes
just from noise in the signal linguists
are really careful not to speak
negatively of people and we tend to talk
about languages like species that change
but ultimately the way language changes
most of the time is that kids don't
quite get something we don't think about
it that way but it's effectively
somebody somewhere was a little slow on
the uptake so phonological changes
happen because kids approximate how the
speech communities their born into to
speak but kind of sort of slightly
missed the mark and eventually entire
Generations might just not make
distinctions that their parents do make
there's a vow merger slowly spreading
east across Pennsylvania while we speak
where kids just don't differentiate
between two vowels that their parents do
leave me a comment if you know which
vowels while I sip my coffee and the
same happens for words we have fancy
terms for it in linguistics like analogy
but it's really misunderstanding and
running with it let's see how this works
with some real slang take a word like
drip now it means fashionable attire
usually a sort of crisp but casual look
this is just analogy happening over and
over again start with a metaphor like
dripping with finesse meaning you have a
lot of finesse so much that you're
saturated with it this is not new baby
boomers say things like dripping with
condescension or dripping with class or
dripping with Charisma or dripping with
finesse on the whole these are positive
not the condescension one but you get
the idea so given a ton of Expressions
that use that dripping metaphor is
pretty easy to get something like I got
that drip where it ends up being a
certain junad that deut pardon my French
you're more likely to hear that kind of
word play in Black communities but
that's not always the source from there
it's very easy to make the jump to
drippy clothes which constitute the
outward markers of that trip and finally
to just having drip which then gets
reanalyzed as nice clothes specifically
and nothing else that is not the Riz
that often accompanies drip if you were
paying attention and most of us weren't
that happened in real time in the last
10 years helped Along by not one but two
hit songs that make use of that metaphor
and for the last 10 years or so people
have been using drip in ambiguous but
positive ways and everybody just has to
figure it out from Context Clues no
surprise it's now come around to
something concrete and tangible second
regarding the breaking things linguists
sometimes call this anti- language the
classic example is the word bad meaning
its antonym good there's a ton of
reasons people might do this and anti-
language crops up over and over again
lot has been written about anti-
language and New World slavery and the
cultures that came out of the resistance
to that but effectively that's how you
get good things described as bad sick
ill dope and so on it's also how you get
Funk there's also another kind of
misunderstanding I didn't mention before
which comes in two flavors both of which
are forms of What's called the recency
illusion basically if it's new to me it
must be new so when you Google gen Alpha
slang you get Stan defined as an aid fan
one problem this comes from a song by a
Gen X rapper born in 1972 and the song
was popular in the year 2000 I get that
the person writing the 50 gen Alpha
slang terms you need to know article
that's sitting at the top of Google's
results isn't American and wasn't born
yet so she doesn't remember the absolute
ubiquity of Stan but the origins of
things just get collectively memory hold
in general the sper version of this is
that things different ethnic groups have
been saying for years sometimes
literally centuries are attributed to
little white teenagers apologies Aiden
but you did not invent the word clout
and it has meant personal influence
since 1946 lowkey has been around since
1895 Chi you can have so every slang
explainer is riddled with words that
have existed in other dialects for a
long time or just in academic English
but that people encounter a few times
and begin to use often wrong I'm talking
finna I'm talking extra which my ass got
called in the early 90s I'm talking lit
I'm talking lowkey I'm talking sus I'm
talking simp which again you can hear in
hip-hop from
1993
damn pretty much if it's actually slang
and black people are saying it now
you're going to hear it from everybody
in the world quite literally in about 20
years it's like clockwork remember when
by Felicia got big in 2014 that's the
20-y year anniversary of Friday it's not
all from African-American speech though
don't get me wrong The Beach Boys were
talking about Good Vibes the 1960s but
Jen Alpha thinks they invented Vibes
vibing and Vibe checks I saw sleeper
listed as genen Alpha slang explained as
something that is unexpectedly good or
impressive often used to describe under
ated or overlooked items experiences or
people great except it's used with that
meaning in a June 19 1948 issue of
billboard magazine talking about a
sleeper hit it's not just kids and
amateur lexicographers who miss these
things linguists do too as well Geneva
smitherman has an excellent book on
black English but she incorrectly
attributes Diva to black English and not
you know Italian and don't get me
started on her explanation of Bogart
Humphrey is not included and a ton of
gen Alpha slang is from games and
Computing as well I would have said said
video games but honestly Dungeons and
Dragons is punching way above its weight
maxing as a suffix as in his looks
maxing comes from maxing out your stats
on a given parameter now it just means
doing or being something to an extreme
me what's me it's when you look Max and
that brings me to another driver of
slang there's a pattern that goes by a
bunch of different names and Linguistics
but I think of it as all variations of
the same thing yerson cycle the
euphemism treadmill basically something
isn't thought of as being as intense as
it once was and the whole system shifts
yerson cycle is when this happens to
negation and it's how you get French
moving from n as negation to n plus verb
plus ba to just B if you're studying
French I don't care what your textbook
says people barely ever say n now that's
how mid now means bad and not middling
if it's mid it's not good and what's not
good bad Sigma is a double
misunderstanding first you have the old
wolf about alpha males where
Alpha is the best and beta is
subordinate to Alpha and so on this is
debunked bull fake science about wolves
in captivity and is not at all
reasonable as a way to think about
people but we'll set that aside in
statistics Sigma is used to indicate the
standard deviation get it s for standard
anyway back in the day you might have
heard people talk about say a three
sigma event something very unlikely
pension does this in gravity's Rainbow
so it's not super new misunderstand all
of that and when you go to intensify
Alpha instead of super Alpha which mixes
Latin and Greek or hyper Alpha you get
people saying Sigma also what does Sigma
mean means that Alpha it started with
ridiculous influencers online doing the
if men were wolves I'd be the pack
leader thing but on steroids now it's
diffused out from there and just means
generically very good this is also how
you get slay when Jazz musicians have
been saying something good is killing
for decades anti- language you killed
that means you did it very well you
completely dispensed with the task but
now we have to intensify it you bodied
it you slayed you don't have friends you
have a squad music was funky for a while
and then you get a tune like filthy
McNasty add to this mix baby talk what
linguists call
hyperarticulation while I'm on dulu
let's talk about Karens people have used
stereotypical names as standin for kinds
of people for way longer than a lot of
people inum including some linguists I
know so Karen and Stan and Chad are
familiar contemporary archetypes but
when I was growing up there was shenin
and Becky Becky is like Karen's mom I
guess and my parents generation could
refer to Gan as Bruce and mus Ians in
the 1940s talk about Jack and Mo and cab
callow was calling lames Jeffs in the
1930s by the way he was also calling
Things Groovy sorry Boomers second to
last there's also just changing parts of
speech by analogy fire went from a noun
to an adjective Flex went from a verb to
a noun but if you think about what
you're doing when you're flexing usually
posing to show off you can understand
what a flex is my age and upbringing
would call it stunt on someone but it's
the same idea finally you get to honest
to goodness genuine madeup slang words
and I can really only find about three
or four of those for Gen Alpha and I'm
not convinced that gen Alpha had
anything to do with two or three out of
them Chi Fleek and skibbidy and maybe
Yeet leave me a comment if I'm leaving
any out the point of this video is not
to beat up on gen Alpha because picking
on kids really isn't a good look maybe
we shouldn't be propping up teenagers
and children as Arbiters of culture and
asking them to explain a language to us
when they're still kind of learning that
language and honestly every generation
does this the Baby Boomers think they
invented groovy so we've seen that slang
can come from honest to goodness new
words but also misunderstanding
borrowing truncation and just simply
giving a word more recognition of slang
even when it's not new not to mention
changing the part of speech Let's go
through the top Google hits for Gen
Alpha slang and see it in action first
the second Google hit because it's just
a top 10 skibby it's a madeup word that
you don't need to know the origin story
of because it's complicated and boring
its meaning is not yet actually
consistent so it's more of a
generational marker my professional
opinion is that you will not need to
worry about this one because it will be
cringe extremely soon Riz is a
truncation of Charisma that's it Phantom
tax everyone will tell you it's grabbing
someone else's food and it's named after
a streamer Phantom but nobody seems to
get the pun that it's a phantom tax
which is a phrase that has existed for a
while what can I say people who write
slang explainers are usually not very
good at lexicography yeah you'll be told
that this is an acronym for girl your
ass is thick which like maybe but it's
about as likely as fat being an acronym
for pretty hot and tempting it's
originally from borrowing God as in God
damn the thing you say when a shorty is
fat if you're a millennial ratioed this
is 100% from Twitter and primarily used
by Gen X and Millennials cap This Is A
Lie its origin should be transparent to
people but evidently isn't it's a facade
literally a cap is a false front like on
teeth cap is literally the next
iteration of fronting goated this is
actually actually from an initialism
which is rare greatest of all time it's
now changed part of speech to past
participle which means expect back
formations soon big yikes yikes goes
back to the rumors and I have no idea
why people think gen Alpha invented it
gen Alpha is skibbidy yikes is Scooby
Sigma male I already explained this one
and now let's go through the number one
Google result an explainer written by
the delightfully named febriana ramadana
something that only happens once every
33 years I had to look that one up eight
this is to do something well the origin
is to do it thoroughly and to my
knowledge this comes from gay black
Ballroom culture in New York in the 80s
as a lot of these will basic conforming
to mainstream Trends in the '90s in
black English and to my knowledge this
is still the case it has the additional
meaning of stupid deeply ironic that
people who were called basic missed what
they were actually being called and
self-identify as such this is also not
at all new to gen Alpha notice how this
works by analogy though basic is roughly
equivalent to remedial your basic while
everyone else has moved on to Advanced
things bet transparently from you bet
black folks did this first by at least a
decade and then it spread Big W do I
really need to explain this bop a catchy
or enjoy a song This goes back to at
least the 1940s in black English busen
this is from busting like bursting you
just no longer have to say with flavor
or whatever this is one of those
instances where a person's accent their
dialect gets reinterpreted as being a
new and fun word just like B cap we
already did that Chi this one I actually
think they made up good job jenzy clout
the author is confused and this has been
around for almost 100 years it's
originally from a word that meant to
whack something cringe this is now an
adjective and not a verb but that's
literally the only difference most
likely it's a shortening of cringe
inducing which was popular about 20
years ago dulu that's delusional with
cuu Loco reduplication rupu drip surely
you remember this extra over the top
literally exactly what it sounds like
instead of saying he's extra wild today
you can just leave off the descriptive
for a vague sense of doing too much too
much what just too much also via black
English where it started at slang and
has been around for a long time facts
another instance of mistaking an accent
for a new word it's fact
a general expression of agreement as in
what you were saying are
facts finna this is not slang at all but
a future modal in quite a few varieties
of English originally from fixing
oneself to do something it's not
originally from black English to my
knowledge but it is prevalent among
black English speakers in both the US
South where it originated and the north
where it's marked as being primarily
black but that's changing it's primarily
Southern though it's just the Great
Migration coming into play here fire
another part of speech jump so now it's
an adjective meaning good Flex another
part of speech jump as I explained above
glow up this is a makeover in French
they have the imagined English word
relooking it's like that Gucci sounds
vaguely evocative of good and is a
luxury brand I'm surprised this didn't
happen earlier ghost historically this
was to leave think the little cloud in
the shape of a character that just ran
off in a Warner Brothers cartoon but it
was borrowed into the mainstream from
you guessed it black English where it
now means in the mainstream to stop
responding or to stand someone up ick
this was used by C callow in the 1930s
why are we attributing it to gen Alpha
it's the golden generation or whatever
The Lost Generation you're literally 100
years late on this it's giving I have no
idea why it's hard for people to
recognize that this means exuding and
literally the same as giving off but
without the preposition off lit how do
you get something that's fire this is by
analogy with starting something like a
firework or an engine it goes lowkey I
mentioned this earlier and it originated
with music at least according to
atmology online although I always
thought it had to do with keying as in
lighting contrast in film low
vibrational Bringing Down the energy
this is just physics used as a metaphor
although it does seem popular in
particular among hots for whom vibration
is more of a spiritual thing mid this is
the euphemism treadmill at work
eventually good and bad will be Sigma
and good mood this is a single statement
in response to something to my knowledge
it originated with Gen X and was used to
death by Millennials it's a response as
though you are captioning whatever
you're looking at or describing as in
this is a picture of my mood peep are
you kidding me again it's cab Callaway
at this point I should make a video
about slang from the 1930s jeepers
creepers where'd you get those people
period this is something that Boomers
used to indicate finality and whatever
they're proclaiming the one with a t
period is just a way of representing an
accent I have an entire publication on
what's going on there called tweets as
graffiti where I compare black Twitter
and graffiti at Pompei if anyone's
interested in that I'll leave a link
below that's on period is a version of
that uses a uniquely black American
grammatical structure it's kind of slang
but also the same idea Charisma enough
said salty also not new pretty sure
Melville used this sheesh this is where
the fact that these lists are not always
made by native English speakers really
shows this is again the recency illusion
and this is a taboo deoration of G from
Jesus from the 1950s for taboo
deformations definitely check out last
week's video shook this is literally the
same as shaken with exactly the same
meaning it's the participle and it's
just being borrowed from other dialects
go ahead and guess which one gave us
Shook and woke and turn shooketh this is
a playful variant and the ending is one
that comes from the fact that literally
nobody seems to understand the basics of
Middle English anymore it's a pet peeve
of mine for a different day SLE I
already merked this sleeper also very
very old it's dark horse snack a snack
is something that looks so good you
could gobble it up now apply that to
people it's what my grandmother would
have called a dish but I guess you don't
get as much anymore on account of
inflation snatched looking good
originally from snatching wigs from
black gay Ballroom culture so like 1980s
New York Squad I already explained this
one to my unit by the way expect
Replacements like unit team Etc in
coming years Stan an obsessed fan which
is itself short for fanatic sus a
truncation of suspicious this has
somehow become perceived as slang when I
definitely learned it as just a regular
word in the90s and had the impression
that it was used that way as far back as
at least the 1960s T gossip from a
spelling of the letter t for Truth at
least apocryphally from bam culture
thirsty eager needy pressed this one
should be obvious you want something
it's a physical metaphor Vibe and his
variations all have to do with Good
Vibrations woke I have a whole video on
this but it's like Shook and that it's
literally just the participle awake just
borrowed from black English so now the
mainstream has awake and woke with
different meanings when woke was just
awake being used metaphorically ye an
anopia used to express excitement or
when throwing something by the way I
spelled Anam anopia correctly the first
time in writing my script so like A+ for
me anyway my understanding is that yeet
originated with video games along with
things like NPC as non-player character
and a handful of other terms having gone
to the top genalpha slang according to
google there's a few things that should
stand out first most of it isn't gen
Alpha second the overwhelming majority
of slang items can be figured out of use
context clues but also there's
ironically a danger there because these
things sometimes become slang because
people used context clues and got it
almost but not quite right so yeah gen
Alpha slang is kind of stupid but that's
okay that's how slang happens it's
either misunderstandings or changing
parts of speech or intentionally obusca
but that's what makes it fun it's
novelty tickles our brains and then it
gets really old really fast and we just
stop saying it or it becomes so
mainstream that we don't think of it as
slang anymore like fan or cool if you
like this video please like And
subscribe and leave me a comment with
anything I left out or with your
favorite slang bonus points if you
invent plausibly gen Alpha slang that's
not real like that one guy thanks to all
my patrons you can become one at
patreon.com language Jones or you can
support the channel right here with
super thanks and super chat if you liked
this video YouTube thinks that you'll
like this one and it's their business to
know these things until next time don't
be a mergatroid Jeff Daddyo
