welcome everyone to another voices with
REI I'm here with somebody who's been
here before Kai and uh we had an amazing
conversation this is part of a series of
ongoing conversations I'm having um that
often get into dialogos on ifs and
related topics around Ally work and
parts work and the dialogical nature of
the self I've recorded one recently with
Paul vanderlay on just this topic uh
it'll come out shortly uh recorded one
with Mark Lewis which will come out um
so been dying yeah diving very deeply in
all of this um and uh so uh first of all
KRA great to have you back um why don't
you just tell us again a little bit
about yourself you know your credentials
and um you uh how you're in like how
your work and my work are connected in
your mind and things like that very good
to have you back it was a great pleasure
talking with you last time thank you
John thanks for having me it's a it's a
pleasure to be back and to to you know
to talk with you again so yeah I'm
Castro Mirai you introduced me I'm um
clinical researcher I'm a
psychotherapist and I'm I'm also a
teacher at a university so I'm doing
this kind of you know three things
teaching researching and treating like
doing
Psychotherapy and um basically I have a
very broad spectrum of interests uh in
my work so it's on the one hand it's ifs
related I'm by training I'm a behavioral
therapist and I do combine certain
things I work especially with
adolescence and um adolescent um
residential crisis center where I'm
working with heavily impaired
adolescence from 14 to 18 that have like
you know personality disorders severely
traumatized at the same time also doing
research on ATHC Dynamics it's called
and it's basically it's it's the
psychological research of self-organized
criticality I would say so oh wow yeah
yeah so what I'm what I'm looking at is
um how how emotions and affect how they
fluctuate and how you know the Tipping
Point comes probably doing therapy it
can be doing therapy where things shift
where a phase transition um takes place
and I'm looking at this from you know a
more technical perspective a dynamical
systems theoretical perspective so
that's the technical part of my work and
yeah besides that I'm deeply deeply
interested in and the question of
meaning basically and um yeah this has
drawn me to your work John I've been an
avid follower of your work for many
years now and yeah it's a pleasure to
talk to you so yeah I'm again I'm this
this topics of meaning and spirituality
and how it can be how science and
spirituality can be conjoined again
that's deeply deeply relevant to
me all right let's talk about this and
I'm going to talk to you about uh
self-organizing
yeah I've been doing some recent stuff
on that but let's start with the ifs and
there's a couple questions that that are
come to mind we sort of laugh left off
last time and you brought this up off
camera with a question that I really
wrestled with both with with Mark Lewis
and uh with Paul Vander clay and um and
you know and feel free to sort of you
know fumble your way around because they
were too and that's not an insult to
them that's not an insult to them like
there was this like like this is a hard
question and and I'm going to well
there's two questions one is the
question of self-deception yeah with ifs
and the other is the question of
self-deception in is in ifs okay so
there's the one is can people use ifs to
significantly deceive themselves
 themselves uh there's a new
paper out that uh chat gp4 is basically
not it's doing bullshitting where it's
making things Salient and indifferent to
the truth and making us very prone to
that and it's very dangerous already um
and so there's that question about uh uh
about self-deception that way but also
can the parts deceive us that's
self-deception in ifs can can they
deceive us can they lie to us if they
have some intentionality and if they
have goals which are sometimes
orthogonal or perhaps even opposite of
ours could they deceive and lie to us
and then that brings up the the question
that is in the in lurking in the
background of a lot of religious
people's thinking when they confront ifs
which is the possibility of evil um in
all of this and then that will I think
if we get into it that in the right way
that we can shade into the second topic
which is you know ifs and spirituality
and and and and things like that but
let's start with the first one so what
about you know self-deception with ifs
and then we'll move into self-deception
in
ifs um I if I'm not mistaken it's it was
the even the last question you asked me
in the last conversation that we had yes
and um now I really had time to really
good to really sit with a question and I
really contemplated on it and meditated
on the question actually more deeply and
well first of all thank you for doing
that well thank you for asking because
it it really gripped me the question and
I think it it was interesting because I
was a little bit blindsided by the
question and I don't mean this in any
kind of you know reproachful sense or
you know but because I had an implicit
assumption and I projected like how you
know J Bei the you know the guy that
gives courses and you know dedicated
parts of his entire career to this
question is asking me about
self-deception so I I I I gave an
initial answer and I won you know State
my answer in in a second um but if you
allow John I want to First leave out the
ifs bit and address self-deception more
broadly and generally and then we can
Circle back to it if yeah yeah that
totally fair totally fair that's a
Socratic move let's step back and make
sure we're clear about our orientation
yeah because I also in you know I really
took the serious and I and I really not
only thought about it in an intellectual
sense I did practices on it on you know
how I can you know answer this how can I
address this question how can I get into
contact with this question and it's
you're really wetting my appetite you're
really wetting my appetite for this well
it was an ifs and let's say yungan
informed practice that I did there so
yeah so the answer to it is also in the
practice I would say and
um yeah as I as I said I was really
thinking about it and um so again to
reiterate my initial answer from last
time for the audience um part of my
answer was that I think we we really
have to reconnect to our body like
deeply inhabit the body again in this
Melo Ponte sense that you mentioned too
and um I also mentioned that we I think
that that communal feedback is really
necessary like social communal
feedback and um I still think it's a
good answer but I was I was dissatisfied
with it a little bit because I felt it's
incomplete there's something missing and
then it hit me when I you
know had my daydreaming and I you know
did my practices and all of that and um
so first of all I think this this
communal feedback is also something that
ties back to what we talked about last
time about vigotsky and Scaffolding
because well ifs is something like an
inner ology of communal feedback it's
like when we take the outer family
system or external family system serious
we build a scaffold to internalize these
stuff so I I really think that you know
external feedback systems like the
community they are important for for
correction right to for maybe not
self-correction but correction and
um and and and it was interesting
because I I think the scaffolding part
is important and something that hit me
is just the you know side note John is
that
um well the scaffold is important but
the goal is this internal
internalization because the goal is
self-governing you know know to be
self-governed and interestingly enough
John I realized recently that that's
actually the if I'm not mistaken I mean
you know people can correct me in the
comments if they're like but if I'm not
mistaken that's also the root of the
word God in farsy in Persian
it's like we say and in there is which
means self and and the term means
self-governing so it's like this
autopoetic thing of self-making
self-government and this is this is a
notion of God that
really that I always found meaningful
even as a teenager and even as a kid um
so that just as a side no I I still
think this that's a good one I I like
that so the the idea that God is sort of
fundamentally like autopoetic in that
sense not just self-ruling but
self-generative too and I mean I can see
what why that would appeal to somebody
um uh with you know with with deep
experience and reflection on you know
Yung and also ifs right because they I
can see that and and again neoplatonism
and the
philosophical
right Sufi and Mystic as well yeah and
and you know um so that was that was one
one thing that came to my mind it's that
it's about this self-government and
um so if you if you allow me that's
already that's already you're doing you
just to put a pin in it for
foreshadowing purposes I mean you're
already bringing a spiritual Dimension
to this because this is a way of like
being Godlike in this in The Virtuous
sense of the word yes being like God
participating in God's nature not just
representing and thinking it but
enacting what God is fundamentally in
some way is that a fair thing to say
absolutely and I think you you're spot
on when you say participate in it
because I think there is this danger of
again identifying with God you know self
being God but I think it's really a
participation setting up the inner
ecology and and the right constraints so
that this Spirit of intelligibility this
this this ultimate can unfold and help
us and ultimately that can be also the
scaffold too so that we can
self-actualize self-realize so yeah I
understand God in that sense at least
from this
perspective and okay so that's good to
excellent that's useful for where we're
heading but let's go back to what what
you want to say about self-deception so
I was sitting in the after our
conversation I was sitting I don't know
where I went but I was sitting in a
train and I was observing people and and
then I thought really thought about this
question of self-deception I really left
out the ifs part because I wanted to
understand self-deception first the
nature of
self-deception and if I'm not mistaken
and John you can correct me if I'm wrong
but I think fundamentally it's the
question about sinning would you agree
on that oh so I think like in the sense
of hara like you know missing the mark
kind of thing missing Mark so I well let
me let me respond because I think this
is an important distinction I think
there is
self-deception and then I think there is
a profound kind of
self-deception that begins to
progressively dehumanize us yeah and
make us incapable of properly connecting
to our Humanity to the our shared
humanity and to ultimate reality and
then when the self-deception becomes
like that right then I think uh it takes
on a kind of EX existential
psychological ethical and therefore
spiritual profundity and then I would
call it sin uh we become incapable in a
deep way of
realizing how deeply the self-deception
has become I so I don't want to say
things like you know when I you know I
deceive myself about thinking that
there's enough food in the fridge is
that a sin
well yeah yeah yeah it's you know I've
made use of rep the confirmation bias or
something like that it's definitely
self-deception but it but it's sin
because what you're doing is the
self-deception is making you miss the
mark of connecting to your Humanity
connecting to reality that's how I would
answer and that's that's how I was
thinking about it not so much from this
moral or ethical perspective like
reducing sin to just misdeed but
actually so my my view was that it's I
could be wrong about this but the image
that I had in that moment was that it
can be on a Continuum from certain
biases like cognitive biases that we
have to yes like really distorted views
that really um fuel Ms or you know are
the are the vehicle for these kind of
things we are exactly on the we are
exactly on the same page about this so
that to me is important because you know
it's the fundament of my argument or
what I was thinking about and and then
when I was observing the people in on
the train I realized well it's
interesting
because if we are all sinners which we
in some in a sense are me included and
those people in the train included how
come we
can still relatively live in a peaceful
manner I mean obviously right now in
parts of the world there are there isn't
so much peace and um but you know you
know to be fair it's still you know we
can still get get along um and why
hasn't all hell broke loose I was
thinking and I was wondering if there is
any solution to this problem of
self-deception at all because and then
then I realized really that it's a just
how you say it it's it's this perennial
it's an eternal I would say archetypal
struggle that we really struggle with
this and and then I thought well if
maybe if if there isn't a solution maybe
there can be a counterbalance like a
counter system that can at least balance
this out and then it hit me and I
thought what maybe the question could be
is is there something more relevant than
self-deception or more pertinent than
self-deception okay can I reply to two
those both of those point so yeah I
think the first again I think we're on
the same page I think I talked about
this in Awakening from the meeting
crisis yeah self when self-deception
like it's that parasitic process
processing and especially when it's
moving towards sin you need a very
comprehensive
counteractive uh like dynamical system
that can coun right yeah yeah yeah the
aold path exactly and and and and then
that idea uh that you just said about um
we we get to this state um where uh you
know we're sort of
incapable uh of of loving which uh like
I think of sin as a failure to love
wisely and so what happens is a lot of
our primary abilities get hijacked but
we're not completely bereft of Love yeah
um and so I mean this is sort of a
Buddhist Christian answer a Zen answer
Zen neoplatonic answer and and and
reason is bound up with love so I don't
mean it in the modern sense they're all
bound up together right there's a
possibility of uh of loving our way into
into a gically loving our way into
a A dhic dynamical system that can
counteract yeah the parasitic processing
and wake us up that was sort of my
response to both of the things you said
what do you think about that and
actually that was my that was this big
part of the answer I I arrived at it's
like if there is a Panacea then it's
love and I would add forgiveness not
only in this sense of I forgive you but
in this agapic sense of
forgiving yes very much I yeah that
struck me like well that could be if
there is a pendency then it it's love
well obviously we have to differentiate
between you know how you love and I
think you know the ability to love
wisely is absolutely spoton but but I
was thinking like well people do all we
deceive ourselves all the time and we
sin all the time right so I was thinking
well what what still helps us to keep
the world in balance and it's and it's
these and these are these small acts
like well H don't you don't think about
it it doesn't matter it's these small
needs of forgiveness and love that to me
balance out this deception that can also
you know that too can you know while I'm
saying this I I also again imagine it
being on this Continuum from bias
cognitive bias to those really big
misdeeds that maybe also need
forgiveness at times and yeah I want to
you can respond to well I was just going
to say and I think I think
correspondingly there's love and
forgiveness on a Continuum for a moment
of somebody steps in front of your way
to get on the bus and you say oh don't
worry about it all the way up to um the
profound kind of agapic forgiveness that
could end a war yes exactly exactly so
that's to me was really important to
again to ground me and to now think
about the more technical matters but I
was thinking of again this you know
committing the act of sin and
self-deception and and realizing that it
can also be quite traumatic if you do so
if we realize that we haven't properly
framed the world correctly the world
around us correctly and also and and
therefore the space you know of agency
and actions and this can often result in
remorse and guilt right so you realize
oh you know why did I do this yeah oh
I'm really feeling bad about this and
that to me this again necessitates at
you know some point if we talk about
like real relationships a real relation
also this again this counter counteract
of forgiving and loving so yeah yeah I
think that's right I mean uh brandom in
his book on Hegel talks about a spirit
of trust and how Hegel actually argues
that um
we we are we we we are the we that
becomes an I that is part of the we like
and that that and we and and that's
absolutely ultimately dependent upon um
trust and forgiveness acts of trust and
forgiveness that give us the basic
shared normativity so that reason can
actually be at work in the world and if
you don't have all of that reason has no
no purchase on people and it just
degenerates into sort of a a mechanical
and maniacal logical machinery or it
becomes this weird Twisted cleverness um
and things like that and that's exactly
right because I was thinking about
people who are maybe really clever
really logical maybe really successful
and I was thinking well I would choose
someone with the with his heart in the
in right place over someone who's really
smart but you know is able to play those
games you know anytime any day I would
still choose this person because to me
that's like the basis and do I probably
you probably know this this quote by
Terrence like this I am human and
nothing human is alien to me so this to
me is really a CREDO like to really get
to understand the person and and that's
you know and that's maybe the saue to
the to the question of how ifs also can
can respond to it
um but before I come to this I I wanted
to add to this to my initial answer I
think the missing piece for me was the
heart like really what what helps to
counteract or you know transcend
self-deception is if if things come from
this place from this place from this
place of from the heart and it's having
the heart in the right place to me
that well if any
practice that engages authentically in
this kind of you know let's call it
Agape in this kind of you know heart
space that practice to me can be deemed
virtuous and if ifs does so then ifs too
can help it that's a very good answer so
do now you may not be implying this so
let me ask you as a question is there
the possibility of ifs being practiced
not from that space and then being a
mechanism by which people engage in very
deep or even traumatic kind of
self-deception is that a possibility
yeah I I I absolutely think so and I
would be really skeptical and
hesitant about statements that refute
that because I've seen this I've seen
people even in I ifs engage in this
Parts language
that that became the root of their
self-deception because ultimately it's
some form of
framing yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah and if they then if you don't
have a variety of
practices and whatever you want to call
maybe beliefs you know belief in certain
practice or whatever then I think you
can it's it's it you can be trapped
quicker than you think in
it so to me I mean I was trained now we
can maybe again now we can um focus on
ifs a little bit more um I was trained
by um Tom Holmes who was a professor for
Clinical Psychology I think in somewhere
in Michigan iot where I know he lives in
kalamazo and um he he practices I think
from like 30 40 years now ifs and he was
you know friend close friend he is a
close friend of Tom Holmes but he kind
of has this unique and individual take
on ifs where he combines it with
spirituality oh interesting interesting
yes and and and I was trained by Tom
Holmes like he's like so maybe that's
why to me they they go hand in hand so
much together and he calls it also even
a path of the heart he also has this
book John that I can recommend to you
it's called I think ifs and spirituality
path of the heart if ifs and
spirituality path of the heart I will
look that up yeah and thank you and it
is his his style is deeply um inspired
by his Christian upbringing but at the
same time I think he was later um he um
also later from his you know um his path
as a Sufi so he got into the Sufi
order oh and it's really interesting wow
yeah so the neoplatonism is quite strong
in him I sound like I sound like
somebody talking about the force
absolutely the neoplatonism is strong
with him absolutely so so yeah please go
keep keep keep going oh well I just
wanted to ask so for you
uh there was the training that you know
the proper way to do ifs is from a
spiritual orientation where spirituality
means having this wise heart that is
orienting you and acting as a sort of
deeper conscience on anything you're
doing is that a fair way to talk about
it and I think because anything to me I
experience that if I'm if if these
if these things come from the heart they
are life
promoting and and they serve life in
this nich and sense so I I want I want
to slow down here because I I know what
you're saying but I know what a lot of
people can hear when they hear come from
the heart they just mean a deep impulse
or something that they really like right
and you're not saying that you're taking
you're talking about something very
different you're talking about agape and
you're talking about an orientation to
forgiveness in both senses of the word
you're talking about trying to be wisely
connected to yourself embodied as you
said last time to other people also
listen to the community and be open to
correction I want to make sure that
that's what you are talking about is
that correct that's thank you for
clarifying this again I it's implicit
and I it makes sense for the audience to
clarify it again that's exactly right
I'm not talking about the heart as this
place where affective and emotional
impulses come right so yes sometimes
they can be part of it but yes I think
there was an simpler way and you talk
about it in your work when you also even
in in in your reference to hiiga it's
it's about the caring it's about caring
yeah the fun the caring that's just
wrapped up with being a cognitive being
yes right and that's why I was talking
about life you know things that promote
life things that promote existence and
being and they they bring it also into
being so yeah that exactly that's that's
the place what I'm you know what I'm
talking about and
um and one of the reasons why I like
Parts work and before we talk about
where it can you know promote
self-deception is that it somehow
restores our cap you know capacity for
potential John it's like say more about
that that's really intriguing yeah so
that was actually I mean I I had this
you know I it came to IFS from this
yungan background and it you know it
always sounded right that we are you
know again not the masses of our own
houses but there was also something
relieving you know there was a great
relief in the fact that it's just a part
well I don't want to trivialize it but
what I'm what I'm saying is
that it is an it's an answer to our VI
and deceptions actually when I when I if
if if there was a part of me that feels
that way or did that way there was
always also the potential and capacity
for different kind of things to to
change and to to allow me to transform
and to yeah and I think partsw in that
sense is really powerful because it it
helps us to get out of this stuckness
and
fixation especially when it comes to
just want to add this last yeah please
especially when it comes to like these
adjectival traits
like what we mean in personality like
the big five Etc when I when I when I
when I um attribute these traits like no
I'm lazy I'm I don't know I'm or
unorganized just framing the language
differently and saying well part of me
is lazy part of me is unorganized
creates this potential and I would say
hope for different kind of things for
variation so
so I just want sorry
IAD so I mean I again with the sort of
the the the neoplatonism of bringing
Plato and Aristotle back into this
discussion where I think they should be
um you know you got you got Plato's idea
about um if I can get the right inner
Justice or Harmony or musicality between
my parts then they all can come to the
overall greatest fulfillment and I can
achieve a kind of profound inner peace
which liberates me from external
self-deception because I my my my
perception and attention and cognition
are not being twisted and thwarted by
all this salience manipulation and
conflict inside there's that and then
you took that and you said oh in
Aristotle's proposal that what we can do
is we can cultivate traits that
compensate for our personality or
constitutional deficits you know uh well
well you know so you know I'm really
introverted so I'll cultivate the virtue
of courage to to compensate that um yeah
to attain the golden mean right yes the
golden mean exactly and this idea that
by doing that um I I release all kinds
of potential uh for the
kind what's it oh magnanimous I can
become the great sold person yeah that's
what the original meaning of Aristotle's
term was like the great sold person U
the person of great Ana right um not in
the yungan sense in the Greek sense um
and so I I think that's um well I think
that's glorious what you just said I
think that's a great connection yeah and
wonderful it's to connect you know again
to these great thinkers like Aristotle
and Plato and um maybe this is also
again a place where we can dive a little
bit more into this um neoplatonic maybe
Sufi kind of thinking because again I
came to the realization John know just
to reiterate
and to um say it again the missing piece
to me was this heart kind of thing in
sense of caring but in the Sufi sense of
heart you really I can really hear the
like the Sufism the the way of the heart
um which is not the Romantic the way of
emotion or impulse or you know anything
like that yeah yeah yeah it's the place
to me from which the love to our
embodiment to our community to our
culture to Nature and Al ultimately to
the sacred comes from and it amates and
also emerges from and interestingly
enough John recently I independently of
you know this thought process I realized
later that there is that is really
congruent with this Sufi kind of
thinking because and these Mystic
traditions because they really view the
heart as this Nexus right the bridge
between the spirit and the Soul between
Ru and NS Naas would we call the theuk
the the right the the breath right yeah
yeah yeah we still have that meaning of
heart yeah even left in English language
we talk about getting to the heart of
the matter yes right where we where the
the thing that's holding it all together
and keeping it alive like yeah that very
much too yes and and also to add again
to this layer you know um this Dimension
that you mentioned which I think is spot
on is that even to the self and to
reality there are there there are levels
to it there are layers to it right and
this heart heart space as well there are
layers to it and um oh and then is that
part of the potential too uh so you know
the idea that Plato has this idea when I
start to get the Inner Harmony and I
think ifs is about getting the Inner
Harmony in a deep way um uh you know I
start to see more deeply outwardly into
reality but I also like
like mirror back reflected back reflect
I also see more deeply into me than I
could before and that unlocks potential
and and and and and that gets I I get
sort of the I get the meta virtue of
serson I get this ability to be more and
more tempted by what's real and by
what's good absolutely I create more
inner piece and that inner piece allows
me to get again more into contact with
reality with different layers of reality
and that again affords my inner work and
transformation EXC then we have this not
the reciprocal narrowing but the opening
in the anagog that you talk reciprocal
so I think that's that's really
congruent to that and so I'm really
looking forward to this ifs book
especially if it's bringing in these
Sufi themes thank you forend also be an
wonderful interlocutor he's um I really
respect his work and again he's you know
my teacher and I learned a lot from him
and he's really open to these kind of
things and I think lots of lots of the
intellectual stuff that we talk about
are often implicit in the work that that
they're doing or that he does in the
sense so yeah and and again and to me
that's the bridge to also to your
question about spirituality because if
it comes from this you know if we learn
the language of the heart in the sense
that we're talking
about we I think automatically or
naturally transcend this notion of sheer
therapeutic method and
technique and we and to me that's a
naturalistic account of spirituality to
thank you for watching this YouTube and
podcast series is by the Veri Foundation
which in addition to supporting my work
also offers courses practices workshops
and other projects dedicated to
responding to the meaning crisis if you
would like to support this work please
consider joining our patreon you can
find the link in the show notes so wait
this is also gold okay I want to just
put I'm just going to put a couple
things what you said with some some of
my language and see if this lands for
you yes please so you've got this idea
that ifs is an imaginal dialogical
learning the language of the heart and
there that that is inevitably a
spiritual practice in some way how does
that does that land for you it's hard
for me
to well that absolutely lands I I want
just wanted to say it's hard to not view
it like that to me it's really difficult
separate
them I see I see but but again that's
that's maybe a personal thing um I think
there are ways where we can like really
strictly look at it from a therapeutical
perspective but I think it's like
there's way more potential to it and I
think in both senses like we have to be
responsible about this as well when we
talk and when we um bring it into
connection with spirituality because
again it opens up this whole pathway for
spiritual bypassing which to me is again
akin to your question of self-deception
within in this case within ifs yep right
I and I I I concerned about that so I'm
glad you brought that up because I could
see if ifs isn't done on the path of the
heart it could very much be the pathway
to spiritual bypassing in a very
significant way I could and I do have a
concern about that and so I but I think
you've already given me a very good
answer so we're getting into the
spirituality and before we do that I
want to do evil yes uh which is which is
you know and and this came up um not
that the person can use ifs to engage in
self-deception to which you have given a
very yeah beautiful answer thank I think
a really beautiful answer but this other
question is can the parts themselves be
deceptive can they lie to us can they
 us can they manipulate us for
their own surv Ral whatever that means
at our expense right and and a lot of
people are concern and of course this
concern comes up when those parts like
Hermes uh for me yeah become
archetypal um and and claim to be um
explicitly you know transcave in nature
and things like
that yeah that's a really good question
um I I'm thinking if I maybe if I if
I'm I'm thinking if I should share my
experience first because I had an
similar archetypal
experience regarding this question and
then that's up to you like do do do what
you think I mean I don't want you to I
don't want to expose you to expose
yourself psychologically unnecessarily
but you think and and I think it's okay
to share it because I think the truth is
out I mean you know this phenomenology
out there and maybe it's time to speak
about these things so I I I really
thought about it it's okay I mean good
obviously I'm making myself vulnerable
to this but you know I'm actually I I I
try to follow your lead there I mean you
you spoke about your Hermes and I think
that was really courageous and now I
want to follow up with on this and so
John when I thought about this question
of self-deception I
really try to to again and this is where
ifs helped me try to you know Remember
The Credo of ifs which is all parts are
welcome yeah and so what I what
ultimately helped me was actually this
kind of approach and practice so I
treated self-deception as a living thing
let's call it part for a second I
treated I I personified it
imagin as a living thing so that I can
dialogue with it and I can I can come
into relationship with it and it was
really interesting because at first John
I was able to grasp personal Parts like
the subjective parts that you know that
apologized for their misdeeds because
they were thinking about you know
sinning and doing things wrong and that
was okay and and I was you know I I sat
with this part in a in a you know
curious Manner and I you know I welcomed
them and it was okay and we could laugh
about these stuff but I was quite clear
in this that that I was saying like well
that's not what I'm looking for I'm not
looking for the personal
biographical you know you know you're
tainted by self deception I'm I'm trying
to talk to self
deception oh yes that's oh wow just let
me Savor that for a minute that is not
only existentially Brave that's
brilliant oh
well thank
you well it's it's I'm I'm not I'm not
lying about it it was really an
experience and um and then it was
interesting John then suddenly a force
talked to me that didn't feel like a
part and and it felt more
archetypal and it spoke to me you know
like a at first it sound a little bit
more like an oracle but it had this you
know it had this poetic language to it
and and I really tried to make an effort
to grasp it understand it and in ifs
terms you would say befriended right I
really tried to befriended
and see and get curious about what it
has to tell me and to really understand
its role and purpose and then it spoke
to me John it it said it said to me um
how can you realize the really real and
significant things without me how can
you love and forgive without me what can
you love if not for the
illusion what can you forgive if not for
the
sin how can you build responsibility
without errors tell me who will carry
this burden if not
me oh was like okay what the
hell yeah the proper
response yes and John it was really
interesting because this figure really
on the one hand it it it's you know it
talked to me with great might power and
Grace so was numinous for you even yes
yeah and and at the same time it also it
it it had this sigh this right it it was
it also came from a place of
exhaustion it's part of it I think it
felt like the burden that that this you
know archetypal thing is carrying but
also from the ungratefulness that we
have
towards it I see so what I then realized
in that moment John was that it's really
a life force again it's something that
promotes life and it's not something
that deprives life and I think to me
that's the response to your question of
evil it's like this whole
being well okay let's let's before we
get the next St
one so I mean this is what came up for
me this is what came up for me is the
very things that make us adaptive make
us prone to self-deception yeah and our
deepest self-deception can actually
dispose to us the depths of what it is
that makes us adaptive yes and without
that self- knowledge we can't actually
properly flourish how does that land for
you that absolutely lens because again I
think there is
this deep ontological reality attached
to it that I think we
both propagate um or you know promote
it's that reality is fundamentally
relational yes and and this encounter
with this with self-deception let's call
him the spirit of self-de self decep
exactly it's the spirit exactly it
really you know I it really made me
realize that we that through
self-deception and through let's say
sinning that we attain first of all
Consciousness but also that we really
learn to love and that we learn humility
and that we learn for forgiveness in
this agapic sense so it really made its
point that you know don't kid yourself I
am important and there is no way around
it and then John it hit me then I then I
thought about it um but I will give you
a chance to com comment on this sorry
well no first of all I I I I I mean
there's a strain in Christian theology I
don't know if there's anything like it
in Sufism sort of about the idea of the
benefit of the the fall yeah that if
human beings didn't fall they would have
never achieved
self-consciousness and without aing
self-consciousness they could not
actually they they would they would have
the image of God but they could not come
into the like they they could not be
like God and is it is it similar to
Milton's Lucifer kind
of
um I I'm not sure I I don't I don't know
if I'd say that but it's it's more the
idea that so so they very careful about
this the the fall is a fall it is an act
of sin but if that sin hadn't have
happened then human beings couldn't have
L lost their innocence and without
losing their innocence they would have
never become capable of being um well
being properly Godlike they had to be
tempted by godhood in order to become
Godlike if I can put it that way oh yeah
oh that's good that's really good
yeah um and and and it's I mean it's a
powerful idea and uh like many powerful
ideas within the heart of a religious
framework it's deeply paradoxical
because it sounds like the fall is
necessary which means God wanted it to
happen and then how could it be a sin
yeah because if God's making it like and
you get into all these things and I'm
not going to comment on that because I
can't thread I and I don't know anybody
who gets of this but this idea this idea
that we face this sort of primordial
original sin right that actually
launches us into the path of virtue in
some profound way and this is although I
don't I don't know if it's in Milton
it's clearly in Blake yeah Blake has
this idea running through his poetry yes
yes you're right and I was thinking
maybe maybe it's not about solving this
Paradox and this is also again something
I learned from Yung because some things
need to be you know we can't solve them
we have to outgrow them and to me
self-deception was ex that's exactly
what I you know what I uh realize that
it's like well there's no way around it
we have to experience it maybe we even
have to experience remorse so that we
can practice forgiveness so and that to
me was this deep realization and and
again I'm not you know now we can get
into more theoretical
um understandings of my experiences but
and I'm not trying to equivocate or
sound deep in any sense I what I'm
trying to articulate is that if the
deepest ontological reality is
relational and in this sense of ala in
in haiger sense right it's yes and it's
a relationship between sufficiently
different aspects like the idos right
and themselves being relationships and
then we are again in this argument of
true line then in some and in some cases
even opposites complete
opposites then in order for relationship
and let's see how you think about this
John in order for relationships to make
sense we need to validate the things
that the relation binds right so they
have to be real too and to me this is
what I also understand with Rao religio
um I hope that I understand it correctly
but what do you think about
this um I I think that's I think so I'm
agreeing with you
I except um I would I mean and I've been
doing this because I've been I I've gone
through uh filler's book in the course
on Ultimate Reality God and Beyond and
um I and I don't know if James thinks
this or not I I'm looking forward to
talking to you about it but you don't
want to Simply invert what I mean by
that is you don't want to say well it's
the it used to be the relata from which
the relations emerge and you don't want
to say no it's the relations from which
the rata emerg that's just inverting and
all of the argument that destroy the
first position symmetrically destroy the
second position you want to say pure
relationality is that which is below the
relations yeah yeah yes yes and from
which it but it's not a substance right
because it's pure relationality it is
that from which the relations and the
relata co-emerge and then that means it
is like the spirit that is flowing
through the emergence and the emanation
completely interpenetrating up and down
yes that's that's how I would okay that
makes to me a lot of sense and I don't
think it's um I don't even see an
argument against what I said which is
good um if I'm not mistaken because I'm
not arguing for the hierarchy I think
that absolutely you're right it's it's
below that right I was thinking do would
you agree that um the things that are
bound and linked by the
relation um that they also then
necessarily have to be real and valid
too would you agree with that yes and
this is one of the pro this is one of
the issues I have uh with sort of some
Notions of the relationality that the if
you don't have any point where the Rel
where the relationality bends on itself
like The Noose in the ne in relationship
to the neoplatonic one then you just get
this homogeneous like the one of
perenties right which is just this
homogeneous sphere with no with that is
no different from nothingness um yeah I
agree there there has to be a
and you know this is where I think I
have a lot of critics to Whitehead but
this this is where Whitehead's idea that
yes it's like that but the mini become
the one that adds to the mini right and
then goes back and you got this sort of
flowing accordion holographic fractal
thing going on rather than just this
homogeneous blob thing going on yeah
that's wonderful and and you know well I
have a I have something asked you just
hold your thought get take a moment to
get your thought I don't want to I don't
want to J out of your head but you know
I've been and this comes from nishita I
was thinking about and process's idea
about the one within is the vehicle of
the one without and we were talking
about the self last part not as a thing
or a substance but more like a field of
pure relationality and I was thinking
you know maybe what can happen in ifs is
you can move to the participation in
that which gives you a way of
understanding by participating knowing
by coupling knowing by participating
Ultimate Reality as pure relationality
it's not identical but it is a deep
realization by participation what what
do you think of that wonder I was
actually thinking about exactly the same
thing that's the thought I was holding I
was trying to bring in the wow because
what you said makes sense to me the
context that you give or gave um a
second
ago gives meaning to what kot says with
the self right it's it's self is the
relationship that relates itself to
itself in that it really makes sense
that even this thing like thing is a
relationship that relates itself to
itself yeah and to me and now to again
to answer the question of how we
can deceive ourselves within ifs I would
say one of the fundamental mistakes
people I don't want to say mistakes
because again it's the language of
training whereas it's the language of
explanation so um but I still see
problems with it even in a practical
sense um when they again
when there is this
reification of the self and they and
they yeah yeah it becomes an with with
the self again something as a part and
then what happens typically John is in
ifs practices people get into this push
away kind of mentality to push away
apart to get to the self as if it's
a and I think that's this that's this
really it's it's seductive but in a in a
bad sense like it's really seductive to
think like this but I think that really
is the self-deception often going on in
ifs oh that's that's that's brilliant so
the idea is that like if the self is
this pure
relationality that properly orients us
towards reality because it participates
in the grammar of reality we can lose
that by trying to turn the self back
into a substance and then turning it
into an idol and then we get in to
totally the wrong even though we're
talking the word self we get into
totally the wrong framing that is what
is most crucial about the self not what
is framed but the way you're
participating in a fundamental framing
exactly is that absolutely oh that and
okay and now again talking about the
traps and gaps of of Parts work I I
think I have a problem with parts work
when when um parts are used as a
scapegoat for avoiding real
responsibility I I brought that up and
that's that's a species of the spiritual
bypassing kind of thing too where uh you
know did I bring that up with Mark I
think I brought that up with Mark Lewis
and I said I can see people using that
to devest themselves of their moral
responsibility well that wasn't me that
was this part exactly that's exactly old
yeah yeah the old the old joke of the
devil made me do it kind of thing and
that and I think that is deeply
problematic because by definition that
is something you want to address because
when you say something like that first
of all you cannot just dissociate apart
from your own agency right I mean you
could but that it would be either
pathological like in dissociative dis um
identity disorder and complex trauma
where this can happen but then it's a
pathology right or it's really
self-deception and I think that that's
one of the points so um so that's why I
personally try to limit Parts language
to when I'm in situations of you know
emotional upheaval and where I feel like
my framing and my agency is hijacked by
a part in the sense that you talk about
when you talk about parasitic processing
yeah or you know in yungan theory you
would say when you're gripped or
possessed by a complex right complex
yeah and then in ifs you have to step
the stepping back move that you do with
your glasses too we call it un blending
right so you try to un blend from it but
the problem there's also problem in un
blending though in my opinion it's like
well just as a stepping m back move you
know can't account for everything I
still have to step back in right I have
to get into a part again to me and this
is something I mean I might be wrong and
people you know with more experience in
ifs might disagree with me but that's
okay I what I see often is that well I
still have to act in the world right we
are enacted beings right our cognition
is enacted right so my part still has to
do the
job well and to use the glasses metaphor
you have to put the glasses back on and
look through the part and see if you can
now see the world differently because
then something has changed that's
fundamental and to stick with the
analogy I would say when you you know
take off your glass and you you look at
you know smudges and you which is akin
to the self-deception and you try to
wipe them away you put them back on you
still have the same thing but you have a
different quality right and to me this
is what U um um to me that describes
what people talk about in ifs when you
talk about being
self-led right it's a quality it's not a
thing right it's there no thing to it
yeah it's a functional we talked about
this that it's probably has to do with
these two platonic things about you know
bringing about inner peace and bringing
you into connectedness with reality
affording anagog affording Agape that's
what it is it's it's something like that
exactly and and to me
this captures better the idea of the
self as this very process and product of
optimal gripping and
self-organization yeah yeah right so no
self Beyond self organization or I think
you you um compared it to the mataku and
and I think it's the inner logos then
when it maybe could I don't know I've
recently discovered um the work of
William Desmond and uh he built an
entire like impressive profound ontology
around mataku oh um and I'm just diving
very deeply into it deeply influenced by
Plato um really astonishing um and uh he
he he's got the ad what is it metac
olical meta olical um as a um and he
proposes as that is what what's sort of
beyond the hegelian
dialectic um uh and so I I what I'm why
why did I say that because I think you
we're doing this we're and I mean this
in the right way we're doing something
like the Theology of the mataku here and
we're trying to bring it into a deeper
and we're arguing for a deeper and more
proper apprehension and appreciation of
what's going on in ifs that's what
that's what I was yes uh trying to
articulate can you John can you put the
it's a book right the metex one there's
I recommend there's the William Desmond
reader can you put it into the reading
list also I I don't have anything to
write it yeah yeah yeah yeah that would
be great I would love to look into this
and if if you allow John I I just want
to you know Circle back to the to my
encounter with the with the spirit of
self-deception yeah because we talking
it's it's it's I just wanted to note it
was interesting that the spirit of
self-deception spoke to you sounds like
very truthfully which was a really
interesting sort of meta move but keep
going well yeah that's actually that was
also a feeling I was thinking about this
if it's you know maybe it was a trickst
the archetype something like because you
have it like lowkey and different kind
of God yeah yeah yeah totally totally
who knows if it was right so but we're
talking about this right so we're trying
to figure out these things together you
know you know collective intelligence
here and um so uh you agreed that the
thing
that the relationship binds that
necessarily also have to be true right
so then I would say if they are before
yeah real yeah real exactly real and I
then I was thinking if they are real
then I should attend to
it yes if they are real I should attend
to that's why I try to have a
conversation with this that's a good
point yeah yeah yeah spirit
and and and and ultimately my
realization was that there is no reality
without illusion and illusion isn't
necessary for reality and vice versa
right so and they're relevant to each
other well I mean this is a Dost move
you're making U but it also goes to uh
um I I've just finished a course on the
Primacy of beauty that I've taught um
and this idea that uh real is a
comparative term yes and illusion or and
and and and as comparatives they are
they they are bound something is only
real in comparison to something less
real an illusion and something is only
an illusion in relation to something
that's more real and you can't you can't
just saying something like saying
everything is an illusion is like saying
everything is tall but it would equally
be wrong if I'm hearing you right to say
everything is real because that would be
like saying everything is tall too it's
the relationship what I'm trying to
allude to again and maybe again no and
haiger has that by by the way right yeah
haiger has that being is both the
unconcealment and the concealment at the
same time it's The Shining forth and
it's always also the withdrawal into
mystery yeah and this and this
withdrawal
this shining forth and the withdrawal I
was thinking about this in a yungi sense
interesting enough because yeah
understanding y hopefully correctly
means that if if things work into two
directions then it's not about the poles
he you I know that you talk about it's
the it's about the polarity and I was
thinking it's about the polarity it's
the force field it's the force field not
the pole and I'm hearing Yung say well
if they work into two direction then
then the goal is the
center ah right right right right right
that's that's something I also
associated with this um you know this
deep wisdom by haiger and again maybe we
can turn it into something practical
also for the audience so it doesn't stay
as this kind of theoretical intellectual
thing please maybe from a theraputic
perspective that you know to make things
really real now and so it also doesn't
sound like a depy okay yeah
yeah as you might as you might know and
I'm I'm sure you know that there is deep
and
persistent there is a deep and
persistent search for meaning in the
state of
trauma people who are traumatized have
like
pdsd they really try to figure out what
this Beast is right they ask what's they
really asked about the meaning of this
and
and if you want or if I want to make
sense and draw meaning and significance
from my trauma then maybe I can manage
to understand my trauma as a force that
wants to communicate something to me as
a
messenger and and this is actually
really something I do with my trauma
patients then oh I see well I I really
try it's it's it's by understanding
these that these events can potentially
be relevant
to your transformation to your growth I
can by just framing this relationship
like that I can enter into a different
kind and quality of relationship to my
trauma yeah yeah and and then in this
relationship in the quality of the
relationship lies the Transcendence and
then I can and then patients and often
clients can overcome that trauma because
again in an hermeneutic style they can
make sense out of it they can draw
meaning out of it and it's exactly this
reframing of the
relationship that take that also can
take away the power of the trauma and
hand it back to the client and hand back
the agency so if you ask me John because
that that's to me ultimately what trauma
is I mean what it's a lot of things but
it's it's a displaced I would say a
displaced or disturbed or maybe in your
words
parasitic hermeneutic
process right right so right it's a loop
and and it's not an event the trauma is
not an event and it's also not in the
event it's in the relationship of me and
the world and how I make sense of myself
and the world and it keeps does that
land with you does that make sense yeah
yeah that that yeah and I'm getting that
this looping it takes on a life of its
own and and that's how it sucks agency
away from the person that's traumatized
this is landing very well for me keep
going please yes and I think um in in
very complex cases again that becomes
difficult with ifs to be really honest I
think then you really really need a you
know Ecology of practices not only ifs
but there is a way in ifs you know ifs
really found a way to address this being
frozen in time in this Loop right that's
the unburdening process and going to the
Exiles and and it's this updating right
it's it's this reframing and again it's
a her again I I would call it a
hermeneutic process because you're
trying to draw meaning of it and you
know yeah attend to it and I again I
would say in from an agapic position
Yeah by you know attending to it from a
from a place of
love so that again something opens up so
you
can so you can put the memory into its
into the
into the right kind
of I don't know I don't know what the
right word well it's it's ratio it's the
properly proportioning and
prioritization of things in the correct
perspective and from the correct
participatory standpoint it's deep logos
it's that proper proportioning that we
expect from the reasonable person that's
what it is it makes it reasonable it
makes their it doesn't mean they get all
instantly happy but now they are back in
having a reasonable orientation that
allows them to properly process uh this
am is that what you I like when you when
you're struggling for this language of
proportion yeah because I've been try
I've been trying I I've given up kazra
I've given up trying to get people to
use the word rational to mean this
broader notion other than logical and so
I'm saying well we have this other word
we use reasonable and we don't mean
logical you mean like in the court of
law you you have to do what the
reasonable person would do what does the
reasonable person do well take the right
perspectives so they prioritize the
right things they see things in the
right proportion and they participate as
they properly should and that's what I'm
talking about yes and even from that
perspective even logic takes a different
kind of meaning because it's then you
can understand that it's deeply bound to
the idea of logistics right to
Distributing all
resources we have this optimal grip you
get and this harmony I would exactly
exactly said like this rational
proportion
that really that that was the word I was
struggling with to find So yeah thank
you
um yeah it's it's
crazy so I I mean I think you've given
some like
really I I mean this beautiful answers
and I love I love uh like so you know I
I love talking to all everybody about
this I mean I'm talking to you know Seth
Allison about this and he's coming in
with this deep you know deep reflection
uh from from the psychotherapeutic which
you have of course too and then you know
and Mark like you has this deep
psychotherapeutic perspective but you
know but he also has this cognitive
scientific thing that I share with him
right John just to you know just to
mention my work on self-organized
criticality intersects with Mark Lewis's
work by the way oh yeah so I I know I
briefly talk to him um VIA mail and um
because his lab in in in in in the
Netherlands I'm actually doing research
with them so that's interesting we not
only there is not an not only an overlap
in ifs in the therapeutic sense but also
even from the cognitive scientific
perspective so sorry I just wanted to
add that to no no no I think that's good
and I I mean I think we should have at
least one more conversation um before um
we're sort of going to wrap up our
voices with fori um but I'd like to have
one more with you don't and I don't want
to completely lose the thread with
everything we've been talking about but
I do want to have that conversation with
you around your uh self-organizing
criticality work and what the
connections are between that and I would
love that all this stuff and I you know
I I have a lot of connections between
self-organizing criticality and the
cognitive science I do and and you're
totally right to mention Mark Lewis um
so let's let's let's have you come back
and do at least that uh because I don't
want to we're almost out of time so I
don't want to start that now I don't
want to start that now but I do want to
do what I always do first of all I want
to thank you
uh I like I I was saying you and I you
you bring in the therapeutic and you
have the cognitive scientific but you
also have the like a deep philosophical
spiritual side of this that resonates
very very deeply with me and I'm very
appreciative of that um and so I just
wanted to I thank you and uh thank you
for being Courageous about like opening
up and making yourself vulnerable don't
pay any attention to the horrible trolls
that say stupid  uh because you did
that uh because they'll do that no
matter what you do you just have to
ignore them uh but uh pay attention to a
lot of the people that a lot of people
that are encouraged that are encouraged
by you opening up and saying we need to
talk about this stuff because it happens
and it really happens and it really
transforms people and we need to get the
new language to talk about it correctly
in order to deal with what's happening
in the meaning crisis and the Advent of
the Sacred so I want to thank you you
you participated and contributed to that
very significantly thank you John that
really means a lot to me and again to be
able to share this with you and to have
a forum to speak to speak about these
things for these things but also
together with you is I think there is
nothing that is more meaningful to me
and Socrates says yeah sorry go ahead I
was gonna say Socrates says you know
participating in genuine dialogos is the
best life that we can actually live I
would 100% agree with this and I just
wanted to say to the TR RS I mean I'm I
don't want to be
too I don't want to participate in huis
and to be too arrogant but I'm not too
afraid because I know that the proof is
in the pudding and I think I would speak
with less confidence if I didn't
see the merits and also the the success
and the work that I'm doing with the
students at University the community
that I'm in but also with this again the
verely impaired people that I working on
a daily basis and to that is reassuring
to again to open at least open the
dialogue in this conversation and we
know we both don't claim to have the
answer and we it's still an on dialog
right so but um at least let's you know
keep the ball
rolling so um the phrase is uh uh the
proof is in the eating of the pudding
and you are deeply uh you said some very
delicious things here today and I wanted
to thank you for that I always like to
give my uh my guests um the last word
and it can be whatever kind of word you
want inspiration summation
provocation whatever whatever you'd like
to
say it I I think it's not so much in my
nature to you know provoke people or you
know to say something
provocative um I will
say I would love to continue to ser
serious and to talk to you again and
also again to bring some of my
colleagues and other thinkers like Robin
bear just as an example because we
promised the audience last time that we
want to talk about the triaa like um the
the archetype of the Adolescent and also
work and yes I just want to say maybe we
can keep it at that I'm looking forward
to this conversation conversation yeah
good we'll make that one happen too
we'll make that one happen I'm not going
to stop having conversations we're just
putting voices with her VY uh into
retirement I will still have you know
individual conversations and dialogue uh
but but uh thank you so so much thank
you John really
sincerely yeah I hope we get to meet in
person someday I think that would be
really wonderful I hope that
too we will
