okay I'd like to uh Begin by thanking
Lori and bank for inviting me back to uh
speak in this wonderful uh
Symposium uh it's a hard act to follow
uh don who's given us an amazing uh
overview of the origins of our species
but uh what I'd like to do is uh go back
about another thousandfold in time to
somewhere around 4 billion years
ago when uh the chemistry of the early
Earth was developing and becoming more
complex and ultimately giving rise to
biology so that's a hard thing to study
for for many reasons like including the
fact that we have no actual you know
geological samples of uh the surface of
our planet back then uh
um so a lot of what I'm going to talk
about is uh a mix of sort of theory and
experiments that gives us ideas about
how things might have happened what we
can do is test our ideas we can figure
out what things don't work and what
we're left with we hope is a possible
path leading from chemistry to
biology so when I was thinking
about how to present all of
this one thing that really struck me uh
something that's happened again and
again is is that you know we see at some
point an an advance in the field which
usually results from overcoming some
some preconception some deeply ingrained
idea about how things ought to work
which turns out you know not to be true
so it's over overcoming
those uh deeply ingrained prejudices
which is really essential for the
progress of Science and what I'd like to
do is give you uh a series of of
advances from from my field which is the
the chemistry uh of the origins of life
this whole field is actually closely
related
surprisingly um to a big part of
astronomy which is the discovery of of
uh other solar systems
exoplanets uh we now know that there are
you know Millions probably billions of
other planets many of which are like the
Earth orbiting other
stars and and that's given rise to a
huge hunt for signs of Life out
there I just like to ask everybody in
the audience here how many of you like
really think that there is life out
there on other planets just raise your
hands if you think there's life out
there okay and how many of you are
equally sure that we're the only place
that has life and I see there are a lot
of people like that too so we have these
very Divergent views right life um you
know it's it's it it we've we we've seen
that it arose here it's given rise to
this incredible diversity that we see
around us some people think that must
happen out there other people think well
it's so life is so complicated maybe it
only got started here if we could find
another independent origin of life that
would Clearly say that it's not so hard
to get from chemistry to biology but so
far we have only one example and so my
view is that we we don't know we can't
say what we're trying to do in the lab
is figure out if there's a what looks
like an easy path to bi to
biology U but I think it's our friends
in astronomy who will perhaps most
clearly answer this
question okay let's
see okay all right so yeah what I want
just briefly say why why do so many of
us think that the life is common in in
the universe so clearly one example is
there are lots and lots and lots of
environments that could support life
right we have already in the early days
of of this adventure over 5,000
confirmed exoplanets planets orbiting
other stars and many of those are in the
habitable zone where you could have
liquid water and so it's pretty clear
that a lot of these environments out
there could support life we just don't
know if if they do
I think another reason for thinking that
life might be common is that there was a
lot of time available for on our planet
for life to get started so in between
the time when the Earth had cooled down
after the moon forming impact to the
first clear signs of
biology there's a time span of at least
several hundred million years maybe as
much as 700 million years and and so
there's there was a lot of time for life
to get started started and no matter how
hard it is maybe in the end it was
inevitable on the other
hand I think what makes a lot of us
think that life might be rare and really
hard to get started is that modern life
is just so incredibly complicated right
so this is is part of the metabolic
chart I mean every living organism on on
the planet has thousands of coordinated
chemical reactions going on all the time
catalyzed by incredibly complicated uh
beautiful
enzymes um but even the informational
organization of life is complicated
right so from the central dogma of going
from information coded in DNA archived
in DNA transcribed into RNA used to code
for proteins which carry out all the
reactions of cells every part of that
system depends on every other part right
it's incredibly self-referential you
can't replic at DNA without help from
RNA as primers protein enzymes that are
polymerases and other parts of the
machinery and so on same thing for RNA
you it's cated generally by DNA but to
replicate it or to transcribe it
requires proteins and metabolites so how
could such a
self-referential system ever evolve
there are a lot of crazy theories um to
account for this but things didn't get
uh progress wasn't really possible
until um some very smart people like
Francis Crick um Leslie Orel Carl Lo
realized uh in the 60s that it was RNA
that molecule in the middle that
potentially held the answer uh when the
first structures of uh TRNA came out
with its complicated three-dimensional
folded shape uh these people realize
that maybe RNA could also act like an
enzyme in which case you have one
biopolymer that can both carry
hereditary information and carry out
chemical reactions and so it became
became possible to at least think of an
earlier simpler stage in uh of life's
history uh where before the evolution of
DNA before the evolution of proteins you
could imag imine simple cells with an
RNA genome that was catalyzing its own
replication as well as biochemical
functions okay so that simplifies the
problem of how life got started
enormously but we still have to work out
how how could the chemistry of the early
uh Planet give rise even to structures
like this which are still quite
complicated so here's a more detailed
view of what we we think these early
simple cells might have looked like
often call them protocells they still
have a a membrane envelope that keeps
things together so that different parts
of the system don't just float off into
space uh inside this membrane uh
compartment we have small bits of
genetic material which we are pretty
sure was RNA or something closely
similar to Modern RNA maybe not
identical um
these kinds of structures are actually
very easy to assemble uh in the
laboratory um but the harder part is to
imagine how a system like this a
protocell could actually grow and divide
and replicate its genetic material
before there was any evolved genetic
material right we need to go through
this stage where we have the
self-assembling system that's
complicated enough to actually undergo
replication
but just based on chemistry and physics
that gives rise to the ability to begin
the process of darwinian evolution which
can lead to the complexification and
diversification that we see around us
now okay so in thinking about uh how to
do the replication of primitive RNA
molecules uh I want to begin by uh
mentioning one of the Pioneers in this
field uh the the late Leslie
Orel who had been working uh ever since
the late 60s early 70s on how to how to
uh
imagine replication happening without
enzymes and one of the key insights that
Leslie had out of many was the fact that
the substrates the the the the
nucleotide molecules that would be
polymerized during the process of
replication had to be different from
what we see in biology today so what you
see on the top the nucleoside
triphosphates are the universal
substrates for DNA and RNA replication
now but they
require very sophisticated enzymes uh in
order to accelerate that polymerization
uh process and if you don't have those
sophisticated catalysts you need
molecules more like what you see on the
on the bottom those uh so-called
phosphor metales these are molecules
that are reactive enough that they can
start to polymerize all by themselves
without any help from sophisticated uh
fancy evolved catalysts so that kind of
insight gave us our our kind of standard
view of how this copy and
chemistry uh ought to work and this
little video that was made by Janet aasa
uh shows how we were thinking about the
process we'd imagine single strands of
RNA floating around in this chemically
very rich environment filled with
activated nucleotides that could find
their partners by Watson Creek Franklin
base pairing and sort of Click into
place reacting with the growing chain
and building up a copy as you see
here so to look at that in a little bit
more
detail um what you can see in the in the
diagram is that we have uh a short
strand at the top a primer which is
growing by copying the template and the
way we imagine this working is based on
what we know about how this happens in
biology we imagine a single activated
nucleotide um coming in binding to the
template the bottom strand next to the
primer and uh for those of you who are
interested in the details of the
chemistry the atomic structure of one of
those substrates is shown at the bottom
but the schematic version at the top
shows you the essence of it so this
nucleotide comes in and binds the primer
attacks adds one nucleotide and kicks
out the green imolo as the leaving
group and I'll show you an example of an
experiment like that this is the kind of
thing that uh was pioneered in Leslie's
lab this is an experiment we did in my
lab many years ago and it shows the
progress of this type of
spontaneous C in chemistry no enzymes
involved okay so in the gel image
underneath the sequence diagram at Time
Zero is the starting material after a
minute you can already see a slower
moving band that represents the primer
where one base has been added after a
few more minutes you see a second base
coming in and then a third base coming
in by uh 5 to 10
minutes so the basic chemistry of the of
copying works but there's a puzzle
hidden in this
experiment and if you look closely at
the template sequence you'll see that
there are four
C's which G's can come in and base pair
making a GC base pair but you see in the
experiment only three of them get copied
right and why is
that this was a puzzle that was in the
literature
for at least 40
years
and it was just one of those things that
there was like no obvious explanation
for and so it kind of lay
there remarkably really remarkably to me
in Leslie's lab about 25 years ago they
did a very clear set of experiments that
showed that when a second nucleotide
binds to the primer Downstream of the
one that's going to react it accelerates
the reaction that second nucleotide is
acting as a
catalyst
right it just seemed like an incredibly
important clue as to the mechanism of
this process but that discovery lay
there unsighted unseen unknown for
almost 25 years until a fantastic
student in my life know prev
rediscovered this independently from his
own
experiments uh and to me this always uh
seems like a really iconic example of
the fact that by working hard in the
laboratory for several months you can
save yourselves a couple of hours in the
library reading the
literature so um we rediscovered this
and we really tried to get to the bottom
of it to figure out the mechanism
of this catalysis and we spent several
years on this we tried all kinds of
things our um our bias was that this
catalytic effect was probably some kind
of molecular interaction some part of
the second nucleotide was maybe helping
to pre-organize the structure of the
reactive nucleotide and and to make it
you know in the right geometry for the
reaction to
go um but we could never nail that
down and finally a new student came into
the lab Travis Walton and and he swore
he would get to the bottom of this
mystery and amazingly he did and what he
discovered was that the interaction
between these two nucleotides the
Catalyst and the one that's going to
react was not as we thought a
non-covalent reaction involving a change
in Geometry but actually due to the
formation of a Cove valent
intermediate so the process is uh
diagrammed U on on the left and uh the
chemical details are on the right but
basically what happens is that two two
of these activated nucleotides react
with each other they make a strange
looking dinucleotide that binds to the
template by two Watson CC based pairs so
it it combined more tightly which means
you need less of it which is nice and we
were able to show later from structural
studies that that bridge that phosphate
imidazol phosphate bridge is
pre-organized in three-dimensional space
to favor the chemical reaction of
template
copying and so I think what took so long
to make this discovery was the fact that
we were convinced that this
non-enzymatic copying ought to work the
same way as it does in biology it just
doesn't Okay so once we learned about
that once we got over that barrier we
were able to take advantage of our
understanding of the chemistry and
really learn uh how to copy RNA
templates in a much more efficient and
general uh way and that work is still
ongoing but but this was the key key
advance came from overcoming that
preconception okay now I haven't said
anything so about where did these
nucleotides come from I mean these are
pretty complicated molecules why would
they be lying around on the surface of
the early Earth and in fact uh 30 years
ago actually um Jerry Joyce and lesli
Orel uh
summarized uh the the general feeling
that that the way molecular biologists
was studying the problem was was um
unrealistic to put it mildly
they called it the molecular biologist
stream of some warm little Prebiotic
pool filled with pure concentrated
activated
ribonucleotides how could that possibly
be so
uh in
fact the chemistry of nucleotide
synthesis at that time was not very
welld
developed uh and a lot of people
actually came to the conclusion that
maybe it was actually chemically
impossible to get to RNA in in in sort
of in one step and maybe there was some
earlier more primitive version some
simpler genetic material that would have
been easier to make and or easier to
copy that then later on evolved into RNA
and and
DNA in the intervening that that led to
a huge blossoming of um studies of of
different kinds of nucle Tides a lot of
the work done by one of the great
chemists of the preceding Century Albert
Ean
Moser um but in the end nothing as good
as our
ribonucleotides ever came
out still has left the problem though
that in the chemistry going on not in a
nice clean lab where everything is well
controlled but in a natural environment
it's not going to leave to Pure
ribonucleotides right we are now pretty
sure on the basis of a lot of chemistry
that's been worked out by many people
but a lot by um John southernland in the
UK that the synthesis of ribon
nucleotides is is actually reasonably
not completely but reasonably well
understood but it should be accompanied
by at least some synthesis of closely
related materials like arabino
nucleotides 3o nucleotides and even
deoxy
nucleotides so any Prebiotic synthesis
you'd expect to have some mixture of
these different nucleotides which could
then polymerize into short chains but
they'd be kind of messy very
heterogeneous right and that doesn't
seem like a good very promising start to
something that could easily replicate
and actually fold up into structures
that might begin to do interesting
catalytic processes so this is something
we've been studying my lab over the last
10 years I'm just going to give you two
quick examples that give us hints about
maybe how RNA emerged as the winner from
this primordial competition between
different types of
nucleotides so what we can do in the lab
now and this is work a lot of this work
was done by by Chris Kim Legion Xiao and
others in the lab we look at these other
possible relatives of RNA and ask well
what about their copy and chemistry how
does it
compare um and if these other
nucleotides were around would it
interfere with the copying of
RNA so for example if we look at arabino
nucleotides which are very close to
ribon nucleotides there's just one
hydroxy that's pointed up above the
sugar ring instead of down we can follow
all the steps of the reaction right the
activation process the formation of that
Cove valent U dimer
intermediate uh the actual reaction with
the primer subsequent primer extension
what we see is the initial steps in this
case um the formation of that
intermediate it's not really affected
but the extension of a primer with an
arabino nucleotide is slower than with
RNA and in a competition experiment
mostly what you see is primary extension
with
RNA not only that but it if arabino
nucleotide is incorporated into a
growing chain it's essentially a
termination event you can't extend
beyond that on the other
hand if there are arabino nucleotides in
the middle of a chain you can copy over
it but which you make is
RNA similarly with
30o nucleic acids where you have a four
carbon sugar instead of a five carbon
sugar that actually look easier to make
but here every step on the process is
slower right so at every step RNA is out
competing this very similar uh relative
and yet again if you have these three
nucleotides in a template strand you can
copy over it but you're more likely to
make
RNA and so this is given rise to the
model that you see here we have we
imagine somehow a primordial environment
on the surface
of the early Earth where these different
kinds of nucleotides have
accumulated probably mostly
ribonucleotides which which make RNA but
mixed in all of these competing species
they assemble into these very uh
heterogeneous mixed
strands um but every now and then they
can base pair with each other and little
bits of primary extension happen and
when that happens what gets made
preferentially is RNA so the idea is you
keep doing this you go through Cycles
what you're going to end up with is this
messy early mixture is going to get
transformed into strands of almost pure
homogeneous RNA just like what we see
now
okay all right so we can see at least
bits and pictures as the pieces of how
to from the southernland work how to
nucleotides from these experiments how
they assemble into primitive strands
that are RNA we know uh how to copy them
what's the next step how can you
actually get replication to work so I
need to explain why this has been such a
difficult problem in fact it's one of
those problems that was so hard we
didn't even want to think about it for
many many years because there was like
just no obvious way around it so to
explain if you have a strand of RNA and
we want to copy
it if you have enzymes if you have all
the evolved Machinery of biology it's no
problem you can start at the beginning
quickly extend make your copy and stop
at the end but if you don't have that
evolved
Machinery there are all kinds of
problems the only way to start at the
beginning is with a specific primer that
will bind to the template strand at the
beginning but there's no way to supply a
specific primer
sequence you know in a Prebiotic
situation where you don't have catalysts
or any way to to make
it even if you can copy an RNA strand if
it's above a certain length it gets very
hard to get the strands apart even at
high temperatures it's very difficult
and furthermore as soon as the
temperature goes back back down to a
point where base comparing can happen
and copying chemistry can
happen these complimentary strands come
back together thousands of times faster
than the chemistry that is required to
copy a template strand so it just looks
impossible when you view it this way
there are other problems as well I
already showed you an example of what we
used to call the last base addition
problem now we understand why it's so
hard to add that last base space because
the the two nucleotide real substrate
can only bind very weakly by one
nucleotide so that reaction's incredibly
slow and you know there are other
problems if you start in the middle then
you lose the information from the
beginning and that's going to happen on
both strands so replication looked very
difficult so uh we've all been through a
a difficult time with the covid
pandemic uh for those of us who do
laboratory work it it was it was a tough
period because the labs were all shut
down we couldn't go in we couldn't do
our experiments we had to just stay home
all we could do is stay home and
think which turned out to be a good
thing in this case we could still talk
to each other you know by
Zoom uh and so uh in the middle of the
pandemic uh through conversation with
people in my lab we came up with a
theory a model for how to do
replication in a way that we think
actually solves all of the problems that
I just showed you so uh we call this
model the virtual circular genome model
the reason for that is we Imagine The
genome of a primordial cell being
circular that's illustrated by the green
circle in the center but it's not there
are no circular molecules all we need to
have are small pieces short oligos that
map to a circular sequence right in lots
of overlapping combinations from both
strands okay so why is that so great you
might be wondering well the idea is that
since you have little bits and pieces of
this circular sequence from both strands
they can come together wherever they
overlap have complimentary sequences you
have the possibility of extending those
primers by the kind of primer extension
chemistry that I showed you earlier so
these complementary fragments can come
together in lots and lots of different
ways and some some of them will allow
for a bit of copy and chemistry to go on
others will not but if you cycle the
process through you can eventually copy
in little bits and pieces all the way
around the circle so by iterating that
process we think that it should actually
be possible to replicate the entire
circular sequence but not like it
happens in biology where you begin at
the beginning and go to the end and then
stop but in a distributed way totally
different that then we imagine quickly
evolved once you had catalytic Machinery
into a more efficient mechanism like we
see in Modern
Biology Okay so just to point out again
that when these complimentary pieces are
allowed to anneal with each other they
can do it in lots and lots and lots of
different configurations in fact this is
one thing that's makes it very hard to
model this kind of U
process uh even for a very small
sequence there are hundreds or thousands
of small subfragments they can come
together in millions of different ways
and and so figure ing out all of the
necessary interactions is a little bit
complicated but we're working on that
and collaborating with some uh very uh
clever people in particular arand mgan
and the physics department at us Chicago
is helping us try to understand this
complicated system but we think that by
cycling the environment you can you can
repeat this uh process of of doing
little bits and pieces of copying that
will eventually give rise to replication
so that's shown here we have a cycle
every time the environmental conditions
allow these short pieces to come apart
then you uh the conditions change to
allow base pairing they come together in
different configurations that allows in
different places little bits of copy and
chemistry to go on so a lot of what
we're doing in the lab now is trying to
experimentally test this model and
actually uh demonstrate U
replication uh in the lab so we'll have
to see how that goes over the next
couple of
years okay I want to uh tell you another
actually interesting little uh anecdote
of where we faced the problem that that
really looked like it uh it was a very
hard to get overstep in in imagining how
this copy and chemistry could work so
again the the schematic of this works is
is shown at the top the chemical details
are shown at the bottom of the slide but
here's the puzzle we have these
activated
nucleotides they react with each other
to make this bridged dinucleotide that's
the real substrate for template
copying but that reaction is reversible
okay and the equilibrium of that
reaction is actually towards the
monomers which are not good for
replication the amount of material that
gets made at
equilibrium that can drive copying is
pretty small
okay
so it's an equilibrium process what can
you do right is there any way to make
this whole thing work better to make
more of the molecule that we need to do
copying and of course there is you know
if you think about non-equilibrium
chemistry it turns out we've actually
found two ways to shift the equilibrium
in the direction that we want one is a
chemical process that we actually don't
really understand so I'm not going to
talk about it the other is well you see
the products there are two products
right there's the
bridge material that we want and then
there's that leaving group that little
green bit the imidazol if we can get rid
of that we could shift the
equilibrium this is something that we're
working on WE imagine this working
inside protocells membrane
compartments if we allow mononucleotides
activated nucleotides to diffuse into
this compartment right we'll get a
little bit of the reactive dinucleotide
that we want but if we can wash out that
imol leaving group we can shift the
equilibrium all the way towards making
the actual important substrate for temp
temp plate copying and that should make
template copying go faster at lower
concentrations and we know from other
experiments much more accurately so this
is something we have hints that this can
work we're trying to work out uh a way
to actually demonstrate this which
hopefully will lead to an understanding
of how this could actually happen in a
natural
scenario okay so these are the kinds of
little bits of stepwise pieces how we
have to overcome one puzzle at a time to
try to build up an overall picture of
how to go from simple chemistry to the
ability to comp to to copy and actually
amplify genetic
materials okay so what kinds of
environments on the early Earth could
support chemistry like
this we need to be on the surface
because a lot of the steps in nucleotide
synthesis are photochemical we need
energy from the from the Sun from alter
Violet radiation to drive a lot of these
processes we want an environment that
we're pretty sure is not steady but is
dynamic and cycling and fluctuating all
the time to drive the cycle of protocell
um growth and division and so
environments like that we can actually
see and visit on the Earth today uh
volcanically active areas like this is a
picture of Yellowstone Lake in the
Western United States there many other
regions that we think have similar uh
kinds of surface chemistry would be in
areas uh after a large impact uh on the
early
Earth these environments are are nice
because they um allow us to think about
how to both make and assemble the the
the feed stocks the starting materials
of which ironically we we now think that
cyanide is the key ingredient for
building life right cyanide is made in
the
atmosphere um it can come to the surface
in in rain but is a very dilute solution
right and if you have cyanide in water
at low concentration like when it goes
into the ocean it's just going to
hydrolyze by reacting with water in
order to use cyanide to build up the
building blocks of life it has to be
concentrated which has to happen on the
surface and there's a fantastic way that
that could happen and this comes from
insights from John
southernland my colleague deitar
sasselov and John
grotzinger the idea is that in a
volcanic or impact crater area you have
hydrothermal circulation of water
through the Rocks which brings up ions
including iron
into ponds or lakes uh on the surface
and iron reacts strongly and
instantaneously with cyanide to make
very stable complexes called Ferro
Cyanide and as these Lakes um
periodically evaporate you could build
up a reservoir of cyanide held in this
stable ferrocyanide
intermediate and then again if you're in
a volcanic area
lava flows will come over this thermally
process um these chemicals and release
concentrated cyanide ammonia cyanamid
all the reactive starting materials that
we need to build up sugars amino acids
and
nucleotides and then when they come to
the surface as rainwater leeches these
things out and through the groundwater
and up through
Springs they can flow for example over
this is a terrorist outflow again in
Yellowstone be exposed to ultraviolet
light undergo chemical
Transformations intermediates like here
one of the key intermediates in the
synthesis of nucleotides tends to
crystallize out another opportunity to
build up a reservoir of of a key
intermediate as a crystal and Reservoir
and again inter uh contaminants side
products byproducts can get washed away
and it's this kind of thinking about how
to
um get away from the idea of this
primordial soup where everything's just
all mixed up together right to a new way
of thinking which is is is that you
build up reservoirs you undergo a few
steps make a new reservoir of the next
key intermediate that can get purified
and in that way
you can build up at least an idea a
model of how these complicated
Transformations could actually occur in
realistic geological
settings okay so um the way we're
thinking about it now just to summarize
is that we have uh we imagine very
primitive cells
protocells whose growth and division and
internal replication are driven by the
environment
in Modern Life of course all these
processes are internally controlled by
highly evolved
sophisticated Machinery protein
enzymes um but in a primitive situation
we imagine the environment is
responsible for driving a cycle and so
here's one idea of how something like
that could happen you have protocells in
a pond you have hydrothermal vents
releasing streams of hot water which we
see today in Lakes like Yellowstone
get caught up in a stream of hot water
these short fragments of RNA can come
apart protocell gets swept out into Cold
Lake water things come together again
little bits of copy and chemistry you
iterate that cycle you can do
replication and that sets the stage for
the beginnings of darwinian evolution
which would allow for the emergence of
the first RNA enzymes which can drive
better replication allow you to have a
longer genome that can encode more
functions and so on and so forth to a
more and more complicated and more
well-adapted primitive cells and
eventually over some unknown period of
time we see the evolution of
metabolism of
um energy transducing Machinery
complicated membrane structures uh the
origins of protein synthesis and so on
which sets again the stage for the
evolution to the last Universal common
ancestor of Life which was already as
complex as a modern bacterium and then
on U to us okay so again just to study I
think from all of
these this long history of um sort of
theory and laboratory experiments one of
the things that's strikes me as the most
important is keeping an open mind and
being ready to
abandon your preconceptions and think of
a new way that things might actually
work and I think that's happened enough
times that we're starting we're we're
just starting now to see the outlines of
a coherent pathway going all the way
from the chemistry of the early Earth up
um to the beginnings of
biology okay so um just wanted to
mention I've just finished writing a
book with uh Mar Olivio who's a
fantastic um astronomer and if any of
you are interested in learning more
about the details of that process uh you
can find it in this book which will come
out this
fall and so with that I'd like to thank
you all for listening and uh thanks
again for the opportunity uh Lori for to
speak here thank
you fantastic
