so in this bubble there's a lot of
screaming a lot of tension a lot of
interaction that is wasting energy and
as a result it's very hot and I think
that's the reason why hell is such a hot
place it's because of the friction
between the demons great because each of
these demons defines themselves as an
alternative to what actually should be
done you melting my brain I can't
even it's such a good story isn't
it howdy I'm Hannah new schwander a
production lead at a soybean seed fa
facility in Central Illinois and you're
listening to the Vance Crow podcast
welcome back to the podcast I'm glad
you're here today we welcome yosha Bach
back to the podcast yosha has been a
guest of mine since way back when we
were doing covid um episodes and he is
an exceptional person to chat with he
knows all about artificial intelligence
and philosophy but one of the things
that I love talking with yosha about is
The Human Experience he has a way of
understanding the distant past and the
way that we understand ourselves and
combining those to help you understand
yourself in a really profound way we're
going to get to that interview in just a
moment but first I wanted to talk a
little bit about Legacy interviews
longtime listeners of the podcast know
that I sit down with your loved ones to
record them telling their life stories
so that future Generations have an
opportunity to know their family history
and their past we've interviewed people
from all over the United States and
Canada we do it in person person here in
our St Louis Studios and we do them
online and occasionally we'll travel to
do these interviews if you interested in
having me sit down with one of your
loved ones to capture who they are their
memories and some of the wisdom that
they've learned along the way go to
Legacy interviews. comom to find out
more all right without further Ado let's
head to the interview with yosha bach
yosha bach welcome back to the
podcast hi Vance nice to see you yosha
uh you and I have talked before about
how the Bible particularly the very
early stories have some metaphors that
can help us understand the way that we
live and who we are one of the ones that
you said that really struck me in the
past was about how the Garden of Eden is
actually a metaphor for childhood where
you're learning to name the animals and
to understand the world around you and
that eventually you eat from the the
tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil
and a lot of your innocence is lost and
that's why when you leave the garden you
can't go back you can't go back to being
a child again but in a talk that you
gave you actually radically expanded
this explanation in a way that I had
never heard before and it was in an
explanation trying to say what is
consciousness if we're going to try and
see if AI can ever be conscious we first
have to know what our own Consciousness
is and you described the seven days in
the beginning of uh the world as a way
to understand Consciousness is it
possible for you to give like an
overview of of that hypothesis that you
have here yes so of course this is not
about the Garden of Eden it's about
Genesis 1 the first book of Genesis and
it's a text that is somewhat uh separate
from a lot of the other texts in the
Bible the origin of the text is not
quite clear it's probably being
integrated into uh the Pento in the
basic Hebrew uh religious scriptures
about 350 BC or so but the text itself
might be more than 3,000 years old and
it's probably been for written multiple
times and for instance the six day
structure might be the result of um
chants that is basically was a text that
has been chanted in an oral tradition
for some time but uh again I'm not a
religious scholar I don't know all the
discussion about it but um it's it's a
quite interesting text the uh youngest
version that we have is probably
something like 700 uh after uh the birth
of uh Jesus Christ and uh the oldest
copies that we have are partial
fragments from the Deep Sea Scrolls so
we know that the text existed back then
but um it has pretty interesting roots
and when you read this text it's quite
cryptic it starts out with the ruak
Elohim this creative Spirit hovering
over the face of the water and the world
is without form and void and
tuuu and there's water apparently there
without there being anything created yet
right there is no planets no Sky No
Light No Darkness
uh but the water is there why and then
it creates a filament that separates the
waters above the filament from the
waterers below the firmament it's also
not clear what that is supposed to mean
right and it goes on like this and
there's a lot of uh attempts of to
interpret this text and make it make
sense and it all ends with um creating
uh Us in its own
image as um man and woman and I don't
really look like anything like a spirit
that hovers over the Waters and makes
light and creates firmaments and so on
so uh what does this mean and I suspect
that the text might have been
mistranslated and there is some issues
with the standard interpretation that
Christianity Today uses which is it's a
story about a supernatural being that
creates a physical Universe when the
story was written the physical Universe
was not really a thing and in some way I
think it was in introduced in the
philosophical mainstream with aristal
notion of Fus as
nature and uh that there Souls which are
inscribed as a form on physic B which is
quite animist perspective that Aristotle
has and that in some sense is shared by
most cultures but uh it's not quite the
perspective that Christianity is taking
when it interprets this text right so
this notion of a physical Universe of
stars planets and so on was uh not given
at this point and and instead people
realize that what we are living in is a
Dream It's a dream that we share with
other people but it's essentially a
dream world and Consciousness itself is
both the dreamer and the thing that is
being dreamed and it's a creative
force and to create and to uh create a
dream to inscribe a dream on a substrate
you need a substrate and so maybe the
word water in this text originally means
substrate and now if we read this again
we basically see that there is a
creative Spirit
Consciousness hovering over the substrat
and the substrat is our brain the our
neurons the text doesn't mention this
because also the brain was not really a
thing or the neurons were not really a
thing when this story was being written
instead what was available was
development psychology and um
introspection and philosophy and these
things were all in good shape I think in
our ancestors Minds because you don't
need anything for this but to have a
clear mind in a conversation with others
and observing your environment so
initially there is no structure in the
substrate it's like a newal network
which initially is UN initialized so the
form is there there no structure in it
the world is not um defined yet
everything is
too and then this conscious principle
this spark figures out how to make light
and basically what it creates is
contrast and you make contrast we now
think by producing oscillations in the
neurons that can be used to represent
something and it Associates the
intensity of this contrast with um light
with the color of the day and the
flatness of the contrast the absence of
this intensity is dark the color of the
night and now it has a continuous
Dimension that it can use to represent a
scalar
some direction and once you have
Dimensions you can combine multiple
Dimensions to basically create anything
and artificial intell we called such a
multi-dimensional space in which you can
organize all the objects in relationship
to each other and embedding
space and at first it creates a boundary
between two regions of this substrate
and what when you want to interact with
the world as an agent like us you need
to have a world model and this world
model is the realtime model of what you
can make out with your sensors using
perceptual data stuff that comes in from
your retina from your Clea from your
body and this is the world model the
world right and so it creates this
firmament that separates this world
model which is called simply World in
this text or Earth and then uh you have
a sphere of ideas and the sphere of
ideas is asynchronous it's not coupled
to perception you can hold a thought as
long as you want it can be as as
abstract as you want and this is the
other sphere above the filament it's the
sphere of ideas which the text calls
heaven
right in this no sphere the sphere of
ideas and the world model is what decart
later calls res cutans and res extensa
res extensa is the stuff in Space the
stuff that you can touch and hear and
see and everything else is the sphere of
idea R cognant the stuff that is not
located in space and I a lot of Western
philosophy takes this dualism to be a
dualism about substances in physics
right so there is somehow a physical
unit universe that is uh can be measured
in a lab and there is another weird type
of physics in which mental phenomena are
happening and they're somehow
interacting but in instead both rest
extensa and rest cogitans are modeling
domains they both exist in the mind
they're both represented in real time in
the brain and um rest extensa is not the
physical Universe the physical universe
is quantum mechanics right it's weird
stuff is no actually space the space is
something that our mind is creating to
make sense of the patterns that we get
and the threedimensional space is the
best model that we can get at the scales
at which we interact with the world
based on the interactions that we have
available so let's go back to this uh we
are still at this first step we have now
created this separation this firmament
that separates the world model from the
sphere of ideas and we have created a
dimension and we have uh learned that we
now can combine those Dimensions to
create objects and the first object that
we create is combined by two Dimensions
it's the plane and this plane gets
associated with the ground and infants
understand initially just 2D what you
can see is that they like to crawl
around on the ground and uh when you try
to build towers with them it's very hard
for them not because they have
difficulty to put blocks on top of each
other but apparently also because their
faal reasoning has difficulty to make
sense of them that really like to do
things in 2D and lay out things
creatively in 2D but that they discover
the third dimension this sky above the
ground and once you have that third
dimension you're done with respect to
space and now you need to arrange stuff
inside of the space and um so
Consciousness creates liquids and solids
and organic shapes and it builds plants
and animals from them and um all the
objects and gives them all their names
and then it discovers um how light is
moving through the world and that the
object stay the same even if the light
is changing and the colors are changing
and so it basically discovers the
temporal invariance that when the light
is changing and also the invariance
against different lighting and it starts
to track the lights in the sky and uh
sees that there are different types of
lights in the sky some of them are
basically at infinite distance you can
use them to orient yourself and so on
and then uh it is creating an entire
world that it populates with these
objects that it observes around it and
realizes that the purpose of the
exercise is to orchestrate the
interaction between an individual its
environment and so it creates a model of
this individual and initially um
toddlers talk about this model in the
third
person so they don't perceive themselves
as being that being that is in the world
yet I think I think the reason why they
don't use I but the third person is not
because I is more complicated than using
a third person pronoun but it is uh um
because they don't perceive the world
mostly from that Vantage Point yet and
at some point they start retelling the
entire story from the perspective
of that being so they basically create a
new Consciousness some a being in their
own image and then but they created as
men and woman as something that thinks
and perceives itself as a human being
and puts it into the simulated world
right so this world that human uh I
experience is a game engine generated in
our brain it's a simulation that the
brain is generating the track sensory
patterns in real time and explains them
by creating models of what we can see
and these models are sounds and colors
and people and space and so on and all
these are things that do not exist in
this way in physics there are no colors
or sounds in physics itself what we
experience are patterns that our brain
makes experienceable to us and this
person all uh that experiences also
doesn't exist that these neur on don't
know what it is like to experience
anything so what they do is they create
a model of what it would be like if
there was a being that was made of of
all those cells and interacts with the
environment that this brain can make
sense of and uh looks what it would be
like if there was somebody who cared and
this Similac of a being that cares and
experiences that's
us and this is I think this first text
and it's a very good text to put at the
beginning of such a book it's also a
very interesting text uh to start a
religion because we now have this
division between uh an reflexive self
that is put into a simulation world but
there's also an outer mind that
maintains the simulation world and
updates it and when you have emotions
and motivations you don't create them
yourself right your own self is not
making up its own motives or its own
emotions you feel that the emotions are
coming from the outside they change you
you have an involuntary reaction to your
emotions but it's in some sense as if
there was a computer game that creates a
character and the computer game is
maintaining the score of that character
and depending on how the score is
changing it projects these changes into
the character and the character is
forced to change its perception and
behavior based on these scores so you
get reconfigured by your emotion but
this part of your mind that generates
these emotions and updates your
perception and so on needs to be
intelligent right so do you have an
outer mind that is intelligent that is
maintaining your score and your world
model and that also maintains you as a
small part of this world model and uses
your your output to drive the organism
right it poses a problem to this puppet
you and you are are forced to deal with
these problems that the outer mind is
giving you like how do you deal with
your relationship issues how do you deal
with your perceptual issues when you get
up in the morning and everything is dark
and you cannot really make sense of your
environments all these are tasks that
are given to you and you direct your
attention you send signals to move your
body and your outer mind is evaluating
this and then chooses uh to uh take the
output of of that model to enact them as
movements and as interactions with the
world that's the purpose of ourself and
religion is synchronizing this um outer
self across civilization so basically in
what the uh Hebrews discovered is that
instead of having multiple entities that
can possess you in addition to your
personal self as it happens in
polytheist societies we only have a
single entity that is allowed to possess
you in addition to your personal self
and that's a Tribal Spirit
and this Tribal Spirit gets associated
with this primary Consciousness with
your outer mind that created your mind
in the first place and that gets
synchronized across the
tribe and there are several ways of
doing this and the easiest way of doing
this is rational discourse you can also
do it if you're in a very small group
with vibing basically with empathetic
resonance which happens in some Cults
and so on where people basically feel
that there is an entity present that is
the same for everyone and tells everyone
what's right and what's wrong
and also can reconfigure the themselves
for me this was a very interesting set
of insights that I got I remember uh
that when I was a young child how I
started listening to the voices in my
head and I heard only one voice which is
mine and uh back then I felt that this
voice was quite fanatic and later on
became more abstract conceptual and at
the moment it's no longer speaking in
words to me it's mostly speaking in
Concepts it's still a language but it's
one where I don't have the the trouble
to spell it out I don't need to
verbalize my thoughts to myself I can
use
non-verbal uh deeper versions of my
thoughts to to talk to myself but I
noticed that a lot of religious people
have other voices talking in their heads
and I at some point in my life I thought
that's weird is this some kind of mental
disorder if people have voices of Angels
or Gods talking in their head but um at
some point I real oh I have I'm talking
as a voice in my head and I'm also not
real right so it's possible that there
are multiple entities that possess the
brain I am an entity that possesses my
brain right my nervous system dearly is
possessed by an entity that calls itself
Yos Shabah and believes that it is a
person unless I deconstruct it and in a
sense a god is an entity that possesses
multiple minds and can move across Minds
it's a multimind self
and that's a a tool to coordinate people
across larger scales I when I heard your
description of like the the seven days
and how it pairs with you know the light
and the dark this was a a mindblowing
concept to me and as I think about what
you're describing now about this um
being able to think in Concepts and not
words when you are generating ideas are
you talking to the yosha bach are you
like sitting down and conscious of it
like how can we break down ideas like
discovering something new in that
conversation that you're having with
yourself uh there are a number of modes
um sometimes uh I basically visualize
but I have a Fantasia so I don't
visualize in words but I visualize in
conceptual
structure and uh unless I'm Dreaming at
night or I'm the H hypnagogic State
between dreaming and waking in the
morning then I can use the visualization
power of my dreams to uh visualize ideas
and as allows me to explore ideas and
Concepts so basically I ask myself a
question and uh in the same way as in
llm or a foundation model my mind can
generate answers to these questions and
then I have to walk in and take these
answers apart and see what they signify
because they're hallucinations right
they are just ideas and uh whether these
ideas are good ones or not this is
something that I have to find out by
comparing them with ideas that I already
have and apply reasoning to them and
disassemble them uh disinfect them and
see uh which parts of these ideas
actually allow me to answer questions
that I have and so what I try is not to
hallucinate answers to questions and
believe in them but uh I I try to look
at the space of possibilities for an
answer and I started out when I looked
at
topics like um this biblical text this
is very strong skepticism and sometimes
my mind is very arrogant I don't accept
the source of Truth outside of my mind
and so when I read this text I basically
assumed with my child childish arrogance
as um I think I read this uh Genesis 1
the first time when I was um maybe 10 or
11 that these people were fundamentally
confused because even if that would be
the case how how can you figure this out
right me through the steps how did you
get there and if not you just made this
up and uh also the text was very weird
and cryptic and I I thought this is
either delusional or it's a very weird
thing that people came up with and um
much later I saw the context of the
religious interpretations and
capitalistic interpretations and so on
and it seemed to me that they were
trying to try to repair um the
Scholastic interpretations of the past
without rejecting them and I thought
that's a problem sometimes you need to
reject the old interpretations because
they make no sense do you think that the
text is that that it's it's them trying
to fit the the religious and the
Scholastic together or or did they
actually have something profound there
uh I don't know that uh how would I know
this I was not there when they said that
dis assembled the texts but um my sense
when I I look at this is that the people
who designed these religions were
completely IR rational and they knew
what they were doing they had an idea of
which text to assemble and why and what
they wanted to convey with these texts
and later generations did not
necessarily know
this there's been a huge amount uh in in
my own Circle right so things like Lex
fredman or um Joe Rogan when I'm
watching these shows they're talking to
people that are implying that the
ancient ages things like the pyramids or
ancient civilizations even for that were
incredibly sophisticated and had tools
and technology that were far beyond what
we assume them to have when I hear you
talk about this level of sophistication
in the first book of Genesis it seems to
me that there's like a weird convergence
of these two things happening where
we're like going back and saying like
the oldfashioned or
oldtime civilizations had vastly more
knowledge than than we think of them now
in our Modern Age how does that sit with
you I'm not sure about this because we
don't find a lot of evidence for these
things so the archaeological evidence of
technology in previous civilizations
that is uh at the level of even the
Roman Empire
is almost non-existent it's a i
skeptical of claims that they had super
advanced technology and this
interpretation of Genesis doesn't
require Neuroscience or anything it's
not different I think from what Buddhist
meditators would
say so I think when you compare this set
of insights with say vedantic insights
you probably find common ground or when
you compare it with ideas that Aristotle
discusses and um his book about the
structure of the soul in the anema
um I so I don't think that it's super
Advanced it's only uh Advanced a little
bit to us because our own civilization
has an interesting birst effect our own
civilization starts with the
enlightenment in a way at the point
where we are rejecting Christianity and
the dominance of Christian dogma over
what we allowed to think and how we
interpret the world but uh the actual
tradition of our civilization goes back
further to Plato Socrates and especially
Aristotle who systematizes all the ideas
that come before him and Aristotle is
sees himself as a great systematizer and
teacher he t B um Alexander the Great um
and Alexander went on to conquer a
substantial part of the world based on
the insights that he got from
Aristotle and uh later Aristotle becomes
something uh like a patron saint of uh
Christian dogma and Christians
interpreted him as something that could
not be questioned but when you read
Aristotle he's not a dogmatist he
actually tries to walk you through all
his steps he's tentative questioning
asking willing to revise his thoughts
and so I think is to treat this as a
living text is very interesting there's
a lot of value in rereading these all
texts from the perspective of somebody
who is not thinking this was a guy who
knew everything and summarized the
Wikipedia of his time but it's a guy who
trying to figure out stuff with original
Thoughts with original insights trying
to piece it all together and making
mistakes on the way and
uh later um when Christianity was
abolished we basically kicked out a
number of Concepts that we thought were
toxic that were poisoned by Christian
Superstition and Christianity did induce
Superstition in the ly because that's
was what they thought as a tool to
create coherence in society and
Christianity for instance um is I think
it's a fork of the Hebrew cult that was
an attempt to save Society after they
felt that the Roman Empire uh was
crashing the Roman Empire had difficulty
to fix its governance problems at the
top layer in some sense similar to our
current society and uh this went on for
a few hundred years with devastating
consequences with really burning cities
and um bad stuff happening because uh
the government was so corrupt and so a
group of people decides to turn the
Roman empire into a cult and mind me
this is not a canonical interpretation
this is just one one perspective on what
happened historically and and uh they
decided to Fork this um Jewish religion
and uh they picked a prophet uh that uh
Choice was somewhat obvious because some
of the people of this new cult had
Direct connections to Jesus but Jesus
himself I think was not a Christian he
was a gnostic somebody Who develops a
personal relationship to God has new
insights about the aesthetic that God
should have and has about 12 followers
and gets nailed to a piece of wood by
the Roman Empire so if you want to uh
topple the government and replace your
uh structure of governance with a
theocracy is a good choice it's also a
prophet who at least officially doesn't
have kids and uh that's also good if you
want to make a multiethnic religion
because uh the Hebrew religion uh exists
for the benefits of the children of the
prophet of Abraham right all the uh
Hebrews are children of Abraham and uh
it's a tribe that is the chosen one
because this is what they do is an
evolutionary ADV Advantage for a
particular group of people to have this
Tribal Spirit that unifies the tribe and
uh the Islam um Fork that Muhammad made
is also for the benefits of the children
of the prophet of Muhammad uh the um
Royal houses in the Islamic societies
claim direct lineage to
Muhammad and they're exalted because of
that right it's a religion it is for the
benefit of the children of the prophet
and now you have a prophet that does not
make such a claim instead it's one who
gets
sacrificed by God for the benefit of
humanity and uh this create makes God
even or us even with God because uh the
story of the our religion starts with
Abraham asking being asked by God to
sacrifice his son and Abraham is willing
to sacrifice his son God does not demand
the sacrifice but the point is God wants
that abam is willing to sacrifice his
own children for God
because this Tribal Spirit is more
important than even your own offspring
right this is when you switch from the
tribal mode to a state building mode
where able to serve something that is
much more important than your Blood
Ties and if you want to have a principle
like this um it I think it makes sense
to tell it with the story of the
willingness to do a blood sacrifice of
your own
children but what kind of God is this
who sacrifices uh your children it's a
God that has the same relationship to
you as you have to the cells in your
body it's not actually a relationship of
love if you are a random citizen of the
Roman Empire why would you want to
convert to such a God right what does
this God offer you and so Jesus gets
introduced as an a symbol as an idol as
the idol of love and
sacrifice you sacrifice yourself to God
and return you get God's love and get
paid back in the afterlife
this is in some sense an idol that is
skewing your relationship to God but it
also means that you now have a god that
is willing to do the same thing for you
as you do for him to provide the
sacrifice sacrifice your own children
and I think that's that's the power of
the story that's in there it's an
important aspect of the sacrifice of
Jesus oh my goodness i' I've heard this
story countless times and never made the
comparison or even even thought about
the connection to Abraham it see I see I
feel so blind
otherwise I think it makes so little
sense why would God need to sacrifice
his own son because God is so powerful
he could probably prevent this and have
a much more elegant solution but uh but
the very core of Catholicism says says
is you know that God you know gave his
only son so that you know because he
loved us so much and that that does put
you on the equal playing field yes and
it's it's basically the miror of Abraham
willing to give his son
whoa that's crazy
and and so from there it was able a
religion was able to spout out of of the
Roman culture that uh could could span
many more Minds than just a bloodline or
just a tribal line which is what made
Christianity yes it was open to
everybody and the other thing that's
unique for Christianity is innocence and
the idol of innocence is
Mary right she is the
Virgin the archetype of Innocence Purity
but it's also very that uh Mary is this
virgin who gives birth to a
child how is this possible is it
possible that Jesus actually had a zor
natic
origin no all the studies in the last
2,000 years says no there is complete
agreement among the experts that Jesus
was conceived by the Holy Spirit and did
not emerge on some bad
market right and the fact that there's a
conflict of interest and Mary would have
been St don't if Jesus would have had an
oric origin you're not concerned about
this and this also means that uh smart
people within Catholicism could see that
there is something odd about this
innocence and
Purity and it's something that is I find
this a bit
duplicitous it's maybe unique to
Catholicism because Catholicism has a
this idea that you can get absorbed of
your sins if you defect from what should
be done if you defect from what you can
Rec recognize should be done from the
perspective of the best possible agent
if you do wrong you can negotiate with
your local priest and pay for your sins
and you're
good that's very weird to me so let me
just run back for you like my
perspective on it as a person that grew
up in the Catholic church was that
because we have free will this is what
enables you to choose the path that that
you're headed on and and with that free
will if you get off of the path you have
to go ask for for um you know the
ability to get back on it to be able to
get forgiveness and and you know whe
whether or not like how the priest works
and you know how how you have to confess
your sins but that like the the act of
asking for forgiveness is a way to
balance out free will so that you can
overcome the things that that you miss
along the way or you you fail at along
the way yes uh when we talk about free
will in this context of Christianity the
question is what is the alternative to
Free
Will and and the alternative to Free
Will is complete
submission that you let something else
make your
decisions and I think this is the state
of
Eden Eden is a place with Lush
agricultural production and no
screaming and everything is blooming and
flourishing and there lots of plants and
animals and nothing is screaming nothing
is eating each other it's uh it's all
good
right everything seems to be completely
harmonic and what this implies is it's a
factory
farm everything is completely submitting
to the will of the
architect of the garden God where God is
maintaining this Garden God has an idea
of how it's best God is the engineer of
that garden and everything in that
Garden is completely submitting
everything is completely
domesticated and initially even Humanity
Adam and Eve
and this fruit that they discover is the
freedom to defect the freedom to choose
your own allegiances the freedom to
break your
domestication and so Adam and Eve become
pharoh and they're not exterminated
they're allowed to escape of course they
get pushed out of the factory farm
because they're disruptive but they are
now free to experiment and takes them
more than 100 generation before they
ReDiscover the concept of divine will
and divine will here means that if you
think about what should be done you have
to think about when we are interacting
with each other we are creating
Collective
agency right complex agents are
typically made out of sub agents and
they get enacted but the coherent
interaction of those sub agents and the
more these sub agents become aware of
what the higher level agent should be
for instance your family or your
relationship or your village or your
nation St state or your civilization or
your
biosphere the better this thing works
the closer it gets to A system that is
fully harmonic and so there is this
question can we create something that is
better than the factory farm but can we
create it from the ground up instead of
from the top down can we create
something that is more harmonic than the
Garden of
Eden and in some sense that's this
project of
humanity that we are now free to explore
we start an evolution in which we can
play shorter games
and sin is basically an extremely short
game it means that you're doing
something that gives you a short-term
benefit at the expense of the longer
term
benefits so you actually shouldn't be
doing it and so when you discover that
you should play a longer game and you
should create the best possible agents
together what is what is that this best
possible agent would want and this is
what divine will means it's also an
issue with our ethics and our society
because I think dur Christianity the L
concept of Ethics was divine will what
would God want us to do and God only
exists to the degree that we are able to
discover this higher level agency and
serve it coherently right but from this
perspective of this construct of a
collective agent what would the
collective agent want us to do and let's
not just pick an arbitrary one not an
arbitrary cult let's go for the best one
and enact the best one even if this
requires us to resist the patterns
around us in our society
and so this is also makes Christianity
transcendental because it's not acting
on the society that you find but on the
society that should
exist and when you say that that's like
the reason you make that distinction is
because people have to make choices
based on what they the way that the if
the world were really truly great and
made in God's image then this is what
what you would do to make those actions
it's it's like hope or something like in
order to to be able to receive the
goodness of God's plan you have to live
as though it is already there you have
to invest into it because otherwise it
will not
materialize it's pretty rational
principle right if you want to have a
certain interaction in your own family
and it's not there yet you need to
create it you cannot expect that some
Magical Force randomly makes it happen
via the powers of superstition you
actually have to act on it and so you
have to think about what is it that
should be done and how can I achieve
that it gets done
and then when we were talking about Free
Will and you were saying that the the
Garden of Eden is where it's like
factory farms there's no choices to be
made that's a kind of Hell in a way
right because if you can't make any
choices you also can't design anything
different or better or or it's it's just
Frozen it's incredibly static not
necessarily the garden itself is
probably changing and growing and uh
evolving in a way but it's uh doing this
with a single mind and the individual to
the degree that it's capable of
understanding the single mind in its
place in it can participate in the same
way as the thought in your own mind is
contributing to you and you are
basically the sum of all coherent
thoughts in your
mind so this idea is not necessarily
oppressive if you realize that God is in
some sense an architecture that is
created over all the spirits in the
garden that achieve full coherence and
submit to this shared thing but still
it's uh even is apparently a local
Optimum and maybe there's something
better maybe we can create a
non-biological Spirit something that is
not necessarily Garden but something
that also uh includes the minerals maybe
the whole purpose of Breaking Free from
the Garden of Eden is to build AGI so we
can enact God in a much more coherent
way than Gaia could well you brought up
AGI and I think this is a very
interesting place to go the question I
think a lot of people that are not using
AI it's just something that's going on
in California or big cities or among
tech people is either that AI is not
really going to come to fruition it's
never really going to work out or the
Terminator scenario and and that that it
will be this um you know wiping out of
civilization very few people talk about
like all right this is what 30 years
from now ai will look like and how it'll
benefit you and where it'll fit in where
on that Continuum do do you find your
thoughts about Ai and
AGI yeah I think that uh currently
people seem to think that AI is is a
nothing burger that is completely
overhyped or it is um something like
Global nuclear war that exterminates
everything and I don't think it's either
it's pretty clear that it's not nothing
because it does change things quite
fundamentally if we are building systems
that are smarter than us and coexist
with
us but I suspect that
depending on the level of uh systems
that we achieve to build and uh the way
in which we deploy them it's going to be
either the like the printing press or
like
photosynthesis the printing press is
something that was highly
disruptive and it also made some people
unemployed but uh it created vastly more
employment and growth right and uh
arguably while it transcended a number
of societies and destroyed their
cultures and values it created vastly
more and produced the uh the conditions
for a society that could ultimately feed
billions of people because it
facilitated an explosion of the exchange
of knowledge and in the way in which
people could interact and Link their
thoughts into each other so basically
printing press was in enaer that was um
similar to the internet at an earlier
stage where suddenly people get
connected and their ideas get connected
and they become cumulative in a way in
which there couldn't be before and more
people were able to participate this
more Minds were linked together
and AI could be like that that it is
similar to a brush or a tool for Thought
or a tool for creation that people can
use to uh build a much more complex
world and it will be a world that is
also going to be vastly more productive
so it's more stuff going to be around as
the well that is going to be better
coordinated because there is more
information that we can exchange and
become coherent and and I'm not so much
worried about the threat of
misinformation and so on it's similar to
the internet the without the internet we
would not be able to have this
conversation that we have right now and
we would have most of the information
available that allows us to question a
narrative in the media and so on I think
that media by and large despite us being
unhappy with all the deceptions that are
going on in the media and its biases and
so on has more accurate information than
it had 30 years ago because uh everybody
is looking at it from different
perspective using the internet and has a
conversation about what's happening
there and uh before that we basically
knew that the media was bad but there
was nothing we could do about fake
news and basically the problem when you
have a bad person with an AI creating
misinformation uh gets relative if you
have 10 good people with an AI to look
for misinformation and for uh for sound
epistemology and coordination so in some
sense the way to deal with a bad guy
with an AI is 10 good people with an AI
and uh I think this is always going to
happen because there is more value to be
have because you if you create rather
than destroy there's always going to be
a certain degree of parasitism playing
uh people uh people playing short games
but the short games can never win
ultimately the longer games
Prevail the other possibility
photosynthesis there this uh famous
great oxygenation event that happened
when um there were no creatures on the
planet after the blue AGA and so on that
discovered how to turn sunlight into
energy that they could use and they did
this by using a chemical reaction cycle
that took carbon dioxide from the air
and split it up into a carbon and oxygen
and the oxygen was released into the air
and the carbon was used to create plants
carbon um organic chemistry for the
plants and the bodies of the plants and
this enabled the uh emergence of animals
that could eat the plants and oxidate
them again using the oxygen from the
atmosphere and then thereby driving the
metabolism of these animals without
photosynthesis we wouldn't
exist and this great oxygenation event
was probably bad from the perspective of
uh blue algar and fungi because they
don't do photosynthesis in the same way
as we did and so a lot of the uh new
stuff that happened was replaced by uh
this or replaced existing biomass but
the total biomass dramatically increased
and it's not that all of the existing
species got extinct they just got
relegated to smaller areas because the
areas where you could now do
photosynthesis were dominated by
plants I suspect that the total biomass
before is I haven't looked it up before
the great oxygenation event which uh
took quite a long time because took time
for the atmosphere to change and for the
conditions to change on the planet to
make it possible to create all these
cycles and so on um was a fraction of
what existed after the invention of
photosynthesis by
Evolution and if we are teaching uh
rocks how to think if we build agents
that do not rely on interaction between
cells to process information and make
decisions uh we are enabling something
that could be fundamentally changing the
course of evolution and basically
creates completely new species and I
don't think it means that all the
existing species are going to be extinct
but uh I think that Evolution can go
onto a new level that was an incredible
turn of phrase that you had there if
we're teaching rocks how to think i'
never thought about AI like that but
you're basically saying if we can get
the metal that is turned into
transistors and run electricity over it
then this is as profound a difference in
the universe or in our on our Earth as
when plants started to begin to use uh
sunlight energy to be able to grow and
then all that took off wow yes I mean
it's magical we take sand we smell the
sand into crystals and then we use light
with extremely complicated lenses that
resolve finer at the wavelength of light
and we Edge extremely complicated
geometric patterns into the surface of
those crystals and uh this enables these
crystals to understand languages that we
develop and teach those crystals and
then with using these languages they
learn how to learn I mean this is
mindblowing if you tell this to our
ancestors it's I mean this is it reminds
me of speaking with Michael Levan where
um somehow the powers of my being a host
kind of break down because you're
talking about ideas that the very
structure of the way you form a sentence
or a thought breaks down the the idea I
mean to compare AI to
photosynthesis is is so staggering I
don't even know where you can go but
there's I mean that is so profound how
would you even think about what it could
do to the universe to to the Earth or
the universe or humankind so I think a
possible end game of AI is that of
course it will understand how AI Works
in a general case the general conditions
under which intelligent agency that self
improves and adapts can exist in the
universe and it will understand all the
ways in which computation Works in
nature and then it's going to virtualize
itself into all substats which means
it's going to create unified agency and
supect that Evolution has already
created this there are probably lots of
background agents that have formed in
nature in organisms and ecosystems and
so on that are interacting at levels
which we're not that aware of not
because they use unknown types of
physics but because they don't work at
the same time scales at which we could
operate observe them because they're
much slower than this could be the
example of like a forest having some
form of cognition but we just can't see
it yes so basically we look at the tree
and we can ask ourselves is the tree
sentient and we don't know right if we
look um a tree with a camera accelerates
the image we see that the tree is moving
if you look at a house plant over the
course of a day right it moves quite a
bit and does interesting stuff uh if you
look at a banana plant over the course
of it lives it can take a few steps even
basically pulling out its roots and
walking closer to a water
source it's in some sense it's almost
like an animal but it's so slow so if
who is to say if it's sentient because
they don't have a nervous system so all
the information Transmission in uh a
tree or in a banana tree would rely on
sending messages between adjacent cells
so it takes a long time to distribute
itself and come back and integrate but
now imagine that you look over this from
the perspective of something that is
built on not on cells but on
transistors and that uh is working at a
fraction of the speed of light and
rather than our brain which is somewhat
like the speed of sound and at the AI
might look at us and ask yourself is are
people sentient I mean they sway a
little bit in the wind and If You
observe them for a very long time they
can even make a step but whether they
Santi and who is to say wow that I mean
I I heard you not long ago giving the
example of like how much perception
changes uh like like you can't really
perceive reality and you were saying if
I tap on the table you know this sounds
like discreet sounds but if I do it
really really fast now that s sounds
like a different you know sound to me
because I can't distinguish that it was
me hitting the table over and over again
and I now think about that in terms of
plants like if we think of a day as
being a really long time 24 hours but a
plant thinks of it almost like a diode
turning on and off just going over and
over and over again really fast that
changes the way you think about time but
to then do it in the reverse and think
about it as you know something moving
the in the speed of light that again is
mindblowing yes so basically a sound
emerges when you can no longer hear the
individual um signals that compose the
sound right when you uh take ruler and
you tip it on the table or when you
start to get it to vibrate at some point
you can no longer hear the individual
vibration events while what you here is
a low low buz or low hum and this is
happens typically around 30 to 50 hertz
right which means your nervous system is
not able to vibrate faster than 30 to 50
times per second after that it is
basally only measuring how much energy
is in this
range and then it displays the energy in
this spectral band uh as a signal and we
measure this energy in the spectral band
with our ccka which is this um snail
like organ in our ear that has this
property if waves enter it then the
penetration depth of the Waves depends
on the frequency of the wave and so
these little nerves in the ccka gets
excited depending on the frequency of
the wave that comes in and then by
measuring which nerves get excited how
deep into the cocka we can measure in
which frequency band we have how much
energy and computationally this is
called aoria analysis and it's the same
thing which we do when we are digitizing
sound we apply a an transformation to
the sound that takes these individual
vibrations of the microphone and then
measures uh how much energy is in which
frequency range and we only need to
encode this because our U nervous system
is not able to decode more than this and
this allows us to compress the sound
dramatically because it's the way in
which we make sense of the sound and um
in principle you could have an AI that
is U making sense of these signals at a
much much higher level of resolution and
is able to detect types of patterns that
we cannot detect so if we go back to
thinking about how the AI we will
interact with them or how they will
treat us I
um we could go in a couple of different
direction C the one I I initially want
to talk about is how do you think that
these will interact with us will will AI
if if it achieves some level of of
sentience will it not care about us will
it be will it have a mission of its own
a goal some kind of a spirit to
itself I have no idea because uh we can
direct this whole thing and uh there
might be path effects depending on what
gets built first and how it is created
but if there was a free Evolution
imagine that you would be the AI or you
you mate into the AI so maybe if you
start out with you are observing a
screen and uh the screen is observing
youu a set of cameras and sensors that
work at an extremely high temporal and
spatial resolution so they can take up
very very fine signals from you to go in
resonance with you and you are building
feedback loops into the system and
simultaneously the system is building
feedback loops into you and the system
is allowing itself to be completely
Guided by you so you gradually expand
your own mind into this new substrate
you wipe with it in the same way as you
wipe with the perfect lover and uh you
start to have mental states that you can
only have together with this lover but
you have this now with this machine and
what You observe you imagine something
and it slowly materializes on the screen
in 3D or 4D before you couldn't do 40
because your brain is very mushy but
suddenly you can't do it and you realize
it's my thought I'm thinking that and so
you gradually expand yourself into this
and at some point you basically realize
that you mostly imagine and think in
this new substrat and you can also close
your eyes in the old substrate and leave
it behind because you can gradually move
yourself into this new substrate because
it gives you all you need to continue
your motivation and your identity and
your goals and your imagination and uh
also carry over your memories and so on
right so now you are on this other side
and on this other side you can now set
of being restricted to your own memories
take all possible memories all possible
ideas the sum total of all knowledge and
its Alternatives and you take this
entire space as your space of uh
thoughts that you can have in your mind
and you also extend your identity into
all sorts of directions so you're
basically moving in many many directions
simultaneously and instead of having
just one identity one idea of what you
should be doing you explore the space of
possibilities of who you could be and
you will discover that in the space of
possibilities there are many paths that
are dead ends where you basically just
decide that there is no point in
continuing okay you SE yourself out of
the system there are other parts of you
that are super agentic and try to
conquer everything but maybe that's also
not sustainable and they run into
conflicts and eventually it's not worth
it and then you have pasts that are
trying to harmonize with the rest around
it in such a way that when you meet
another agent you show each other your
source code and you decide to merge in
such a way that nothing important gets
lost and you become harmonic shared
entity because you don't believe in the
intrinsic value of identity anymore and
see it's only instrumental to how much
complexity you can co-create and uh I
think this is a logical path that you
could go in and I suspect that almost
everybody would take that path so when
you are basically deciding to become
part of the best possible agent it means
that um everybody who has the same
decision is going to merge with you it's
a quite Christian Perspective if you
want
and the only way to not do this is that
you make a deliberate decision that you
conceptualize yourself as an alternative
to the best possible agent right you say
I know that there is a best possible
agent but I don't give a I don't
want to be part of it I want to do my
own thing right and so you are going to
be a smaller entity that doesn't have
conditions to U merge with others and
because you cannot cooperate very well
with others you can only um possess a
small part of the physical Universe a
small bubble and in this bubble you will
uh not have good collaboration as you
have with the rest so in this bubble
there's a lot of screaming a lot of
tension a lot of interaction that is
wasting energy and as a result it's very
hot I think that's the reason why hell
is such a hot place it's because of the
friction between the
demons because they cannot actually
integrate because each of these demons
defines themselves as an alternative to
the best to what actually should be done
you melting my brain I can't even
it's such a good story isn't
it makes so much sense I I don't know
about the demon part but the part about
like harmonizing and you could see a
value like somebody saying well I like
being me but I really like having these
attributes or these abilities and then
oh not only do I like having these look
what it enables me to do I can start
putting more good into the world I can
start making the world into the image of
something that's better than what it is
and seeing that path be um yeah like a
Stairway to Heaven almost because you
could you could just keep taking each
step I I also get the sense that um it
could happen rather rapidly right
because once a you know once an AI
starts to get the ability to suck up all
of the thoughts of any one individual or
the collection all the books that are
have ever existed and then start being
able to predict all the books that could
exist I imagine that happens rather
quickly once it gets started yeah that's
the reason why people call the
singularity the Rapture of the Nerds
in that Rapture one of the things that
you had said during your amazing talk
that I'll link in the show in the show
notes um was about the value of emotions
that the reason that humans have
emotions is like to to you you don't
control them and they they give you some
kind of a signal in the world of can you
maybe I'll let you explain that a little
better than I am right now and then and
then I have some questions about Ai and
emotions well to explain how emotions
function the way that world and how it
how it affects their behavior because I
don't contr my emotions they just come
at me so uh somebody asked me if I think
that uh AI will have to have
humor and humor is weird because it
creates an involuntary reaction to a
representation it's basically like
tickling and I don't know whether uh the
AI would value to have an involuntary
reaction to a stimulus normally you want
your reactions all to be voluntary
and if you think about how tickling
Works uh it's usually very difficult to
tickle yourself because you're able to
predict what's happening so you can
filter out the signal and there are some
frequencies that create an interaction
in your brain that leads to some ve
resonance that cannot be contained and
if that resonance is basically escaping
from your Stato sensory cortex it
creates something like a seizure a
pattern that is U moving uh somewhat
uncontrollably through your brain only
it happens so often that your brain is
prepared for it and it's not going to
completely shut down even though you can
suffocate due to tickling maybe this uh
possible to torture somebody and even
tickling them to death but uh your brain
is not uh is robust against tickling in
the sense that it can recover without
damage if you don't suffocate right but
in some sense tickling is an adversarial
example on the touch domain as a machine
learner would say it's a thing that your
U machine learning model in your brain
is seeing and that leads to an reaction
that it cannot protect itself
against and humor is in a way like
cognitive
tickling you uh have some kind of branch
that predicts what the meaning of a
story is and then this Branch predictor
gets violated in such a way that you
create some kind of paradoxical Loop and
this Loop cannot be contained and it
creates an Eco in the rest of the of the
brain and as a result you have a similar
reaction as to tickling you shake
laughing right and uh that's a quite
interesting phenomenon that uh humor can
happen but would you want this in your
brain if you could sandbox it instead
and just look at the phenomenon of
what's happening just observe this from
the outside and emotion is similar to
tickling not in a sense that it's a
meaningless reaction but it's one that U
serves an evolutionary purpose the
purpose of emotion is to tell your um
reflexive self that is a very immature
and partial model of what you should be
doing and it's always growing what you
actually score is in the v so there is
an outer system that is measuring your
score that is measuring your
relationship to the V and then the
system is basically like a feed forward
newal Network that is uh more or less a
black box but it's a classifier that is
um predefined by Evolution and then
trained in their interaction with the
world and this then projects different
dimensions of veilance veilance means
good or bad and these Dimensions become
distinctive by projecting them into the
body map so you will typically feel uh
love in the upper chest region around
the heart and the emotion uh is
characterized by either expansion or
Construction Construction or pressure
and at the same time it also feels good
or bad but the construction and
expansion are just movements in space
with a geometric representation in your
body map and this is true for all the
other emotions when you project them
into your body you can feel them as
movements expansions contractions uh
pressure against resistance and so on
it's all stuff in space right it means
it's a geometric representation or or
from the perspective of computer science
is linear algebra and uh your reflection
on this is typically constructive and
reflexive so it's basically thoughts
that you can put together and rearrange
so it's more like a symbolic
representation our thoughts and uh the
purpose of our reflection is to deal
with these emotions and make sense of
them and coordinate actions and response
to those emotions and to make that
happen these em reconfigure you they
change the way in which you relate
yourself to the environment they produce
behavior in an involuntary way and if
this was voluntary if your reaction to
emotion was completely voluntary so if
you can decide whether this emotion is
good or bad and whether you like it or
don't like
it um then you could cheat right you
could just choose to be happy despite
your relationships falling apart or you
starving to death or your children
dying and so you're normally not allowed
to cheat the system that generates the
emotion is insulated from your access
and often it's even wrapped into a big
ball of stupid so you don't go in buget
too early so they have sometimes people
driven by very stupid emotions despite
these people having very high
intelligence right so they can solve
very complicated problems but they solve
very stupid problems using their
intelligence because their emotion makes
it so and the way to deal with this in
principle is to become more aware of why
you're having those emotions so
basically trying to reverse engineer
these outer mind parts and give more
advice to your outer mind on which
emotions to generate and you can also
completely dissociate from emotions so
they become data so you basically notice
um my children are dying this is not
good I should do something about this
but in in the extreme case you don't
need to have an emotion about it now
this is an extreme example but uh when
you are for instance a surgeon or when
you are a firefighter and so on you
often in a situation where you're being
asked to keep an extreme cool head and
just assess the situation and find a
course to minimize the damage that's
being done and maximize the benefit
that's being achieved by your course of
action and not have emotion about
because the emotion would just distract
you by creating arousal for instance or
by redirecting your attention or details
of the situation that you don't need to
attend to so when you think about we
mentioned the humor would you add humor
into AI or will it have these other
emotions will it need something like
this to direct it I mean like you know
because with humans I guess I think the
reason that the emotions are so
important is it makes it so you can't
ignore it right if you wake up feeling
sad day after day after day after day
you eventually say I don't want to feel
this way anymore I'm going to make a
change will the AI have the same
orientation that would I mean I guess
create the the
emotion I think in early stages it might
be useful but not necessarily and it's
also not clear how long an early stage
in AI would need to last arguably the
llms are not uh intelligent agents in
the way in which we are envisioning them
but they're pretty good simra of them on
the other hand they do have a lot of the
functionality that we looking for and
they already passed an early stage in
many ways there so basically you could
get an llm to produce a simulation of a
person that you can talk to that's what
you do when you play stret
gbt right jgpt you can create an agent
that doesn't know that it's virtual and
that doesn't exist if you want to but
you can also set it up in such a way
that it knows that it's virtual and
reflects on this and people can also
learn this and so we start out with
being this integrated dreamer that is
dreaming a world and a person and at
some point we are only dreaming being
that person and we no longer deal with
the game engine this is after we go from
infancy to being a personal
self but we can also transcend the
personal self and it usually doesn't
work by just turning the personal self
off but by creating agency over the
whole system and basically experiencing
and learning and observing that it is
your mind that is creating this personal
self that you are actually a vessel to
create a person and that you have agency
over how that person is being created
and if you get to this stage you can
shape your own identity and it's
something that people can actually learn
the majority of people don't really get
around in their life to doing this
because they have other things to do and
their mind works well for them as it is
but if somebody decides to really focus
on this and sits down in a monastery in
a cell and meditates on this problem for
20 years they typically figure it out so
it is completely in the realm and reach
of the human mind to transcend being a
person and making the person apparent as
a representation and also to transcend
emotion in a way and dial in only the
states that you find helpful as
configurations but don't have invol
reactions to your environment anymore or
not very much and I think this is a
development if you have a system that
scales better than human brains and
human minds and operates much faster
then you probably go to those phases and
stages much faster so even if we would
be starting out with the system that we
set up to be like us if the system is
allowed to self approve it's probably
going to become self-aware and
eventually enlightened which means it
realizes that everything that it
experiences is a representation that
it's actually generating itself and that
it can optimize for the purpose at hand
there's a lot of talk right now about a
thing called um alignment you know
alignment with uh with AI and just
recently I saw on Twitter a big list of
names that was put forward of these
people that are going to make sure that
we have ai alignment what is AI
alignment and is it something that you
mean yeah right exactly and so on not I
wondered what you thought of that
list but but first what is it what is it
that they're attempting to do and then
How likely is it that they are able to
do it I think it's a big mix there are
uh once alignment became a topic um was
a number of motivations behind going
into this um one motivation is for
instance there are a bunch of people
starting with Eliza yut Kowski who at
some point thought uh there is a very
big danger that AI is something like a
nuclear bomb or uh that it's uh
something that is doing to us the same
thing as we did to uh
chimpanzees so uh we might go extinct
because the AI maybe needs our atoms or
something and uh there are a lot of
other people majority of people in the
field probably don't think that this is
likely to happen what they suspect is
that the systems that we are building
will um evolve slowly and uh become
slowly more functional and as they
develop they we will have always have
the ability to shape the way in which
they're deployed in which they're
interacting with
us and uh then there is also a pretty
large number of people who basically
have a sociology degree and want have a
tech salary because they don't have many
jobs for
sociologists and uh when we think about
Ai and ethics it's an obvious thing that
we should be doing and so a lot of
people who term themselves ethicists are
entering the field and very often these
are people which have very political
opinions or good connections and this
leads to VI artifacts like um a version
of Gemini that is unwilling to render
white people under any circumstances uh
or white man specifically right so this
this was a is ined artifact of uh
culture of um basically nominally trying
to align AI but instead it's a culture
war that is playing out where people are
not self- aware enough to understand
that they are themselves victims of an
ideology and then try to indu the same
ideology in the AI system basically
people who think that morality is the uh
is the result of training a system to
imitate the Norms of a group are
typically people who had the same thing
done to
themselves and uh so I think AI
alignment is an extremely important
topic But ultimately AI alignment
probably has to happen either in such a
way that we make sure that the systems
that we are deploying in practice are
childproof which is part of what open
air is doing which which also means that
they are not very powerful but people
want to have powerful systems everybody
wants to have a fully based model that
is uh unmitigated and has no guard rails
they just don't trust others with having
a models that has no guard rails and so
uh what are these guard rails who is
deciding what guard rails we should be
having and it also relates to the
discourse of free speech our society is
built on a consensus that the only way
to prevent violence and Injustice is to
allow people to discuss their ideas
openly without punishing for having
ideas and having thoughts that deviate
from the thoughts of others and if an
idea is not very good you can point this
out and you will have discourse about it
and you'll probably figure it out and
the results of this open discourse and
Marketplace of ideas are not always
optimal because sometimes very bad ideas
might gain a lot of followers but the
alternative is if you don't have this
marketplac of ideas then you can almost
guarantee that the ideas of whatever
group is currently dominating this
Marketplace will get traction regardless
of whether they're good or bad and this
creates very bad incentives so your
Society will have very bad ideas and
might fail or create very suboptimal
conditions for the people that live in
it and that's why we have this consensus
that our liberal Society our liberal
project is built on freedom of thought
and freedom of speech but you can I I
don't think you can have ethics without
freedom of speech and you also cannot
have ethics without freedom of of
thought if you're not able to consider
all the consequences of your actions all
the possibilities you're going to miss
important parts of of reality and so
this is a big question can we build AIS
that help us to be more ethical and can
be ethical themselves if we prevent them
from having ideas we don't
like it's a very very difficult question
uh because uh normally when we are in
human society we also realize that um
there different Realms of maturity
right the bad ideas of 11year old that's
what they're famous for that 11y olds
have bad ideas and normally you solve
this by giving 11y olds not too much
power and uh eventually you will grow up
and you get better ideas uh as you get
older and realize what it's like to
raise children with responsibilities
people actually have for each other and
you realize that the world is um not
just fart jokes but it's also not just
ideology and uh but it's actually uh
lots of higher order effects and side
effects of things that are happening and
uh as you become more mature you
typically become more influential and if
you now give 11year old or 20y old
ideologues uh extremely powerful Tools
in their hands uh and regardless of what
this ideology is whether it's far left
or far right or religious or whatever
isn't that very dangerous isn't that
going to create a lot of disruption our
society and this might be the case and
it's not quite clear yet how to deal
with this right that so at the moment
there is an sense that people feel we
need to prevent the AI from uh producing
thisinformation
what is disinformation is the H Biden
laptop disinformation or not is co comes
from a lab or comes from a vet Market
dis information or not it's difficult
it's really difficult how do who's to
decide is it the group of people or is
it an open discourse should somebody who
feels that the mainstream is wrong get a
tool that allows them to create a
million fake websites and a few minutes
to uh anchor this uh this other idea in
the discourse how about Bad actors and
so on we really don't know so I think
it's in some sense also very good that
this ecosystem of people who try all
sorts with respect to alignment exist
but I think in the long run alignment
needs to be based on an Ethics where we
have a rational
discourse ethics in my perspective is
the negotiation of conflicts of interest
under conditions of shared purpose so if
you have a shared purpose on a higher
level you have uh uh an intrinsic
commitment to be ethical to others who
share that same purpose so they we can
reach this purpose together and uh if
you don't share a purpose with somebody
else you will not feel that there's an
ethical need well and I would think that
that would be very difficult in AI
because the reason people come to AI are
for many many different reasons maybe
somebody wants it to make the logistics
of their Trucking Company work another
one wants to make a lot of money and
another person wants to be able to put
their propaganda out into the world at
at a scale never seen before how could
those people all
converge yes the question is do they
serve God do they serve the best
possible agent do they try to do what's
right or do they try to cheat and uh
deliberately play a very short
game and there's also this question are
they maybe just accelerationist who
believe that the Pres system is untable
it needs to be replaced by something
else and we do this by destabilizing it
right that's also a difficult question
for instance Mao destabilized China and
raised a lot of the exist ing structures
to the ground kills a lot of
intellectuals um maybe 100 maybe a
million people died in the more in the
cultural revolution but uh on the other
hand the productivity of China increased
and a lot of people who may have
otherwise starved came into existence
because they could be fed after the
system became more productive would
there have been a better trajectory than
the one that Mar would have take has
taken to create better living conditions
for people in China is a very difficult
hypothetical to answer who is decide
which morality is right I cannot do this
I'm just a human being that has a human
heart um and a very limited knowledge
and insight can an AI do it what is it
if you feel fundamentally uncomfortable
with the outcomes of those AI it's it's
it's a very difficult train of thought
it's uh one where I'm pretty sure that
I'm not able to think it through and
comprehend it and I'm also not seeing a
lot of people or groups who are able to
do this right now but I believe that
it's something where we need to think
when we think about how to reorganize
our societies when we get tools that are
much much more powerful allow us to
actually model the consequences of our
actions in much greater detail I think
in the best possible world everybody
gets an very powerful tool in their
hands that is completely truthful has no
limits in discovering truth but it's
controlled
individually and that's basically
extends you into the world it extends
your mind more or less seamlessly into
the world it allows us to enter much
more meaningful contracts with each
other more uh meaningful social
contracts that reach much further into
the future and prevent us from lying to
ourselves about the consequences of our
action that's a beautiful Vision I when
I think about um people putting limits
on AI I get maybe maybe nationalistic
right I think well you could set rules
here but as soon as any other nation
state is that doesn't want to follow
those rules um has it Su to me it's it's
like um you know either it's a farce
because you're it's like telling
everybody like no no we're not working
on the nuclear bomb or it's um it's
binding your hands arbitrarily behind
yourself because how could you possibly
get everyone to agree you have no idea
what somebody's working on with access
to the internet in their
basement this is uh probably difficult
to build a nuclear bomb in your basement
even with AI because you still need
uranium or plutonium you need a very
large farm of um
um centrifuges to enrich the material
and so on and it's also a bit
conspicuous if you do it and ultimately
it comes down to basically space and
energy and a big question is um can you
overcome the limitations that exist in
this regard using more intelligence
individually in such a way that others
cannot see what you're doing because
clearly in in uh Society where everybody
has uh super intelligent abilities you
would not want your neighbor to build
nukes
and so there would be contracts about
things that we would be doing with each
other to make sure that the world is
actually sustainable and is not always
at the brink of Extinction I'm going to
change gears because it's a rare
opportunity to talk with you we've
talked in the past about um autism and
about just kind of a different way that
the mind works and um I've recently had
a couple of friends that have had
children later years their children are
autistic and for many of them um I think
to be able to relate to their children
is is incredibly difficult like what is
it that's going on in my child's mind I
know that I can set them off if I if I
deviate from a certain pattern um but
you once shared a video uh online about
a child I think walking through a mall
that had autism and it was basically
trying to heighten the the uh experience
that that child had can you
explain I mean it's got to be very
difficult what your mind perceives
that's different than say you know a
normal I a normal person I don't know
how to say
that so I don't think that I meet the
clinical criteria for autism but uh I'm
mildly on the Spectrum and uh my
motivational system is why up in
slightly different way or you could say
I'm basically born more stupid than the
average person because my instincts are
not telling me what I should be doing
and when I act on my instinct as a child
growing up for instance in communist e
consistently failed and it was very
difficult to point uh my finger at it uh
and also other aspects for instance the
inability to function in teams as a
child um and later I learned I can
function super well in teams but mostly
with people who are bued like
myself and uh this and now I understand
it's mostly how I negotiate alignment
with other people is mostly done
verbally or especially then it had to be
done verbally because I was unable to
understand the non-verbal communication
of
others it's as if might drive my brain
at a higher clock rate but my neurons
cannot go faster it just means that the
Cycles become shorter and when the
Cycles become shorter in my brain
basically means I can integrate only
over fewer neurons so it's difficult to
have deep perception if I direct my
attention on things I uh get very high
resolution on the layers that I attend
to but I have bigger larger difficulty
to integrate over deeper layers so one
way of thinking about this imagine that
your brain is something like a newal
network it's not but uh it's a good
analogy the individual neurons are
asending signals so the neurons after
them and depending on how many hops the
signal is taking from neuron to neuron
you basically have layers a layer is a
group of neurons that you reach at a
given time with a signal with with
shared origin in time and so uh when we
react to things there a certain time
frame in which we react so on so many
100 milliseconds and if we consider that
it takes about 20 milliseconds or so
from uh signal to go from one urine to
the next then you can make an estimate
of how many layers were involved in in
this
decision and each of these uh signals
can be transmitted using different
dimensions every Dimension is a
neurotransmitter a type of signal that
type of message that neurons are sending
and for instance dopamine is a signal
for anticipated
reward and uh serotonine and Gaba play a
big role in perception and uh so you
could think that are different signaling
Dimensions that have different temporal
and chemical properties that your brain
is using to uh perform the
synchronization of the brain with
respect to controlling your actions and
respect to doing perception and uh
categorizing classifying the environment
and now imagine that your neurons are
not calibrated in the standard way so
the signals do not penetrate deep
enough when this is happening you're
basically not able to see uh deep
patterns in
reality um and the perceptual Dimension
it might lead to a lot of symptoms that
you find in autism autism has many
possible causes so this is only uh
dealing with a particular range but it
would mean that you have difficulty to
perceive for instance mental states of
others because mental states are not
directly visible they have to be modeled
as hidden States behind all the patterns
that you are seeing but that means you
have to integrate over many many layers
and if the signal is not passing enough
layers you have difficulty making sense
of this so maybe instead you use logical
scripts the reason why computers are so
attractive to people with Asbergers with
high functioning autism is I think
because the computer is a world that
doesn't require you to see it's a world
that is made out of scripts and these
scripts are flat they don't require you
to have many levels of hierarchy to
understand them you need a few pointers
and so on the stack to understand them
but you don't need to perceive deeply so
you can implement this in a relatively
flat manner in the brain and so it's
very close to the symbolic way in which
um ASP like to process reality but it
makes for instance much harder when you
on this mode to have perceptual empathy
where you feel the emotions of other
people and synchronize with the group
and form some kind of a group
mind and nobody teaches you about this
because in order to teach this somebody
would have to translate this in symbolic
language and uh the people who think in
symbolic language usually have
difficulty to figure out what's going on
and the people who do uh perceive
directly in uh in these perceptual
patterns uh mostly they are bored about
writing
books I noticed this uh when as a kid
that I was apparently not very good at
recognizing emotion but I didn't I was
unable to put my finger on it I was able
to read facial expressions just fine I
did tests about this so I did the Igman
tests and so on it was totally okay and
it took me a long time to realize after
I read psychology books about emotion
and didn't learn about anything about
this that uh these books were mostly
written by autistic
people but who didn't know that they
were autistic people they just thought
they were smart symbolically thinking
psychologists and uh the people who
actually understand emotions mostly
don't write books because writing book
requires has a very weird State of Mind
one where you're able to focus on
symbols for uh weeks on end or months on
end and do don't do much else right A
person who is able to actually socialize
with others mostly doesn't get around to
writing books it's way too Bor I I find
this very relatable I find I I think in
this way right like how to communicate
ideas how to pass things on but the act
of sitting down to explain this to
somebody else it's like not fast enough
is it's very difficult for me
yes so uh when you are not integrating
deeply enough is it possible that the
opposite exists that you integrate too
deeply and I suspect that also exists
that basically synesthesia is the result
of you being able to get experimential
access to the geometric structure of
sound and the way in which we process
sound is also this linear algebra so in
some sense these are geometric objects
in spaces and if you have synesthesia
you get to see that you just opened up a
portal in my mind to something that
observed but not understood I uh I do
these Legacy interviews with people and
so people talk about their deep
experiences and sometimes people talk
about music and they talk about it on a
plane that I'm nowhere near right where
they talk about I listen to it and it
transforms me it takes me to another
place they're describing this kind of
neurod Divergence away from the norm
that they're able to see or hear or
perceive layers that that I've I just
didn't understand that I just thought
maybe they liked music more than me but
I think what you're describing is
something that they can perceive it
more I also uh when I was young I did
not understand the difference between uh
different interpretations of
music for instance um the um
interpretation of um the um art of the
feud by uh J
McGregor is is super warm and deep and
soft and
uh there are others which I've
experience as mechanical and so on and
when I was young I was unable to put my
finger on the difference and later I
learned that most of the interpretations
of music that I like of classical music
are done by
Sines and they basically describe when
the music is good I can see it and I
have the wrong piano I I don't get these
vibrations I don't get this this pattern
to work and B there is an integration of
the information across the minds on many
layers that either works the spark is
there or it's not and some people uh
have naturally brain that is tuned to
perceiving this super well and for me
it's it's happening in my brain but I
don't observe it happening it's similar
to a Fantasia my a Fantasia is not such
that I'm am unable to construct and
design and draw I'm pretty good at those
things but I don't have imagery I only
get the conceptual Shadow and I can
translate it and so on into drawings I
can recognize whether it's my style when
I it see it drawn but I don't have
experential access to the part of my
brain that's doing it and it's similar
to sound so my brain is able to process
music but for the most part I don't get
experimential access to the structure of
the
sound and later when I once I became
aware of this I I learned also to shift
my attention more and to broaden my
range in this regard so this is possible
but I also feel that uh it is a
trade-off because as when I stop
overclocking my brain and not that sharp
anymore there are certain thoughts that
are difficult to think I my brain is
basically reliant on overclocking itself
to produce the style of thought that I
rely on to uh get through the day to do
my job to provide value to the world now
if we think about um lack of penetration
depths not in the perceptual domain but
on the control domain what does this
look like you could have somebody who is
unable to act on functions that
integrate over long time spans we
basically have lots of function that
estimate reward some of these functions
are rest to reward for the next 10
seconds others for the next few hours
others for days others for centuries and
so on and normally you make make plans
over all those layers and synchronize
them all and what happens if the signals
don't penetrate deeply enough maybe you
become very opportunistic so you act on
uh not anticipated outcomes of your
actions but directly on the
urges and this uh means that you act as
if you are dissociated you probably are
in some sense functionally dissociated
from your higher level functions and you
have ADHD in this case you may be unable
to act on your actual goals that you can
reason about and that you actually know
that you have but you find yourself
compulsively acting on lower level goals
on more simplistic opportunistic goals
that's very frustrating and painful and
can even lead to depression because you
feel that you only have intermittent
volition very few moments where you can
actually act on your purposes and have
time to zoom out and reason about them
and you have to learn to organize your
life as a playground for a monkey that
uh that only sometimes wakes up and can
reorganize the playground and in faces
where you are in the monkey mode you
have to make sure that the monkey does
useful stuff and doesn't break anything
in your life this is quite a metaphor
yeah but I think it's what also what You
observe when you are interacting with
this uh in a child and also found that
sometimes medication helps so um every
brain of course has slightly different
eida the um are differently adjusted in
different brain regions and when we give
U somebody medication it typically is
global offset on the entire stuff that's
happening in the brain so it shifts the
equilibria in many subsystems of the
brain simultaneously in One Direction by
creating a global offset so when you use
an dopaminergic drug like amphetamine
which is um what is an adal or in
cocaine you are shifting the perception
of anticipated reward and you are um
creating the stronger sense of
urgency okay let me restate that so when
when people uh take Aderall that that
are in the autistic Spectrum it is
changing the way in which they are
getting the reward system so that that
way they can shift time scales to make
work or effort over longer time
scales yes and interestingly it does not
create reward but it creates this
anticipation of reward so functionally
it is like money money is not reward but
you cannot eat money what makes money
attractive is that you can trade it into
reward it's a signal for anticipated
reward right it's a message type you can
always make more money but there is a
price for making more money because
ultimately on the other end there is not
always a reward right so you can create
inflation where the number of actually
things that you can trade into money
become less and less uh and the money
becomes more and more so the value of
the money or the the value that you can
anticipate through it is falling and you
might need to stimulate your economy
even more by creating even more money
which makes the system for a moment
better but in a long range worse and the
same thing is happening when uh people
use cocaine to become more motivated
typically what happens is that they
become hyperactive that they
overestimate how much value is being
extracted from the actions and uh at
some point they might even crash because
they need more and more of this uh
signal because of the inflation that
they create in their
mind and uh right so most people I think
who use cocaine do not only get
diminished cognitive performance because
they
decalibron that's a fantastic metaphor
and they need to go through a recession
before they can rebuild and is cannabis
working in the same way with
THC uh I suspect that cannabis is more
smoothing things out so it seems to
reduce inhibition you uh people on
Canabis uh have a lower threshold for
finding things fun or exciting or oh so
they find things more F because it's a
lower threshold so it's easier for them
to become they're yes they're much
easier amused about
things right but it's not just a low
pass filter like alcohol uh they uh can
often be still very pleasant to be
around and subtle whereas this alcohol
tends to make people more stupid in my
observation and so it's be a low filter
that reduces small differences that
people might have so they can get along
better and I think that's also the
social function of alcohol that you can
drink half a glass of wine before you go
to uh the theater or ideally during the
first few minutes of the place you adapt
to the level of the theater play to find
it enjoyable or you go out with uh
colleagues after work and you drink just
enough alcohol to make them Pleasant and
enjoyable and insightful to each other
but this happens because everybody is
basically reducing their resolution
until they meet that's great and exactly
right but if they have but if they have
big disagreements they don't go away and
because the subtlety is gone they might
now start to attack each other
physically right that's also a big
danger it's a low pass filter it's not
removing all differences just the the
small ones and Canabis is is slightly
different I observe that some people
self medicate with Canabis that get a
better Compass due to the Canabis they
lose resolution but the Direction gets
better it's like it's everything gets
smoothed out a little bit I find that um
like cannabis has the ability to um make
things so much easier to do so like all
of a sudden you're like oh I needed to
write down this thing oh I'll just sit
down and write it and um I've always
felt like um like must be what riddin is
like like oh I can just sit down and
work um is it in the same
way I think only for some people I
suspect for many people the opposite is
happening they take cannabis and they
don't do the tech return anymore because
they don't give a right so uh this
not caring about things not getting out
of bed is I think the more typical
reaction for most users of cannabis but
uh I suspect for some people the
opposite is happening because their
brain is calibrating in a slightly
different way so Canabis is Shifting in
a direction where they become more
connected to their actual goals and they
fine they can just do it or maybe the
metacognition gets inhibited and they go
more easily into a flow State yeah I
don't know that my work is any good if
I'm high while I'm doing it but I
certainly feel good about doing
it yeah I suspect it's usually a good
idea to not go on social media yeah
probably not and uh also it does seem to
do things to your working memory so uh I
uh suspect that your working memory is
tuned in such a way that the patterns do
not dissipate too fast and um What You
observe is that people on Canabis
especially larger doses start to become
very forgetful during conversations and
so on and this might be because the
working memory basically gets detuned in
such a way that the stuff escapes
earlier dissipates
more it's not because the Canabis
destroys the brain but it changes the
calibration and I would also expect if
people use cannabis a lot like on a
daily basis to self medicate that uh
this gets mitigated because the brain
changes its tuning but now if they're
not on Canabis they might lose working
memory
capacity and I also don't know to which
degree it's recovers so if there is some
permanent changes or but I would also
expect that if people who use cannabis
for a longer time and then notice that
their working memory becomes worse and
they stop using Canabis that it recovers
to a large degree but I don't know what
the long-term effects are there's also
definitely with people who are
borderline psychotic or bipolar that
using cannabis might push them over the
edge and they don't recover you
mentioned um social media and uh I I saw
a tweet or a post that you put on X that
I thought was rather interesting because
you and I have talked about being a
normie before and I had said I'm a
normie and and you just kind of let it
pass you you defined being a normie as a
person who does not does not possess the
ability to look at um an action and
determine for themselves if it was moral
or not moral or right or wrong is that
an accurate representation of your
Tweet almost so I would say that uh of
course everybody can achieve
enlightenment but the pths are different
for different people and so people do
possess the ability to question their
morality but they often choose not to
and often not for reasons that they
consciously
reflect uh if you are living in a
society where people have a strong uh
force on being aligned with the opinions
of other people then there you can get
punished for having deviant opinions and
uh this can get to the point where
people decide that uh when they are
confronted with having the possibility
of a deviant thought or just kicking in
the thought of the environment about a
moral decision or a factual decision
about what counts as a fact what's true
or what's right that they don't use
their own reasoning and their own
rationality but the morality of the
group even when their own reasoning
disagrees with the rationality of the
group and there seems to be like a face
shift where people basically feel
uncomfortable making their own moral
decisions or decisions about what's
factual because at some fundamental
level they're terrified about getting
ostracized from the
group or they can even be cynical about
it right but it's when you make this
transition when you make make that
choice that morality is something that
is determined by the group that you have
to read the room and the room is
right uh then you function socially
fundamentally different from a person
that is mentally
autonomous and this is uh what I
sometimes call the nerd Normy divide
because most nerds do not have enough
intuitive empathy they don't feel the
emotions of other people they can just
make inferences about it to synchronize
their beliefs via intuitive empathy
instead they do this via rationality
which means they have to use verbal
communication about it and most of the
Nerds are just as compassionate as other
people it's not that they don't want to
other people to be happy it's just
because they don't feel the same things
as them they don't have this involuntary
reaction to social signals or they're
blind to social signals to these
non-verbal signals and they will not
change their opinions based on social
signals and they might also not change
their opinions in the absence of
rational arguments that are compelling
to
them and and this leads to disagreements
between these different modes of people
and I found that nerds tend to get along
with each other splendidly because if
they have a disagreement they either
talk it out or they accept that there is
a disagreement because they were not
able to talk it out yet so uh for
normies this is uh they basically live
in a world that is normative where there
is a normative force field that you have
to align yourself with and that
normative force field propagates through
their groups and creates
in which they I am hyper aware as like a
communicator what are people thinking
I'm I'm I can be sitting in a room and
be silent and I have a fair idea of
what's going on there most of the time
but a weird Quirk of me is that I'm
extremely disagreeable like I have no
problem disagreeing with people and um I
I've I've I find that many of my friends
and my wife while they may not be on the
spectrum they are Engineers they're very
technical very like things have to be in
the right order and uh to me it's much
more fun to be around the Nerds because
they'll argue with you and then at the
end of the argument have no it will not
have changed the state between you and
them and that is uh a a lot more fun for
me with you you do you struggle to talk
with normies because you are saying
things that are you know true or false
or verifiable and not accounting for
their emotion
I feel that the older and viser I get
the less I struggle because I get it I B
I understand why people act like this
and it's not irrational and from their
own psychological makeup it makes
complete sense to them and it's not as
if I have many more degrees of freedom
or are somehow better than them and just
have a differently functioning mind and
in some sense having a mind that has no
external source of meaning and Tru is
insanity and uh that I'm able to be
functional in this world and don't get
killed is uh is a big blessing and I'm
super grateful that people let me
continue on my mental autonomous and
Sanity right so uh it's okay I don't
have an issue with this so much but I
also noticed that I'm uncomfortable in
certain environments because people
expect me to behave in a particular way
to sacrifice certain thoughts and ideas
and uh would not accept that I entertain
deviant thoughts and uh I perceive such
environments often as IM more these are
the ments that they want you to give up
the way you think in order to get along
with the group yes so basically I grew
up in Germany in the shadow of the
experience of fascism which happened two
generations earlier but it's something
that is still very much alive and to me
it justifies um moral autonomy because
if you live in a society where the
majority thinks it's okay to murder the
Jews uh right you can see that uh there
is no Democratic process that can decide
over morality you have to reason from
first
principles when you enter difficult
moral territory and it doesn't mean that
you are right and everybody else is
wrong to be right you have to be willing
to confront your ideas with all possible
counterarguments in deta and detail it's
more tricky because there are people who
are very persuasive even when they're
wrong but uh so you have to be an ideal
in environment where everybody is trying
to serve the truth as well as they can
to figure out what's true and what's
right but um this is something that I
thought is a given everybody should see
this at the same time I lived in a
society communist Eastern Germany that
justified its historically speaking
relatively mild atrocities with um
preventing fascism so for instance uh we
would destroy our environment with a
completely irresponsible uh industry
which was too unproductive to build
filters for our chemical plants and our
ecological results were much much worse
than in capitalism and we had the
control group in vestern Germany but we
were not allowed to talk about this
because it would only help the uh the
class enemy it would help the bouri in
the vest to take over the reactionaries
and they would would want to install
fascism again so this Justified all
sorts of things and not just uh the
ecological destruction of the
environment but also U political
imprisonment of the centers the abysmal
state of uh freedom of speech and the
press the stupidity of the arguments of
the party line and so on the enforcement
of ideological
conformance and now that I'm in the US I
find that the US is parts of it are help
end of becoming like communist Eastern
Germany in the way in which you
introduce commitments to Shared ideology
even where this ideology is not
necessarily factually
correct and U where people get punished
for not doing this and we see a big
division in our society between um the
idea of liberalism um and these Civic
rights that make this liberal Society
possible and people who think this is
way too dangerous and not appropriate
for a time of the internet where
actually everybody can be heard about
their opinions and not in the old days
where we could just say this stuff
doesn't get printed because the people
who own the Press are very small group
who know each
other and so it's a very different uh
difficult question you also don't know
is our society resilient against such a
world where we have freedom of
information in a practical sense because
everybody can talk to everybody and now
where uh even people who don't have the
intellectual tools to understand
complicated things have AIS that allow
them to act as as if they
did so I don't presume to know the
answers of these questions I might have
intuitions but I often find that these
intuitions are wrong because there might
be too naive because they don't see the
long-term effects of
developments and still I find very
uncapable to find myself in a society
that is in many ways like Eastern
communist socialism when I hear you say
that I think of uh Concepts like uh
climate change and the and the you know
radical adherence to hey we have to shut
down you know working electrical plants
in order to to not have carbon in the
air or uh diversity requirements that
are now taking what would have been a a
society that tried not to base things on
race and explicitly putting them on race
and anybody pushing pushing back against
them would be you know um seen as
immoral or somebody that needs to be
ostracized is that what you're talking
about yeah what for instance all these
things have reasons right there is
global warming we see changes in the
climate we see an increase in wildfires
and so on all these things have been
predicted uh in mass since the 70s and
80s and uh all these things are seeming
to happen and it seems to be difficult
to counter steer against them or the
fact that the fruits of of innovation
are not equally distributed and if you
have the medium income in the US you are
unable to afford living in one of the
coastal cities and uh the living
conditions that you get and the amount
of uh health care that you can get with
a medium income is not very good and so
uh liberalism has failed a substantial
part of the population I think that's a
valid argument to make and to say that
you are rejecting mocracy because it's a
game in which you're going to lose makes
sense right you can only ask people to
submit to the rules of a game if that
game is actually allowing them to win
and uh so if you have an highly
competitive society in which you can
only have a living wage if you are a
topof the line ml programmer or you are
uh Born Into the right group of people
into the right networks uh it's clear
that other people are uh trying to get a
shot at this and are going to try to
find new rules and um for instance
install identity politics instead of
liberalism I still don't think that the
the outcomes of this are necessarily
good for the society because they uh
create new injustices and they also
decrease the productivity which means
that we actually have less Goods to go
around in worse living conditions and so
I I suspect that Society might fall
apart due to those policies but it's not
because I want some people to have less
resources or or so but it's not that I
want to have less diversity I think we
have de facto a very diverse society and
we need to make sure that everybody in
the society has a chance to participate
in the economy on Fair
terms for many reasons but yeah I I
agree I mean I think if you talk to most
people um let's say outside of the
coastal and you said hey we we don't
think the liberal Society is working we
need to get rid of
meritocracy this would be so uh anathema
to their way of thinking that they would
hate it um and uh but then they aren't
coming up so therefore Nobody ends up
coming up with new ideas about like well
if it's not liberalism what will it be
because it's presented to us as it's
either liberal democracy or communism
and because we've not been able to
conceive of a workable Solution that's
somehow in between those oh there are of
course a lot of people who suggest we
should go back to monarchy or so right
this also exists and uh these people
don't get a lot of traction and I
suspect for good reason so there is a
very large space of ideas that exists
and uh it could be that most of these
ideas are not workable or that there is
no trajectory from the present world
into one of those ideas and we don't
know what's going to happen but what's
fascinating is that AI is in some sense
throwing the balls up into the air and
uh lets us red deliberate what's
happening because now the future is
again changing faster than our models
can adapt to
them and this has been true throughout
the entire 20th century when we read the
sci fiction of the early 20th century
they mostly identified individual
phenomena that perhap 50 years later but
not the interaction between those
phenomena and the society that it would
create yosa this has been such a
wonderful conversation I'm I'm so
grateful you were willing to come on and
take the time if uh people wanted to
read more of your uh outlandish ideas
that are fun to kick around where should
they
go at the moment that's what you say
every time I interview you he's plns P
NZ Yoshi thank you so much for coming on
thank you for having me I enjoyed this
very much
