in this episode you know what is space
so this is a great question and really
the the basis of much of my work um when
we think about space for Hegel in
particular in the philosophy of nature
he says that space is indifferent it's
continuous it's
external and so we can kind of break
that down a bit right if space is
indifferent that means that this space
here is the same as the space here it's
homogeneous right all space is just the
same it's once we start to put objects
in it and differentiate those objects
based on space that we really produce
relations as such and even logically we
think very much spatially in this sort
of like web of
relations but Back To
Nature the interesting thing about space
is that there is always more space we
can never contain all of space into one
bucket let's say right and a really for
a very simple reason that there's
something outside the bucket right we
can't ever encapsulate everything and
totalize everything this is a really
classic Paradox this is the Paradox of
the one in the void that when we name
the void as one ah we've the void that
is expansive and endless let's just call
it one thing let's call it the one name
everything as
such well then we've marked a one
against a backdrop of indeterminacy
against a void again so there's this
logical indeterminacy that cradles all
determinations
so in the same way it's becomes very
evident that when we think about natural
space there has to always be more space
it and one other way that Hegel
describes space in the philosophy of
nature is as he says space is side by
side it's Side by sidess hey everyone
welcome to my conversation with the
hegelian philosopher Katherine Everett
firstly let me just get this out of the
way I'm so glad that I connected with
Katherine and started following her work
before she became a well-renowned
philosopher and thinker because oh boy
let me just say reading her thesis
itself was quite the effort so I can
only imagine I can only imagine what a
feat it must have been to write the
thesis CU it's truly an ambitious
project I mean to redefine not redefine
but to formulate an onology of space
using boui and heel and Jan philosophy I
can't put it into words uh how difficult
that must have been and how ambitious
and even audacious has to be to try and
formulate something like that and I've
got to say reading it you know for me as
a neoi I've learned so much uh she kind
of reformulates and and rearticulates
some of these existing big names in
philosophy especially caral philosophy
uh in her thesis which I should probably
mention Hegel in Vertigo an ontology of
space uh it was just it was so
interesting I I certainly couldn't get
through all of it um but I really am pry
make the time to read it a bit more
carefully um and again I learned so much
as to how these different thinkers can
be brought into this really
interdisplinary work um and also I kind
of mentioned this Katherine already you
know in caral philosophy kind of from
the leanian heelan camp uh where he
really only
see uh
taking quantum mechanics and all these
paradoxes that come from the world of
quantum mechanics and modern physics
seriously and philosophizing on it and
theorizing on it and another person I
think an up up and coming thinker would
be Katherine who's doing that uh she
wrote uh a few pieces on uh the the on
the Quantum Leap uh but also another
piece on AI and chbt and I find it's
really important for people who work uh
in in carnal philosophy kind of from the
kind of hegelian or the lenan tradition
to um t with these questions and kind of
bringing this different toolkit to
analyze some of this phenomena we see
more typically handled by um analytic
philosophy or the Feld like cognitive
science or artificial intelligence so I
don't want to prolong this introduction
too much I am really grateful for
Katherine for sharing her thesis with me
but also for her time discussing her
work um but before we get to the episode
of Co a quick PSA you may be aware that
I've mentioned multiple times I'll never
have advertisers or sponsors on this
podcast I simply don't have anything to
sell you and I deeply do believe that we
live in a society of excess and overc
consumption and I don't want to
contribute to that by selling you more
things that being said though forgive
the topology we ultimately live in the
world we live in and I can't continue
this project and sustain it if I don't
have any kind of financial support So as
uncomfortable as this makes me feel I
sincerely would like to ask you to
consider supporting this podcast
financially needless to State your
listenership and membership is more than
enough support however if you have the
means please do consider supporting me
on patreon substack or even PayPal and
if you're wondering what are the pugs
what are you going to get nothing
absolutely nothing because I'm not
selling you anything you're not buying
anything but rather if this podcast if
the work I've done has brought you any
kind of value if you've learned
something new do consider supporting me
on these platforms but to reiterate only
if you have the means all right back to
the episode so as I was saying despite
the current economy if you have the
means please do consider supporting my
work and by doing so you not only
support this podcast and my writing but
also my academic research I truly will
be grateful uh be that as it may a quick
formal introduction to Katherine
Katherine Everett is a heelan scholar
philosopher writer and AR artist
Katherine's a research fellow at the
global center for advanced studies in
Dublin and a secondary faculty at the
Brooklyn Institute for social research
her PhD Hegel and vertigo and ontology
of space was supervised by Frank Ruda at
the European graduate school reading
Hegel with baju and zek she argues that
space is the indifferent ground of logic
nature and spirit in hegel's
encyclopedia I should mention this uh C
did give me permission to share her
thesis around so if you do want her
thesis please do email me and I'll send
it right across Al righty with that
being said here's my conversation with
Katherine Everett well uh Katherine
firstly uh the three main ideas of yours
that I was really drawn towards was
undoubtedly your work on Space um and
then also more of your interest in uh
the philosophy of physics or should I
say you're interested in quantum
mechanics uh outside of je you're
probably one of the only other people
I've seen uh that that are that's really
seriously tackling these questions in
quantum mechanics within kind of the
hegelian you know lenan Theory scene um
it's just I mean I I understand because
like it can really it can easily lead to
the woooo land and it can be a whole
bunch of bush I understand why a lot of
thinkers are quite uh you wey or
circumspective of of you know theoretic
and Quant mechanics and the other thing
of course is this article you wrote uh
does chat GPT and joy so I'd like to
discuss a bit of AI kind of your views
on that too um however however I
probably should mention this um I know
you were on uh cadel's podcast recently
of philosophy portal which is great now
I look forward to listening to it and
I'll leave a link to it in the show
Notes too uh that being said you know uh
I I think Kel's audience the philosoph
audience are a lot more attuned to
German
idealism uh Concepts you know hegelian
philosophy and are they very well
knowledgeable in in the different uh the
tradition itself but also the different
ideas I wouldn't say so about myself nor
my audience we're all neop fites and
yeah and therefore it's it's a bit hard
to just jump into your thesis straight
away without a bit of context I think
it'll kind of make definitely like just
like thrown into you know into something
so maybe one one idea which I've seen
underlying all of your work is this
notion of incompl completeness um you
recently gave a talk on the idea that
reality is
incomplete uh so Katherine can you can
you tell us what do you mean by reality
is incomplete or do use another term by
ter term from J ontological
incompleteness so what what does this
mean and also perhaps why is it
necessary to theorize on the uh
incompleteness of
reality yeah thank you so much R it's so
great to be here first of all just thank
you for having me on it's um I feel
really lucky to be here and to talk
about these cool different I mean things
I think are cool that I like to think
about um so yeah let's start with the
incompleteness so um so the incompletion
of reality for me is intimately tied up
with space and the fact that space
guarantees incompletion in a logical
sense and in a natural sense so we can
break those two pieces down in terms of
nature it's a debate today right that if
we were to take a rocket ship to the
farthest reaches a space are we going to
hit a wall are we going to hit some sort
of
curvature um or just space go on and on
infinitely so of course I didn't get
into a rocket ship when I thought about
this problem um but I think in just a
really basic way when we think about
what space is in itself this is
insightful for thinking about the
Contours of nature so you know what is
space so this is a great question and
really the the basis of much of my work
um when we think about space for Hegel
in particular in the philosophy of
nature he says that space is indifferent
it's continuous it's
external and so we can kind of break
that down a bit right if space is
indifferent that means that this space
here is the same as this space here it's
homogeneous right all space is just the
same it's once we start to put objects
in it and differentiate those objects
based on space that we really produce
relations as such and even logically we
think very much spatially in this sort
of like web of
relations but back to
nature the interesting thing about space
is that there is always more space we
can never contain all of space into one
bucket let's say right and a really for
a very simple reason that there's
something outside the bucket right we
can't ever encapsulate everything and
totalize everything this is a really
classic Paradox this is the Paradox of
the one in the void that when we name
the void as one oh we've the void that
is expansive and endless let's just call
it one thing let's call it the one name
everything as
such well then we've marked a one
against a backdrop of indeterminacy
against a void again so there's this
logical indeterminacy that cradles all
determinations so in the same way it's
becomes very evident that when we think
about natural space there has to always
be more space and one other way that
Hegel describes space in the philosophy
of nature is as he's says that space is
side by side it's Side by sidess which
is a really fascinating Point as well
that there's always going to be more
space next to itself but space has
already in this way alienated itself
from itself which is a really we can
really dig into that it's really
interesting but back to
incompletion in this one very basic way
right nature is open there's always more
space but not simply in the macro level
right like it's not simply that I can
keep going and there's more space out
there but likewise on the micro and this
is what you know science has
demonstrated to us that I can keep
looking at smaller and smaller things
that I can keep splitting things into
you know smaller pieces but not even at
a big level or a small level I could
keep discovering more things about
nature there's more to unfold constantly
I could spend my whole life studying you
know plants or studying a particular
plant right St grass my entire life and
I would unfold and uncover new things
about that so there's a certain openness
and incompletion
constitutive not just in our knowledge
but of nature itself and this I think is
a real key to a lot of different
interesting puzzles right in terms of
Freedom right if reality was already
complete if things added up in such a
way there wouldn't be space for
radically new action for the creation of
a new paradigm for Freedom as such these
are a lot of big claims that I just made
that definitely need some unpacking but
this is the the basic way I think I
approach this question
of
incompleteness sao's work saek his work
on
incompleteness I is is similar to this
but he's really I think looking more at
the contradiction implicit in reality
itself which I completely like I'm on
the same page with him like I agree with
this reading I'm adding I think to his
reading the sense of thinking just
simply about
space yeah beautiful CU in fact that was
going to be my followup question um I
had this discussion with Professor Todd
McGavin and he he uses become
contradiction over especially in this
book this beautiful I love this book so
much it's one my one of my favorite
books uh emancipation after Hegel so for
him contradiction is is it's imminent
but it's also in some sense absolute you
can't overcome contradiction you know
and so and I was trying to see
well I'm assuming you would still uh
subscribe to that idea to that for you
in know incompleteness cuz slavo he he
generally uses incompleteness I I rarely
hear him use he uses negativity or in
incompleteness perap some other Concepts
but for you know Professor McGavin Tom
McGavin it's mostly contradiction so
that contradiction and correct me if I'm
wrong here it's something like in in
this existing reality as such but also
more from like the perspective of of
subjective Identity or an identity and
identity is both itself and not itself
like that's kind of the contradiction it
holds so I'm wondering if you could
speak a bit more into that IDE notion of
contradiction and perhaps how that
differs from kind of your notion of
space being this like o open the
openness of
space yeah this is a great question and
I think the way that both that Todd and
Savo see this problem is as a void right
that is constitutive around any concept
or any being that the void is this
contradiction within within a subject
within a determinate being and so in
this way it's very spatial right aoid is
some sort of empty space and for Savo
this is what makes any sort of
determinate being incomplete and I think
likewise for Todd what makes this
determinate being in contradiction with
itself right so let's take for example
the the example of the subject right
that the subject has
something um
implicitly lacking within herself right
this is the classic kind of leanian
reading um the split subject is
organized around a sort of division
right and we can read this in a couple
different ways right I mean from the
very classic example of the mirror stage
of the child whose ego um misrecognizes
itself in the mirror as the ego ideal
there's this necessary gap between the
two that nonetheless fuses to make a
subject a set
um I mean here's a nice example of just
you know seeing a void or space that is
that that
is underline that contradiction that is
that contradiction itself right that
there is some gap between this two that
makes it this not one within the subject
um I think that's one way we can think
about this
so to take like another example that I
think will elucidate a bit more um for
Hegel there's and for many of the German
idealists this great question about you
know does a equal a does I equal I this
sort of like absolute identity question
this uh principle of non-contradiction
right um and of course in mathematics we
know that you know a equal a x equals x
right we have to like use this Axiom to
like make math work right but for Hegel
it's not so simple right it's not simply
that a equals a we have to go through
many many steps in the phenomenology to
finally
say yes a does equal a I think part
partly what hegel's doing with this like
infinite relation between the two A's or
between the two eyes that's you know how
he describes in terms of the subject I
equals I I am I this infinite relation
with the self requires a certain I think
this is very much up Todd's alley
requires a certain alienation from
myself right I am myself because I am
alienated from
myself my insertion into this is that we
need a space for two eyes they have to
be spatially distinct they have to be
Spa like there has to be a bare minimum
of space in order for the eye to
alienate herself from herself and then
to con herself as you know some
fictionalized Unity okay I mean Unity is
always fictionalized in this way or
there always is some you know kernel or
Gap or seed of of contradiction within
that precisely that I have to point back
at myself and say like oh yeah that is
me right whether it's the mirror stage
or in the
Master Slave dialectic kind of sense of
of alienation from the
self
so so this is really like one of the
first questions I had when I was reading
Hegel was why do we need to have this
this bare minimum of
space and does this occur in other
moments in Hegel right like is this the
only example in the Master Slave
dialectic but um no like the I mean
theide aidea also needs to do this to
itself it needs to like self alienate in
order to come back into itself this is
the progression from logic to Spirit as
well um and again just going back to
space what makes this I think so
interesting is that space itself like I
mentioned before like contains its own
germ of
alienation which was one of the biggest
questions I had in my project um take
making the very simple standpoint that
okay if space is just indifference if
it's just homogeneous right how does
difference come forth from indifference
is this the right relationship to even
like pin together right but one must ask
this right like what is the relationship
between indifference and difference so
especially in a system that depends so
much on negativity on difference as such
how can we paint homogeneity into
this and so when Hegel describes space
in the nature we're still you know
hanging out in the nature right now when
we look at the nature and we say well
space is next to
itself I thought this was beautiful
right that already space is that which
is completely indifferent has self-
differentiated is always next to always
beside itself just as Consciousness is
beside itself if space weren't beside
itself I mean a very like obvious way if
space weren't next to itself everything
would be at one point right there would
be no space right they would just be
collapsed we need to have a speciality
to have difference and even in its own
indifference there is this like seed of
of difference that comes forth so yeah I
hope that answers the question regarding
um yeah there's a lot of different
thoughts there but this is sort of like
yeah riffing on contradiction and and
incompletion and why contradiction is
part of incompletion and vice versa
they're slightly different but I think
they they can hold hands very very well
I I think that last bit of the answer
latter bit where you kind of it helped
me really visualize it the the collapse
that makes a lot more sense and also uh
a good py way to put this is in your
thesis you say that it is in
introduction so right at the start you
say in this text I argue that space is
the indeterminacy which grounds
determination and I thought that really
captures a lot of the spirit of the of
the text um yeah right uh now uh as I
said I want to kind of touch on a few
more things so one thing I think we can
do is Katherine I I think we may have to
jump from different places in this
conversation because uh yeah that's cool
I think I want to discuss your
underlying ontology but there are also
like these other more what should I call
it uh subtopics or
subcategories which we can touch on
while we discussing on ontology and um
really however before that so one thing
I want to discuss is subjectivity and
why and how it relates to this ongoing
kind of invogue invogue dialogue or
conversation regarding Ai and AI
conversations but but before we get to
that I think this is quite important to
get to uh Vertigo Vertigo uh concept um
I have I have one question just for you
to Define what where it go is but also
I've got a bit of a question regarding
character card and a however so we'll
first discuss go um yeah so so what is
vertigo in in your terms in your
ontology of space and has it got
anything to do with Al Alfred
Hitchcock's film ver
call you know I was really tempted to
maybe weave in a bit of Hitchcock it's
one of my favorite movies of all time
you know it's such a perfect
film um yeah I know it's it's really it
really is but you know my my thesis
doesn't have anything to do with the
with the Hitchcock movie but um does
perhaps it does in some ways you know I
think we probably could extrapolate some
ways but I don't explicitly discuss the
film although there probably is some
like unconscious childhood like
associations right but I'll leave that
to my my anst is a term itself there's
something there probably there has to be
there has to be um so
vertigo in the really so when most of us
think of vertigo we know that vertigo is
the sense of standing on the ledge of a
tall building or a cliff we look over
the edge and we want to throw ourselves
over right we have this desire to to
jump right and it frightens us so I
definitely think this is one way to
conceive a vertigo but I do think the
way that I am conceiving of vertigo in
this paper is that vertigo is actually a
confrontation with space itself it's a
confrontation with that emptiness and a
desire to overcome that emptiness and to
close that gap between you and the
ground right to literally throw yourself
over the void and to surmount it so yes
there's this idea of like death that
like caught up with where to go but the
way it really plays out for me in my
text is asking what happens when we
confront emptiness itself well we can we
can imagine this right we can imagine
like confronting the void confronting
the abyss and we do get this vertiginous
feeling right this anxiety that is
produced by vertigo so like the the
classic definition of anxiety per Lon is
that anxiety is not without object
whereas fear if you're afraid of
something you there there's an object
right like if I'm afraid of spiders it's
spiders really freak me out right that's
the object I'm afraid of But anxiety is
when you wake up in the morning when
you're like I'm not sure why I'm anxious
but I just am right there's you can't
quite pinpoint the object this is what
you know drives you uh maybe not crazy
but it bothers you right makes even more
anxious and so I thought this was a
really great way to think about the the
impossibility of conceiving of a space
in itself right and this impossibility
is really Central to to the to my work
right that we can't even Hegel tells us
this that we can't think of a space in
itself a pure
space and you know I mean yeah we can
maybe think of it for a moment but
immediately you know we're thinking of
the Contour around that right of like
the the delimitation of that emptiness
or contrasting that emptiness with
something and this is of course appropo
his first pages of the logic when we're
asked to think indeterminate being and
indeterminate nothing a similar exercise
of thinking blankness or thinking that
which has no
reference so back to vertigo um if
vertigo is thinking space in itself it's
not without object in this precise way
right there's an object lacking in
thinking space in itself and yet there
is sort of an object there as well right
it's it's space but we're trying to
think blankness we're sort of
oscillating between making space an
object and thinking about space as just
nothingness as such so this is the the
beautiful Paradox of space right that
it's somewhere between being and
non-being as democra put it um so how
does vertigo then function in my text
well
when we encounter just this emptiness in
logic in nature and in spirit when we
encounter just pure indeterminacy the
void in logic pure space and continuity
in nature when we encounter just the
empty lack of
oneself these things it's very easy to
just fall into them into kind of a
giveway to almost this nihilistic
there's no no ground underneath my feet
to reality right but so much of what I
work what I worked on was asking how do
we exit that feeling how do we get out
of the vertigo right how do we ground
ourselves and the simple answer is like
we build the ground out underneath our
own feet right like we we choose a point
of orientation and we Orient ourselves
around it this is what I mean even like
you know classical physics will tell us
right we have to pick a point of
orientation in order to just like start
to measure anything right if there is no
absolute s of the universe we just pick
pick a point right and it's arbitrary
but it's
nonetheless um instructive right and we
take that arbit arbitrariness at the
heart of knowledge itself right I mean
this is back to the idea of like
incompletion and contradictions this is
another way to see it that I've chosen
an arbitrary standpoint this means my
logic or my knowledge is going to be
incomplete that there is going to be a
contradiction implicit in it but
nonetheless I can still build a logic
off of that that can still yield truth
and so this is I think the the question
that I was dealing with right is how do
we encounter this again like space in
itself this emptiness lack the void and
how do we pull ourselves out of the
vertigo in order to like properly again
just Orient ourselves and think and like
you know Step Back From The Ledge in a
sense or rather like how do we Traverse
the void right how do we surmount it you
know how do we Garner the courage to to
reorient
in the face of the
Void yes yes uh yeah it's funny when you
were when you were talking about the
idea of two two things came to my mind
regarding yeah arbitrary pick a point it
reminded me in mathematics where they
have the axium of choice uh you after to
good it proves to the incompleteness
theorem that you can't have absolutely
um acatic system mathematicians not just
pick uh a set Theory Z Frankle or
whatever the case may be and then they
work off that and then there's knowledge
built off that though it's it's
effective in the world it's it's yeah
it's also the other thought I had was uh
I think Adrien
Johnston beautifully explains it in his
new new German IDE lism where you know
the relationship between necessity and
contingency I don't know if this kind of
touches on what you're saying where yeah
yeah completely some sense it's
contingent like the ACT is contingent
but it phenologically appears to us
being necessary kind of like falling in
love you know for instance so completely
and all like the contingent even though
it's contingent it doesn't make it any
less real it's it's it's a it's a true
thing it's a real thing and you you have
a life from there um yeah I see that
although Katherine I'm going to be a I'm
G to hyze a little bit here I'm GNA just
be the
Hyer I still I'm trying to get at how
that differs from uh K God's an I mean
his book The the con of anxiety for me
one of the best books I've read cuz I
read it a while back I was like this guy
gets it this is exactly what I'm
experiencing in life and because for him
it's the notion is like this dizziness
of Freedom the openness of space that we
can yeah choose to jump off the cliff or
not so yeah if if he could just toose
vertigo with K God's
anst yeah are there any any any cuz I I
I know like I can feel it when I'm
reading your book that there's there is
a difference but I just kind articulated
so if you could help me yeah yeah I mean
I don't want to like butcher kard right
but I think the dizziness of freedom for
kard the freedom as like the possibility
of
possibility in my view I think it's
really intimate i it's a really
beautiful idea I completely I love this
this whole notion of his I think it's
very intimately tied up with the ability
to choose death right that I that I can
choose to throw myself over the Cliff
right that's what's really that's what
really produces the anxiety right less
what produces the anxiety is that I can
step back and just keep going about my
business as usual right that with the
freedom with doing the really radically
different thing whether it's you know
throwing yourself off the cliff or you
know joining the revolution or falling
in love those things produce a lot of
anxiety because they're outside the
Contours of our day-to-day right they're
they're radic
choices but if I choose not to fall in
love Not To Join the Revolution go back
to my day-to-day kind of life this is
very comforting right this is this is
the normal this is less anxiety
inducing so I think for kard he's really
like that's that is like the the
dizziness there right is between the the
anxiety of that choice and the comfort
of of the dayto day right and so the way
I'm
like deploying vertigo as such is a it's
a there's certainly a similarity right
but I think the distinction is
that the vertigo is is really the
attempt to encounter nothingness as
nothingness right potentiality as
potentiality less concerned with I'm
less concerned with like the day-to-day
in this way right I'm more concerned
with just that that abyss of of
potentiality that we can't
even inframe in some sense right but in
a similar way to kard right we have to
seize that openness and that that Gap
right that blankness in order to be free
like this is I this is I think a very a
really similar kind of point right I
take this from Badu right that if we're
going to have an event occur right you
have to seize upon an intervention upon
a crisis upon something that is
radically outside the towards the dayto
day in order to do yeah sorry it's sort
of like a disjuncture you mean right
like it's yeah like a disjuncture yeah
exactly yeah and to like then do
something new with this right and so the
only way for there to be this
possibility of Freedom right is for
there to be some open undetermined space
right like the void has to lurk for bad
de it has to be it has to a appear and
we you know we create events we create
weate events at a site that is at the
edge of the Void for bad do so in this
way this is more my concern right is
that nature of indeterminacy that
structures and allows for Freedom only
if it can be
seized yeah yeah all right perfect
beautifully put um yeah there's a lot
there I need to think about that for for
days before I really
say um so I'll just say this I'll just
say this um I I wanted to ask you this
question regarding now we'll probably go
more into uh the question of physics and
science because uh it's interesting I
I've SE I've even heard uh you know some
people in the Liana School uh zapan
Manda they them commenting on why they
haven't really um you know thought of
theorizing on science much or on
contemporary physics and yeah their
their an seems quite reasonable it's
simply that look they just don't know
enough it just it's just it's even even
the ongoing dialogue the Contemporary
dialogues in uh the interpretations of
quantum mechanics be philosophy or
physics uh or Quantum Loop gravity and
all these they they too it's very
chaotic there's really no there's no
place where you can refer to as this is
like which probably makes sense there's
no big other so um yeah but I'm curious
as a philosopher um um I how do you how
do you work work with Quant mechanics I
mean firstly why do you think it's
necessary for philosophers especially
philosophers working in this German IDE
this tradition to theorize on quantum
mechanics and perhaps contemporary
physics uh but uh how do you find
working through quantum mechanics
without being a physicist in in the
first place like what's that being like
for you it's hard
um for me I never thought I was going to
go down this path that if you told me 10
years ago even five years ago that I'd
be doing research into quantum physics I
would to laugh but for me you know I I
began with this question of space right
and so I had to ask what's the history
of of space and obviously it's a very
scientific question so you know going
through the the new limits debate right
on is space absolute or is it relative
such a huge touch point in mod modernity
um thinking about a qu qu's text on a
closed world to an infinite Universe
right this shift in modernity where the
universe just became totally open and no
longer an enclosed um an enclosed bubble
surrounded by heaven right there are
these different sort of touch points
that I found incredibly
interesting and then I had to ask like
what do people think about space today
right and there's so I mean so many
interesting theories and there's
definitely not one way to read space in
modern science and quantum mechanics
today right I mean for example you know
some theorists think that space and time
are evental consequences of atomistic
interactions and this is a really
interesting Theory to me right because
you know I read Badu and so thinking
about time and space as consequences of
events can fit really beautifully into
his theory right so that that's
fascinating to me but likewise I have
kind of put my stake in the ground of
seeing space as this indifferent ground
difference so there seems to be some
sort of contradiction there right and so
then I have to take a step take a step
back and ask you know is the space I'm
talking about the same space that
quantum mechanics and quantum physics is
talking
about well there's this interesting like
reproduction of uh of the Paradox of
space that I even see like in
contemporary like quantum physics work
so for example um you know about spin
networks I'll explain briefly like my
understanding of spin networks you may
have to explain briefly SP networks it's
basically the simple idea and you know
Slaughter me in the comments if I'm
wrong about this I'm
sure I'm sure I'm
sure sorry people are people are very
brutal when it comes to quantum
mechanics and good good we need to be we
need to be severe in this world when it
comes to you know intellectual things
but um so the basic idea right is that
we can actually I can actually tell you
what space is right that it's actually
um a series like a network series of
different spins different nodes and I
can draw sort of lines between these
nodes and I can tell you that's the
materiality of space that is space
itself right there that I've just drawn
for you so again different nodes that
are connected by like lines between
them the interesting thing to me in this
demonstration right if I were to buy
into it and say like okay wow you've
you've demonstrated that like there is
this materiality to space i' have to ask
again like what's the stuff in between
right like what's the emptiness in
between these nodes so I see that
problem being recreated but I think just
like take a step back and see like why
even quantum physics right I think my
incursion into quantum physics is really
basic and I think the basic thing that I
find revolutionary about quantum physics
that most I think most people would
agree with me on again Slaughter me in
the comments if you don't I'd love to
see it um is simply that quantum physics
takes the Observer into account and this
is this is radical right that for
classical physics there was a tendency
to say The Observer is divorced from the
experiment that I'm trying to eliminate
any kind of observation any kind ofsal
bias as as I can and that I can really
know reality if I can simply perfect my
measuring tool if I can get a really
good measuring stick I can really know
things as they appear their structure
their you know the elements behind them
their particles behind them whereas what
quantum physics says is well the
Observer is actually entangled in the
experiment and that this changes things
that when we observe things that there's
an ontological again entanglement
between the Observer and The observed
and this I find very interesting right
this is just a very simple shift that
says that the way we determine the world
has an actual ontological implication on
the world itself so this I see and this
is I'm taking a page from Karen Brad's
book meeting the universe halfway which
I think slavo takes a very big page from
as well
um this is not anep syic shift right
this is an ontological shift and I'm not
throwing that word around right like I
mean this in a very serious way right
it's not that oh the electron has a
position in the cloud we just don't know
where it is right but it has some sort
of position that's not what quantum
physics says it says in a much stronger
sense that electron is ontologically
indeterminate in its position until we
determine it right this is like the
principle behind shorting your cat it's
both dead and alive right the electron
is in multiple places at once or it's in
no place right this is a fun little kind
of game to play and so this I think is
is huge right and I don't need to like
be in the lab to like I think comment on
this right and I do think it just really
simply right like as philosophers if
we're told that we like can't talk about
science this is like a sad you know dead
end to thought right and that if we're
going to talk about time and space and
you know I I talk a little bit about
time in my work but like my focus is on
space I need to be able to ask what does
it mean for
place to be totally upended by modern
quantum physics to say that particles
natural entities can be completely
without place and they still exist right
it's they still exist that electron
still exist doesn't disappear into the
ether but it's become ontologically
indeterminant and so very broadly I
think that um there's an ontological
digity given to indeterminacy by quantum
physics and this is I think so important
and completely is the way I read with
space right is that space is this
indeterminacy that still exists and has
a huge and important ontological
function just like the electrons in
determinacy it still exists there's a
lot there to unpack and this is what I
think is really interesting about modern
quantum physics without you know getting
too far ahead of myself that's my basic
incursion I completely agree I mean in
fact I was just having this conversation
uh day before yesterday with another
philosopher of science who's working
more on the sociology of Science and uh
it's interesting uh I mentioned even in
that conversation Stephen Hawkings in
his famous book he says uh uh philosophy
is dead we don't need philosophy anymore
now it's physics will give us all the
answers and then of
course it's kind like nature saying God
Is Dead uh you know we declar some some
some big other is dead and then now I
think philosophy is coming back with the
Vengeance in some sense cuz you I mean
you can't help but not philosophize on
these questions H in fact as you
mentioned the in an electron cloud you
can't ask an electron okay if it's pure
potenti potentiality what does that mean
like how you can't just you can't just
think of it purely in the language of
mathematics cuz we have to derive some
meaning out of it um yeah and um I would
say on spin net works I just remembered
I watched this fantastic talk by color
Val so for the listeners I'll I'll find
it and I'll leave a link down below just
on spin networks just independent to its
its mathematical Beauty and physical
Beauty there's something very
interesting in just how it can imbue a
lot of these conversations uh so
following on from this Katherine um I
really like this point that Todd McGavin
made made uh uh regarding Hegel and Kant
this kind of distin Distinction and I
think I'm quoting him V here in fact he
says that Kant was the philosopher of
Newtonian mechanics or classical physics
um and he says that Hegel in our time is
now the philosopher of quantum mechanics
and the reason he says that is because
again as you mentioned it's all these
paradoxes contradictions and I proba
should Al also mention um it it's
interesting that in the 20th century
what took place in in kind of port or in
the world of intellectual world it's not
just the paradoxes from quantum
mechanics but even in logic with Good's
in incompleteness theorems Russell's
paradoxes and there's even I would even
argue probably even with uh Evolution
there are some things that are rather
paradoxical in how Evolution Works uh so
I'm curious just to comment on that why
in particular as an hegelian philosopher
do you think Hegel hegel's Concepts has
has something interesting to say about
the Contemporary uh contemporary scene
in physics or the Contemporary theories
in
physics yeah it's a great question
because I think it would be a mistake to
say that you know Hegel
pre-aged you
know at all no no no he's not he's not
for sure no I definitely not but that
would be like the that would be like the
wrong way to read it right is to be like
oh like Hegel predicted all of this
right the the question is more like how
yeah that would that sorry interrupt but
that would be the way Jordan Peterson
reads n whoever yeah exactly exactly
right and that's that's not what Todd's
saying and um definitely not what slavo
is saying either um the I think what you
know all of us are saying is simply that
uh you know hegel's logic really holds
up with like today's problems right like
in a really simple way but to dig into
it you know Hegel again like if we talk
about space right like Hegel is writing
um very much in the wake of like the
newon liet debate right and K can
totally agree with the Todd right K very
much takes up like the Newtonian
position of like an absolute space and
in many of his writings he'll say that
there's a that space is absolute there's
an absolute Center that completely
contrary to what I said at the start of
this conversation that this space here
is different from this space here there
there is some absolute Matrix that
distinguishes space as such now kant's
logical space I think is more
interesting and more hegan because
there's this text by k um what does it
mean to orient oneself in thinking and
this this I think is more interesting
because he will say at the end that we
have to have some sort of active Faith
to orient us in our thought but then we
like rationally build the the ground out
from underneath our feet and we can
really like build out with reason so
that maybe is like you know this also
sounds a bit like badzian right we
affirm an event
that may be as contingent but we build
the truth from that event nonetheless
that truth is implicit we build it out
through faith
um and so for
Hegel um in the nature he does talk
about liet and he says that you know
space is relational is of a higher order
than an absolute space however he makes
this really great caveat um he says that
space is in its very self externality it
is self- externality and so I think this
really interesting like absolute that
Hegel introduces that's contrary to liet
instead of saying simply space is just
relational period space is just
relational for sure for Hegel but it's
also it is externality as long as there
is something external this is just space
this is spatial right and so I think
this anchors nature and it anchors space
in this in this very particular way that
allows us to escape some sort of just
like regressive relativist like where
does any of this stuff come from right
like it is externality as
such um and so yeah in terms of Hegel
sorry being the thinker of Hegel being
the thinker of quantum physics um I
think another interesting thing that
quantum physics teaches us is that like
what appears like that's what is like
that's what's there right there's not
some like Secret Essence to this
electron that it really has like a
particular place we just don't know it
again like this is the very content
reading right that like we're barred in
our knowledge and understanding where
that electron is yeah and so I think
that um like zus shine right being is
Shine for heel right being is Essence
being is appearance that what's what
presents itself that is being there's
not some secret backdrop that we can't
access right and I think quantum physics
takes this to heart as well um and like
I mentioned like this is I mean it's a
really particular way to read Hegel you
know not everyone reads Hegel like this
as well but in my own work I became just
very interested in the concept of like
place in Hegel and the fact that at the
very beginning of the logic we're
confronted with this Paradox of being a
nothing having no place no determinacy
about them so just for some context
right like the way that uh the logic
starts out we have a very Infamous
opening Hegel asks us to think about
being pure being without further
determination and nothing the pure
nothing likewise without further
determination and he famously concludes
that if we think about being without any
further determination then it might as
well just be nothing it's just this
blank emptiness he calls it Le he calls
it void the very start and then with
nothing he says likewise if we just
think about nothing without further
determination it's also a being right
it's also empty he says it's
so what I've been interested in with
Hegel is thinking about this Paradox
this presuppositionless place he takes
us to is really a place without place
it's a starting point that isn't even in
the ground we're truly just floating in
the void we are talking about the void
we're talking about being a nothing
without any determination and so
likewise this is just void this is
emptiness so Badu for example says in
theory the subject his critique of Hegel
here is that this is a just a weak
difference between the two he says this
being a nothing this is just a weak
difference of positionality they're just
marking the void they're just two
identical
marks and I don't think bad is wrong I
think that just like to turn the screw
once more with badue it's not simply
that we're marking the void there's this
in and out of marking the void and
marking a place but also of having
absolutely no place and being completely
void so this is what I think Quantum
fist helps us think about is that there
can be a lack of place that we can
think and that's really crazy that's
really radical to me and that there
is a again like an ontological standing
to not being logically placed and like
this is nature r large and this is
really think the way like we like this
is the way I think we should be thinking
about nature is that it is just
indifferent stuff out there it's just a
bunch of stuff without I mean it has
differences in it it doesn't know it and
once we start differentiating nature we
start placing nature that's when we
start determining nature but before that
it's just indeterminate ontologically
indeterminate so again I think you know
back to space it's not I think it would
be a mistake to say that nature space is
infite I think the the better way to put
this is that they're just indeterminate
and indifferent they go on as long as we
keep differentiating on the big on the
macro layer on the micro layer there's
always more stuff there's always more
space but this doesn't make it
necessarily infinite it's not that it is
ongoing right now as we speak but that
as I determine there's always going to
be more to determine this is why nature
is full of wonder for Hegel wow look
there's so much more there's a great
optimism to that reading of Hegel
because I mean I wouldn't even say I'm
not even an optimist I'm I would say
pessimist probably but you say in in the
in when you start your thesis you say
you talk about vertigo but then you say
there there's an optimist with this
openness and and here's what I think
it's quite interesting because i' I've
I've been doing a lot of reading of kard
too in the past few years and like he
always touches on the infinite in that
sense for him the infinite is like a
substantial infinite in in some sense
gold and so he does still think that
there's
a in a fascinating where his Infinity is
a is a spirous infinity or it's it's a
closed it's not truly an infinity and
the like that openness um and I find
that quite interesting um a few things I
want to say here is all right so
externality let's probably touch on that
a little bit because I think so I
haven't read the science of logic in any
way as carefully as you have the I work
with most is the phenomenology um and
one thing I like that stepen hulet Ste
hulet yeah St H says about um the Hegel
work pres
presuppositionalist metaphysics is that
it's an imminent critique right so he
what's beautiful about the phenomenology
is that he kind of works through modes
of Consciousness or structures of
Consciousness you know he starts with uh
sense certainty and so on and so and I
guess how can I ask this question uh
Katherine I'm I'm trying to see through
through more through like the
phenomenology because I find the
phenomenology as as funny as it sound
it's a it's less abstract than the logic
yeah I I totally agree totally really
can you can work through the text as you
go so I'm trying to see if if you could
kind of help us help help when I mean us
really me kind of conceptualize so kind
of illustrate what this externality
would look like from the from the
perspective of like a phenomenal subject
you know phenomenologically speaking I
guess in some sense I'm just saying if
you start with the ey how does how does
one experiences exality leaving aside
more of the quantum mechanics or
whatever the other Concepts uh yeah I
don't know that's an unfair question but
I'm just trying to see if oh it's cool
um yeah I think it
so externality is is what nature is for
Hegel it's the external right and at the
end of the science of Logic the idea
externalizes itself and time and space
are created and it's a wild ending
that's been commented on so much and um
I really just focused on what is this
externality aspect mean in the
phenomenology I think this is a really
classic move that Hegel makes right is
that his many modes of logic and many
steps that he's making in the
phenomenology are constantly
externalizing themselves and there's
this constant alienation that's
happening
right but it's really an alienation I
think what was that you
said I used to used to call it failure
but I think a better term is like every
structure of Consciousness fails then
you move on the next stage Yeah Yeahs or
alienates and stuff I think they both
yeah capture capture the spirit of
Spirit In This Way um I mean even
starting with the many hears right with
like sense certainty that well I know
this table is a table because it's right
here and I'm pointing to it right well
we have to like externalize or alienate
the heares right and say well there's
actually many Hees and you know one here
is going to be different than another
here and so that's right so that's a way
that I think externality plays a role in
in hegel's logic in general like we've
talked about there's this constant
alienation and this bare minimum of
space that's NE necessary and the Master
Slave dialectic like I brought up before
that's I think the clearest examples
right of Consciousness stepping outside
of
itself even in the smaller uh philosophy
of spirit in the encyclopedia right
there's these like even smaller steps
that are made where um Consciousness
says I'm not the soul right and the Soul
also misrecognizes itself even before
that as the body says oh that's me I'm
the body there's these like you know
mistakes these failures these
alienations um before then Consciousness
says oh I'm also conscious I'm also have
this but I'm not Consciousness right
that's self-consciousness now talking
right these like continuous steps of
alienation that are like Progressive and
and build in hegel's
logic yeah perfect perfect I I think I
think that makes sense I I mean I would
say in fact I would say the best way to
you don't even have to read all of
phenology I found as you point out you
because sensor probably is the easiest
section to read in the phenomenology CU
it's very like he talks about a tree I
think and a house or something and it's
like it's very forward and then of
course the Master Slave dialectic uh and
the other good thing is there's a lot of
texts there a lot of work done on the
master dialectic so you could just use
that text itself to understand what he
means by kind of Consciousness going out
of itself uh to find itself in some even
though that never really really happens
um all right the next next part I want
to get to so I guess we're talking about
subjectivity here and this this kind of
makes me want to talk about bit bit more
invoked topics uh however I also want to
talk about the gap which really uh
caught my eye when I was reading your
words would you do you think it's better
if we now move on to bit more towards Ai
and have that discussion or do you think
yeah whatever you like yeah cool I think
we'll discuss Ai and get to the Gap
towards the end because that's a bit
more like in the speculative realm um
so great great article he wrote uh
Katherine um for the philosophical Salon
uh does Chad GPT and jooy this is your
working off uh J's work uh where he says
you know Chad GP is unconscious um so
first of first yeah I just say this I
mean people in the kind of the hegelian
lenan kind of the scene uh the other
person I've seen who's really serious
theorized on AI is Isabel Mela uh I just
start on a book I'm still getting
through it well look the the question
with AI it kind of now I feel it's it's
becoming like an ex the topic has
exhausted itself because people keep
talking about it all the time H and some
of it t tends to get a bit boring but I
still think it's a necessary topic only
because at some level it does speak to
this question of yeah to put it in a
very very humanistic way what does it
mean to be human what is subjectivity
what is a conscious experience and so
kind of like kind of like quantum
mechanics or physics as such you can't
help but philosophize on something like
AI um but I'm curious um from your kind
of gallan
lens not not none of these questions
about is AI going to be conscious I
don't care about any of that uh but I'd
rather ask this question what do you
think the ongoing dialogue about AI
tells about our
subjectivity um as in yeah could you
please like talk talk on that and then
maybe we'll we'll kind of slide to touch
on your article does JY enjoy yeah I
mean I think you you put it really well
that with the Advent of AI and it
passing the Turing test right made us
ask ourselves well like what
distinguishes us as humans from the AI
and I think last year this was a really
big question we've now come to
understand more and more how we are
different in in very particular ways but
it's it's still really astounding that
like we can be fooled by a picture or by
a text to thinking a human wrote this or
a human Drew this and I think we all
want to think we're so much smarter than
that but some pictures really do trick
you into thinking like that's a real
photo right that's a real video and not
until like the flaws are pointed out or
you look at it for a very long time do
you start to to see the funkiness going
on in these things so I think there's
an inclination that we don't want to be
duped you know we don't want to be
fooled um there's the age- old question
like how do I know you feel the things I
feel um implicit here as well but then I
think with AI I mean I wrote this
article because I thought the simplest
way to you know to explain the
difference is that the machine can't
enjoy and this is obviously a very
leanian reading right to say that What
Makes Us human what makes us different
from animals is that we have really
weird enjoyment right like we don't just
have have sex to procreate right like we
enjoy in very bizarre ways not just
sexually right but like we enjoy our
failures right like we you know smoke
cigarettes we drink alcohol right like
we we enjoy hurting ourselves in
different ways and there's of course you
know Wonderful psycho analytic Theory to
back this up but then to think about AI
I mean like if you're to take it back to
space there is an open space for AI it's
completely closed space right it's a
completely closed Al rmic space and
there is no space for freedom and there
is no space for
transgression and humans what makes us
free is we transgress the limits that's
also how we enjoy we love to we love to
push a boundary right that's again very
wrapped up with with libidinal enjoyment
and with suffering too right as we maybe
fail to reach a certain limit or we try
we push too far beyond a limit and we
hurt ourselves this way I drink too much
alcohol at night right and then the next
day oh this horrible hang it hang over I
feel guilty why did I
drink more than two drinks so I said I
was only going to have two right that's
oh but I enjoyed it the whole time right
like this is like part of our libidinal
economy um but if I to a robot you can't
have more than two drinks you know my
you know Blade Runner robot I'm going
out with it's not going to have more
than two drinks right the there's an
impossibility of programming a program
to defy the program right like this and
if that can happen you know I'll eat my
hat right like that would be really I
mean really astound ing to see if that
could be accomplished right but as it
stands this is what fundamentally
distinguishes us from the machine right
is that we do step outside of our limits
so when we're thinking about you know
how to make a machine more intelligent
or does its intelligence mimic the
humans um there's this great book by
hofstadter that I reference in the
article go to leer Bach have you you
have it on yourself of course yeah yeah
the next it's such a great such a good
toome um to indeed yeah it's it's so
good it's yeah what a beautiful text
um I mean he makes a lot of arguments in
that book but one one one argument that
really stuck with me was if you give a
human an impossible task let's say hey
here's a math problem that is absolutely
impossible to solve at a certain point
you're going to walk away you're going
to put your pencil down and be like I
can't do that but a machine can't walk
away from an impossible task great it
will do it at infinum until the till it
gets too hot you know and dies right um
and so I mean this is again like you
know this is what makes us human is that
we makes us intelligent is that we can
step outside of a certain boundary we
can we literally we step outside of
ourselves that is what we are that is
like definitionally we are the thing
that is self-conscious that can look
back and say I am me in this like weird
redoubled way and there's still debate
if like animals can do that and like
sometimes they show us they can and
that's wild you know like that's that's
absolutely wild but some animals
definitely show us they they might not
be able to do that right I'm not an
animal expert here but I think that that
grayness that comes with the animal just
sort of underlines more in a more firm
sense that this is what the human is it
can step outside of itself and so that's
I think the the really basic difference
between you know us and Ai and yeah I
think that is the puzzle today for for
if you were trying to yeah make AI more
sentient right would be how do I break
how does it learn how to break its own
rules which is you know a terrifying
proposition and there's other terrifying
propositions that come with AI in the
world we're living in right now but yeah
just on this spasic sentience level
that's I think what Hegel can teach us
and what the con can teach us about AI
yeah pretty much I think the big thing
that is enjoyment but also like in in
Hoff's book uh the big thing the point
he makes is you know with g theorems
it's that uh theorem can't prove its own
consistency any any uh sufficiently
powerful and the fact that in some sense
in in it's a problem of self- reference
right we humans can self- reference is
kind of like subconsciousness we can
step outside of ourselves and in fact
you know I I even argue you have to step
outside of yourself to really be
self-conscious if not you really can't
you get stuck in this this like infinite
Abyssal self- relating negativity if not
um I think the enjoyment question is
quite interesting too because I think uh
cadell and I had this conversation a
while like I think fundamentally here's
what what I've been thinking about so I
mean my my background's in computer
science so a big part of computer
science is systems theory uh you know we
we study a variety of
systems and there's something very
interesting you know systems theory uh
they're all closed systems so that
that's the that's the big thing in
systems theory of course there's a whole
Branch especially in biology where they
study open
systems uh but the the the thing is even
in a close system uh there aren't there
aren't subjects like the the problem
always is that the subject never fits
into the order of things and and for me
what I found interesting about this
conversation pertaining to AI the more
the philosophical question is well yeah
at what Point does does a subject come
into does come into being from of some
kind of system CU I'm I mean I'm a pure
materialist I do believe subjects emerge
from objects uh and so I think enjoyment
is one it's it's one indicator I mean
enjoyment once you start seeing how you
know we we enjoy our failures we in fact
want to fail and then then that's where
there's like this Loop um I I think love
again I go back to love cuz I think love
is a perfect example here this idea that
you know when uh when an animal pursues
a mate if if they don't get the mate
they either go on they find some other
mate or they uh I don't know
unfortunately rape the animal I guess
but uh in the case of humans we we we
keep pursuing the the main in fact we
want to not we we enjoy the rejection
and sometimes once you get it it it's
it's done you know do can't then you're
like okay no more um and that's where I
find like especially lanan
psychoanalysis quite pertinent into this
conversation around
Ai and yeah the question shouldn't be uh
can can a can AI reason or can it can
they yeah and then yeah that's F
fascinating excellent I think the point
yeah I completely agree and I'm trying
to think of this more thoroughly through
in terms of like the space of AI and
also also like digital space in general
right like and again like if for humans
there's a certain openness in our space
in nature in logic even in spirits like
generation of itself that it can keep
generating itself and like it is
self-generating um the closed space of
AI seems to completely like cut any of
that out of the question um yeah that's
and you know in the systems theory thing
as well it's it's an interesting
question because
um the the I want to like tell the
classic joke when it comes to like
counting right like it's so funny like
you know the how AI has some problems
with math right like it problems
problems yes has some problems counting
and you know multiplying and there's
some wires getting crossed and in this
way but it's just not set up in such a
way for it to like be a calculator right
like it's it's predictive right um but
there's the great joke from Lon you know
I have three brothers Ernesto Paul and
myself this is precisely what AI can't
do right it can't count itself as one in
the sense right I can't like redouble
this and this is like again a great
lanan piece of like the subject right
it's like I count myself twice in this
way right I count myself once when I
should just be a zero right I mean this
is what zero is as well but this is I
think also what AI can't do right it
can't it can't even count to you know it
can like can it count at all can it
count to four in a leanian sense can it
count to three I think it simply can't
count at all because it has this this
precise trouble in in identifying I
think like you put like there's no
subject in yeah yeah in the equation
right like who's counting into the
equation it's it's sort of precisely
like can AI fall in love of course not
because if to fall in love you need to
have an i a subject that falls right
yeah yeah and you know that's the other
thing where I find this divide between
you know the ostensible divide between
analytic philosophy and mnal philosophy
because analytic philosophy in some
sense never truly accounts for the
subject lot of lot of the conversations
around it it tends to be a bit
more yeah like they'll speak of like
Andy Clark wrote this great book called
the extended mind excellent book in
cognitive science but it still lacks so
his it's a simple notion the Notions
that our cognition it's it's distributed
uh that we like we think through other
people which is certainly I mean at a
colloquial
say that right I mean language for but
it still doesn't really capture this
notion of like what is a subject and how
the subject kind of goes the externality
of the subject and what allows for the
subject to be in this being um so yeah
there there's a lot conscious can be
missing sometimes right from the
equation I think that's what so many
like lanan theorists today point out is
like where's the unconscious like when I
watched Ghost in the Shell recently what
a great film so fun to watch but I was
thinking like where's Ghost in the Shell
I haven't watched it yeah oh you know
it's like classic
anim where the robot like gains
Consciousness right but I the the people
can like download their brains onto the
cloud right which is of course you know
sci-fi conversation made very relevant
today but the question is like how do
you yeah you know I have my memories but
they're structured in such a away her my
unconscious right and so how does one
transcribe the unconscious un that which
can't be written as such this is like
the I think an outstanding question for
I mean it's a big question for even what
makes us human like how do we talk about
the unconscious but likewise with the AI
I think it's a big question too and with
neuralink right this is SLO point that
nuring totally alides the the question
of the unconscious yeah yeah and in fact
U another thing here I just add on to
this is um Peter Rollins has this
beautiful analogy where again he says
that something that like there's there's
something and nothing and he says you
know for the kind of people in the
anglo-american you know bertr and
Russell all all of these this way of
thinking nothing is just nothing whereas
for uh more of the again so-call coal
philosophers coming from heiger Hegel
and so on nothing is something not
nothing is a substantial nothingness and
and that's for me that's the unconscious
like that the negativity itself is a
it's an ontologically
true substantial negativity and there's
how can we that because there there's no
way in formal logic or in uh in in the
kind of models that we train capture
that but again as an engineer I always
find this like a fascinating question
because even when I'm building software
I'm like I'm we we we we're told to
always think about the kind of the end
user and kind of try to see what how the
user would interact with the system and
sometimes I get carry it away and I
start thinking about like unconscious
and how can I you know how do you how do
unconscious interact with the software
we build anyway I'm I'm getting a bit
Yeah but uh
okay you bring up a great Point as well
I don't want to like derail us or
anything but um the question of naming
nothingness actually does take us back
really nicely to like a lot of the the
work that we've been discussing um you
know this debate that goes back to the
ancient Greeks right you know perity
says the you know that the nothing is
not we can't say it is um and then you
know lucous says you nope it's it's
definitely something the void is
something it has a weight to it even is
one of his arguments um but this is I
think a really big piece of Continental
thinking right is that there is this
like agreement that like nothingness has
a certain ontological standing and that
when we name nothingness this is
foundational for for language for math
right I mean for Badu we have to count
the voice as one right we have to name
the void count it as an empty set count
it as a Singleton in this way and then
we can derive the cardinal numbers right
and so for right the basis of math we
need to count space right count
nothingness as something and so that you
know takes me back to like why I've been
so interested in space is precisely it's
straddling both the fact that it doesn't
exist it's it is nothingness but then as
soon as I name it I bring it into
existence so it's I think like the the
critical example of making something out
of nothing right of and not to be like
you know uh you know exelia like too
much but it it is the example of this
right that that demonstrates that when
we name things we are you know
disentangling an entangled world and in
that disentanglement we're likewise like
weaving the void we're we're putting
nothingness into that something or
weaving being and non-being together in
a hegan sense hope that help is like
bridge I think that's that's that's a
good segue cuz the next part I want to
get to is this idea of the Gap um like
what is the gap so all right I'm going
to do this more for the listener because
I think it's it's important to give this
context but I'm going to read a few
quotes here Katherine uh one quote from
uh Adrien Johnston's book a new German
audism man I've read this code so many
times uh I'm it's noing love this quote
so much cuz for me it captures a lot of
kind of kind of what we're discussing
and the other is uh sort of what you
theorize on pertaining to the Gap and
I'm just going to try and see if we
could flesh out perhaps the differences
or even similarities so firstly uh since
we're talking about subjectivity uh
Adrian Johnson states in the new German
idealism uh the the subject is the
immense absolute power of negativity
that the power of introducing a gap or
cut into the given immediate substantial
Unity the power of differentiating of
abstracting of tearing apart and
treating as self-standing what in
reality is part of an organic
Unity uh of course organic Unity part we
can discuss if that's really the case
but see that that notion for me really
captures what you just described that we
you know we we completely how by by
labeling things nothing whatever the
case may be so that's that's that's a
Johnston um and then you say here in
your thesis uh regarding the role of the
Gap you say
uh in fact sorry give give me a second
I'll find the full quote because I think
this is a bit out of context just bear
with me for a second okay so this is a
bit bit bit of a mouthful here but
here's what you said beautifully put so
it is Spirited beings who uniquely
Traverse both both the externality of
Nature and their own
internality shaping both spaces through
reason and through reason's sucesses for
sure these are the three hegelian
registers and here's what I really liked
here so logic nature and spirit each has
a unique space and a unique structure in
which empty space is sublated by
differentiation between these three
registers C gaps persist logic weaves
itself into nature Spirit shapes nature
and likewise separates itself from
nature and spirits and spirit is itself
a redoubling of The Logical idea that
has returned into
itself and this is very important
there's an ontological irreducibility to
these gaps as such but far from being a
pessimistic conclusion it is space as
well as avoid the Gap and
lack that keep the world
open without space all would be at one
point collapsed selfsame and
dimensionist with space ontological
Horizons remain open there's always more
space to to determine to think freely to
explode so I think the latter part we
already touched on but what I want to
try to understand is yeah what's the Gap
you speak of cuz maybe I understood this
but for me I in many ways thought of the
subject as being this dap more totally
more along Adrian Johnson's notion but
it could you like that was a lot there I
know but I think it's important to build
it up for the more for the listeners but
could you talk about the Gap Katherine
like what what is that I'd love to I'd
love to not just a clothing store um The
Gap you know it's deployed in so many
ways right as like a constitutive of the
subject that we're structured around a
gap that were split around some sort of
void and so in my work I really wanted
to try and be rigorous with the some
definitions and say like you know really
like what is the void and you know like
for example like with Aristotle when he
talks about the void it's a very
naturalistic question for him right as
like the void as um the ground of
motion but the way that Hegel really
talks about the void is in the logic so
I just sort of like say the void is a
logical construction and it's a really
important one that I'll touch upon in in
this question here um these
gaps in this particular context this
sort of Gap that I'm talking about we
could definitely call it like a gap of
subjectivity we can call it gaps in
Logic the specific quote that you
referenced I'm really thinking about the
gaps between the three heelan registers
so just for context um right the
encyclopedia has three different volumes
um the logic nature and spirit and so
know maybe some of you know the
listeners would be familiar with the
three leanian registers this is often
how we talk about you know Lan is that
there's the imaginary the symbolic and
the
real I think for Hegel we can really
ontologically
distinguish these registers of logic
nature and spirit in that they're
completely distinct yet they do overlap
they do weave together but they can't be
reduced to each other right we can't
just say nature is logic even though we
Define logic and nature all the time
right but nature always exceeds logic
like that is what nature is it's also
externality so we can't reduce the two
together likewise spirit Spirit can
reason Spirit can employ logic but it
would be a mistake to say that spirit is
logic likewise even though Spirit comes
from nature it would be a mistake to say
that spirit is nature so the point is
that there's this this irreducibility
between the three different registers
and one has to ask ask what is that
irreducibility right what is that space
between these three registers and why
are there gaps well if they all just
like linked together perfectly or they
all could collapse together we wouldn't
even have like a system at all right it
would all just be again everything would
collapse at one point right like we need
to have some sort of like distinction
between these three and so
um the one of the sentences that you
quoted from my text uh I think is a nice
way to kind of simplify some of this and
there's there's a lot to it right um but
simply that Spirit traverses nature and
weaves logic into nature this is one way
to see how the three registers operate
that you know I name the things around
myself like per Adrian right like I'm
disentangling an entangled world right
um how did he put it right you know
we're differentiating and we're
abstracting um things that are pot
tearing a pot we're tearing the world
apart right I'm looking at the grass in
the field I'm saying like that's one
blade that's another blade I'm
distinguishing the grass from the
Shrubbery right these are two different
things and in that shrub I'm like here's
a leaf here's a root and as we know with
nature like you know our our inclination
as humans to like categorize nature to
um create certain like boxes for nature
to fit into but we know from our
experience doing this and Hegel tells us
this as well is that nature will always
exceed any kind of categorization it's
always going to break the rules right
there's always going to be an
exception um and so you know that's
that's interesting right but nonetheless
back to this Gap I think Adrian puts
this like really really well that the
power of the subject that's how I put it
right the power is to is to break things
apart to introduce a cut so let's really
kind of break that down a bit right to
introduce a gap let's let's break that
down because it's not simply that in
identifying one blade of grass sorry one
sec excuse me it's not simply in
identifying one blade of grass that I
can say oh here's a being and everything
around it is its non-being right this
this is partly what he's saying right
and this is a spatial way to understand
it right there's the thing and there's
everything outside of it that's not the
thing but what he's also saying and I
think what Todd and sa and myself are
all saying is that when we name that
blade I mean I'll quote mad and delar
here the name names the unnamable
there's something that exceeds the name
as such something more to that blade of
grass than is that blade of grass or
something that fails even in that in
that Reckoning and so the way I conceive
of this
is there's a couple steps here and I'll
I'll I I do want to summarize I think it
is it is an important point is that when
we we start off with the hegel's nature
we move from space from just the
indifference of nature not to time but
to the point time comes after we get to
the point after we talk about space and
the point is just this this difference
right this infinite infinite tmal
difference that's inserted into the
indifference of space the fascinating
one sec
sorry the fascinating dramatic pause
thing about the insertion of the point
is that the point isn't natural the
point is logical right like it doesn't
you know we all can agree on this the
point nowhere occurs in nature the point
is a logical construction and Hegel
discusses the point in the nature as a
logical construction as
um he calls it an abstract limit which
is really interesting right because
abstract for Hegel means that it's an
isolation so if we were to think of a
limit in isolation without it
delimitating anything we just have like
just this cut of difference right and in
this way when we're pointing out things
in
nature yeah because I mean one I like to
think of that is you Adrian Johnson
calls like weak weak nature as in nature
is just it's stupid it's just there it's
dumb it doesn't have
these in
itself yeah and so what we do when we
disentangle nature it's not simply that
we're demonstrating the non-being
outside of the thing but we're actually
weaving a gap into that thing itself and
this really comes from weaving the point
into nature because the point is really
just this Gap right this it's really a
negativity that we're weaving into
negativity right this is negation of
negation right that we take the
indifferent blankness of space which is
itself a type of negativity it has a
negativity implicit within it it's just
indifferent and when we weave this
negativity of the point then we make
something I I really think this is this
is the way to read it personally
um moreover what we learn when we read
the logic is that when we determine in
being we produce two
paradoxes so the very get-go there's
many paradoxes but two that we can focus
on WE produce the Paradox of the one and
the void right when I name a certain
object I'm calling it a one and I'm also
indicating the indeterminacy around it
the void and likewise within it as well
and so the reason I'm making this
argument is that the way Hegel defines
determin being in the logic he says it's
the unity of being and non-being or
being in a certain place so that place
would be like the non-being right so if
we think about being in a certain place
and this is why place is so interesting
right if we think of being in a certain
place as that's how we determine being a
logical place right not a not a natural
place right a logical place the cup is
different than the table is different
than the bow I have a sort of logical
mapping we produce the Paradox of being
without a place and nothing in a place
the one and the void the one is a being
without place it just has its own self-
reference it doesn't reference anything
else I'm just one I need no other
reference and the void sorry I'm gonna
live today if you want to break we can
by the way I feel bad now no no I know
it's like I'm having a bit of a cough
but it's okay we're gonna we're going to
survive um yeah thanks at least for this
conversation but uh void for a bit
longer maybe tomorrow as well let's see
how we go but you got you gotta write
your book so after you write your book
then then I can L bury me with it that's
all I asked just bury me with
it so we get these two paradoxes right
we get the one as being without a place
and the void as nothing in its place and
anytime we determine being these these
two paradoxes are present right we can't
get rid of them and so likewise when we
disent angle nature right when we say
this is one blade of grass I'm naming it
as such we weave in this excess this
void into that blade of grass as well
right
so this I think is really critical when
it comes to precisely what Adrian said
right it's not just that we're cutting
things up into pieces but that that
piece itself can M maintains a gap
within it because we've named it because
we've distinguished it because we've
logically determined it and this is a
this is what is in contrast with nature
right for both Badu and for Hegel nature
is just smooth continuity right there's
Badu I think puts it really well he says
that there's no gaps in nature it's just
smooth stability whereas for B do like
history needs to have like instability
implicit in it we need to have the
potential for there to be ruptures and
crises um but nature doesn't have that
it's just you know Kronos it's just this
continuity of Destruction and death and
indifference and keeps going on doesn't
matter um so this is I think the really
beautiful way to think about this Gap
right or this cut this negativity this
void a lot of different ways to call it
but I do think the spatial element is
really critical to why we describe these
like contradictions and these
incompletions as as spatial as gaps for
every reason I've just said does that
make sense it I'm I think I'm getting it
I'm getting I'm getting to your kind of
thinking but I think I'm still kind of
struggling with how you said that you
know there's the void and the one and
then there's space so when you play of
course we're talking about logical space
here right and when we say something is
in logical space you're saying we create
both the the the one and the void so the
one would be the self preferential like
it's just me in myself and then the void
is everything else is that the kind of
the I don't know if it's like a dualism
but is that the the the two that we POS
it how how yeah that's a bit I'm still a
bit confused on yeah yeah I'll break it
down um
so there's like two steps to the
argument right there's the idea of like
a logical spatiality and then how that
logic weaves into nature right which is
a different type of spatiality so for
the logic right we start the logic off
in Hegel with just the indeterminate
void right and then once we actually
name these things right we name being a
nothing then we actually have this
Paradox that unravels between naming
everything is one which is the you know
all the void is one in which the void
reappears this is really like where
motion comes in and where movement comes
in so I mean I think in a very simple
way whenever we make a logical
determination we're making it against a
background of indeterminacy right
against the void we're making different
logical connections different relations
that's offset by that which is
indeterminate
right the the piece I wanted to argue
here is that when we when we actually
determine things and we say that here's
a being in a particular place in a
logical place so if this is how we
determine things that there's this Unity
between being in place then there must
be these two like distributive sort of
like in a mathematical sense like this
distributive Paradox of being without
place and nothing with place which is
the one in the void that are produced
when we start to name things and
so any naming of anything any
determination of being we start to count
things as ones right but they're not
really unified right this is an
arbitrary cut that maintains a gap
within the thing itself nonetheless
right the one is void for Hegel as well
and
so this is you know this Contrition
implicit in in determinate being but
nonetheless you know we can determine a
such yes yes when we think about like
natural space I think the really
interesting piece is that when we point
out things in nature we inscribe this
pois one this empty one this like good
this point that is void as well we
inscribe this void this little point and
emptiness it's just it's just negativity
it's just this empty thing we inscribe
it into the emptiness of nature there's
this double this redoubling of
negativity but exactly a negation
negation but within two different
registers and that's how like we get
things yeah and who's doing this
spirited being is doing this like this
is a the way I think we can think about
the three different registers right is
Spirited being weaves logic into nature
through this negation of negation that
produces
something yes and and and in this
when when the spirited being does this
this is also the act of Freedom right I
mean that's in some sense that's way to
look at it yeah completely I think
that's a great way to look at it
actually I mean because it depends on
what we mean by Freedom right like if I
just am calling the cup a cup because
everyone else calls it a cup that's not
necessarily free right but when I name
something new right in a badzian sense
right would I name a new event right
when we storm like you know when it's
187 and we've taken over
M event wave is much better sorry I
interrupted you keep going Catherine no
no it's okay when we call that the Paris
comun right like that's a thing and I've
given it a new name that that creation
of a new name I have just woven right
points into the the site right this is
why we need a site for B we need an
actual place to call it to like for the
event to take place right um we're
creating something out of nothing and we
creating a whole new world for Badu
right a whole new logical orientation
and that is an act of freedom and I that
is a that is I think one way we could
read this as well yeah I mean look I no
way have read baju as much as you have I
mean I'm just honestly haven't read baju
at all really a few of his books uh but
I always think B when I think baju
especially from his uh introduction to
begin event I think disjuncture and that
disjuncture always for me has like
freedom to it because it's
symbolic order that wasn't a part of the
previous it's something totally new
something totally novel it it doesn't
come on from the the old symbolic order
so to speak and you have to affirm it
which is what I love it one of my
favorite aspects of V is that you have
to say yes to the event I love this yeah
totally I I find it so interesting that
all of these
thinkers uh more than bazu I think even
Hegel kind of caricature is they're like
these totalizing thinkers You're
Building these huge systems but
but they ultimately thinkers of freedom
and also they're deeply you could even
call them like even like existentialist
and Satan sense that they they deeply
have allow the subject to be free
Freedom it's uh as Frederick bisa said
in his book on Geral idealism it's it's
like this struggle with
subjectivity and and and how can we be
yeah so um I completely agree I mean I
think that this is hegel's Project right
is that a spe
ultimately realizes that it makes its
own world yeah right and that it can
reorient itself in its World it can
choose that new point of orientation to
ground being and nothing at the start of
the logic right you can choose a new
point of measurement to to unfold a
whole new world right and this is also I
think how bad do think as well right is
that we have the ability to to
reorient in order to reorient that we
have to disorient right we have to like
look the void in the face right we have
to like grapple with that anxiety with
that vertigo Let It Go say Lous yeah
yeah yeah right in order to then say
okay I'm gonna pull myself back and I'm
going to ground myself here right and
not just in the old way but in a new in
a new way yeah now I think now it's all
in my head especially your kind of
ontologies that's coming together in my
head yeah this is where I think it's
really important it's interesting
Katherine aan Johnson when I spoke to
him he said something which kind of
spoke to me quite deeply he said that we
think that philosophy that there are two
kinds of
uh intellectuals or philosophers or
thinkers like there are who you would
call historians of philosophy so you
could you could call someone like
Frederick Biser a historian of
philosophy where they they take they
they document and they speak about all
the different thinkers their ideas and
then he says then some people think that
there are philosophers as such who kind
of come up with new theor so Z is
probably in our times the one one name
we all can think of however he says that
that delineation it's a mistake because
they both are doing philosophy as an as
an accounting and kind of rearticulating
what uh historical historically
philosophers wrote about theor Ione and
putting it into our own language itself
is philosophy and I that's what I find
really interesting not just this simp
short conversation we had but like
reading your work CU in many ways you're
rearticulating a lot of the work through
these thinkers that you're working
through but in doing that you creating
something new
umt yeah and I I find that that that's
kind of something I've been trying to do
with in my own small way as as a neifi
in my own thinking too by simply
rearticulating existing thinkers to see
if there can be something new that comes
out of it yeah gotta go back to the text
you know and I think you know what slavo
did by reading Lon with Hegel I mean
that's what inspired all
us and for me I'm very much a student of
my advisor you know Frank Ruda who reads
hego with bad do right I'm very much
influenced by his project um and so yeah
you know I think uh I think this is the
this is a good way to look at it right
and Adrian's such a good researcher as
well I mean like he's I think one of the
best living researchers in terms of just
like explicating like what's come before
us but then he does Push It Forward
right and he does give us a new spin on
you know his project on transcendental
materialism
right is it's brilliant um but yeah you
got to go back to the
text especially find those questions
that people don't look at you know and I
think that's what the contingent choice
I made that was a good contingent choice
right which was I'm just going to look
at space because no one's really looking
at it yes I mean I probably should read
this out here this is quite important
this is going to be the first question I
was going to ask from you but you I
think we already touched on it you say
so I was going to ask why does space
itself need a need a new ontology
because you say here uh while
topological theories uh and a spatial
analysis within larger ontological
projects persist in contemporary
literature there's not yet been an
explicit and ontological examination of
space itself and this is important but
particularly in the wake of the
linguistic and psychoanalytic turns of
the 20th century I mean of course
there's there's been philos philosophers
working on space but it's just with now
with all the thinking that has been done
what's what's what new can we keep
pushing it Forward also with the
revelations of uh of modern physics so I
find that quite fascinating um all right
Katherine I think this is I'm going to
ask a bit of uh I hope I'm not prying
here but a bit of a bi biographical
question here I what got you interested
in German idealism I mean can you like
to I guess to end the conversation I I'd
like to end it on the note of just just
more of a personal account because I I
mean it's really interesting there are
some topics uh you know when I when I
bring them up with people who are
interested in philosophy they almost
like viscerally they they they repulse
Hegel is one of these people you know
like I think now thanks to zek and kind
of the Liana school that attitude is
changing but you know especially like we
all know like KL POA called Hegel a
tyrant and you know bertran Russell said
he has no idea what a higle is talking
about so I'm I'm curious what got you
drawn towards I mean all the way to
doing a PhD on working through like this
work of hean philosophy but generally a
German idolist and what what do you
think this period of thinking in in
human history or History of Thought what
do you think is unique about it is there
something and why do you think it's
still is pertinent to our times um so
both both personal question and
sociological
I mean to Carl Popper's point right
hegel's my very good Tyrant you know my
master certainly you know that I I
suffer under we all need one yeah so you
know I think and I often tell this to
grad students or to people like
exploring grad school you make certain
contingent choices and you just can't
look back right and I
remember thinking about all the
different thinkers I was interested in
and I'm very much influenced by the
Luana school and so I was thinking very
heavily about just focusing on the con
uh for my
dissertation and I was thinking about
doing a more like historical topic as
well so like my background was in I did
a lot of political science work and was
thinking a lot about the shifting nature
of like space and place in like a
globalizing world like what does it mean
for the world to shrink in this way I
was very interested in this kind of
question and so I mean ultimately
happened was I went for like a coffee
with the Maden darar and lublana and it
was a I remember it was a really sunny
hot uh summer afternoon I I eny you I'm
a huge fan of a yeah Super Lucky very
very lucky um and we were having a
coffee by the river and we went through
you know a hundred different topics and
he was so kind to advise me on well if
you choose that one you can go down this
path if you choose that one you can go
down that other path and we like paid
the bill we like ended the conversation
up but we hadn't done the double ending
right the the second death and I turned
to him and I just said should I just go
for Hegel and he says to me it is the
most difficult and the most
rewarding and so that sort of sealed the
deal for me and then just like on a
personal level I've always wanted to be
taken seriously in like this field and
so I I mean just want a very yeah like
you know like to share my personal kind
of gripe you know I was like if I do
Hegel people can't tell me I'm like full
of like they'll have to respect me
at least a little bit to think like oh
she's tackled this like very difficult
thinker maybe she's done it totally in
the wrong way and I totally disagree
with her but there's some Huts spuff for
at least tackling Hegel um so that was
sort of the like the strange way I got
into it um but you know I really thought
if I was going to do space and I was
going to ask about like an ontology of
space and I actually really didn't start
with the nature I really was just
reading the logic and thinking what is
logical space before I expanded the
project to look at um nature and spirit
but I was really just trying to think
about space because again like to yeah
kind of go back to like you know a
personal anecdote um I was in a class
with with Al Lenka and I remember
thinking about retroactivity and time
and like up all of this and thinking
this is so rad what a cool way to think
about time there's almost like this time
travel component to it and I never
really thought about time in this way
before and I remember just having a
really basic thought which was like
what's the correlation for space and of
course there's lons fun non-orientable
objects and all this that we love to
talk about and deploy but I suppose that
you know it's like this basic question
they say you know find like the Gap in
the literature and I was like haha I'm
just going to talk about the Gap in the
literature so maybe it was a bit cheeky
in this way um but yeah I think just and
when I really got down to it to think
about this uh tension between
indifference and difference I knew I was
on something and I was like okay there's
something here to this and let's see how
it expands and you know it's a it
expanded for me in ways I didn't expect
it to right and there I had a sort of a
gut inclination of like where the
project was going to go but it really
started to unfold for me the more I read
the more I thought about it the more you
know I was reading Badu and gek as well
like bringing their work into this
project the more I felt like I could
contribute something to this field of
thought on a very like basic level of
space excellent so I mean I've got to
ask you did did you enjoy your
suffering oh I enjoy it very much yeah
and you know even that's all matters
even in like those last days when I was
doing my dissertation I was you know at
this age very self-aware of the anxiety
and I wasn't like just in a
mom you know like which ways forward I'm
not sure like I was very much outside
myself being like you're suffering right
now and I was like okay now just take
the reins of that and like try and
control it as best as you can so yeah
know it's the best suffering you know
and you know one of my favorite things
to do is just get stuck on a paragraph
of Hegel and I know there's other people
that enjoy this too and like thank
goodness there's you know I know that
these other people exist sh right um and
yeah you know just getting stuck and you
know just digging in and thinking about
all the different like you know
translations Etc right how we can read a
certain paragraph I mean it's I don't
know if you know Tod us said this or
slavo said this um and I'll just credit
both of them with this you know but
reading Hegel is like watching David
Lynch right you can sit around a table
Todd okay beautiful beautiful I borrow
from Todd right we can sit around a
table of people that all love David
Lynch but we're gonna have radically
different opinions right I might be like
oh Mahal and drive is my favorite David
Lynch no it's Lost Highway and we'll
have a great debate about why the other
person's wrong right and David Lynch can
be read in these wildly different ways
same with Hegel right we can sit around
a room and be like around a table and
say oh hegel's the author of completion
no he's the author of incompletion and
have a really good debate based on these
two radically different ways that one
can read he and it's very productive
debate excellent so now that you're done
I mean I should probably say this before
this if if n do tells me to go you know
do a PhD on Hegel I'm I don't doing it
I've got the master telling me and I've
got
the yeah a very good Master
definitely he's such a it's so
interesting you know the Liana School
the je uh zanik and dalah Z is like this
bombastic loud funny guy and then zap
pun and mil they're such
softspoken almost like just the total
contrasts and I I truly I truly love
learning from them I mean obviously for
me as an outsider just reading their
work and listening to their talks but uh
you know it I it's yeah as I said I'm
quite envious so uh I'm curious
Katherine um are you going to convert
any of this work into more for like a an
I wouldn't even say an academic book but
more like a book for the J public um and
maybe get it
published yeah I'd really like to I
don't have this what I want to do is I
want to let it breathe for like a year I
think and come back to it because I love
this project so much and it informs
everything I still do like I still can't
stop thinking about space um I have a
text coming out soon is I'm submitting
it soon on a theory of historical
spatiality which I did a talk on last
year um in Serbia novisad and it's
online and I'm just sort of taking that
talk in like ironing it out a bit and so
putting that into text like the thing I
love about this topic on space is that
you know you can think about again like
historical space political space
economic space there's so many
interesting ways that this is a very
Evergreen sorry come on no mean it's in
in ex topic yeah I keep interrupting bit
no no it's okay yeah it's just it was
like a great place to kind of start and
to mine into like there's so many
implications for This research and
there's still so much more to research
in it um but yeah once this little text
is in I owe it to my guy in two days
which is it's gonna it's gonna it's
gonna land on his desk um the the bigger
project I'm working on in this next year
maybe longer than one year let's see how
it all pans out um I'm working on a
project on the atom right now which I'm
really excited about and it is
everything we we has to do with what
we've been talking about with the idea
of disentangling an entangled nature
because for me the atom such an
interesting question that there is this
irreducible materiality that is a
building block of Nature and this is a
fantasy right it's a beautiful fantasy
that will find one day that little thing
that everything is built upon and it's
material and that it's going to be you
know perfectly spherical or have hard
edges right I mean there's so many ways
that we could or it's string or it's
just a piece of energy right totally um
so I am working on a project on it's
called a MAG and Adam and that will be
the next uh I think big project for me
but yes I'd really love to publish the
thesis it's I feel like super grateful
that people have been interested in it
um I really like it I think there's a
lot to it um and so yes it is a project
that I shall conquer next
love it well you've certainly won over
an avid follower so I'll be I'll be the
first to buy whatever buy or or find
whatever you you put out um yeah looking
forward to download it illegally online
you know do the ethical
thing yeah I mean I I always think you
know work like this it should be
available more for the general public I
mean I I hate this notion of dumbing
down philosophy or making Phil not like
not pop but you know J makes his point
that his bestselling book is his most
dense text Which is less than nothing I
mean that's his bestselling books so
complely as you said there certainly are
people that are willing to spend a month
working on one paragraph from uh hegel's
logic I mean there are people that are
willing to get go through their work um
Katherine I am very grateful for your
time thank you for sharing your work
with me and uh yeah this was a soul the
Define conversation thank you so much
thank you so much R such a great convo
just appreciate so much your engagement
with the work and you're doing so many
cool things I'm loving your channel as
well so just yes I hope we'll talk again
soon
