Keith thank you so much for joining me
again uh as we were just chatting you
were one of my first guests and it was
such an honor to have you and you've
really influenced my career and me
joining this field so it's it's such a
great pleasure to have you back well
thank you I'm honor to play that sort of
Ro um it's um it's a great podcast
pleasure to be involved with it I've
I've I've been curious to know how life
has been since we last spoke because
it's 2021 it's been such a long time
anything you'd like to share prior
before we begin the Deep philosophical
dissection oh um well life keeps
happening
um
um quite a lot of things have happened
since the just at the end of the
pandemic I think that we that we that we
talked
first um and so coming out of that life
seems to have um uh speed it up rather
or maybe it's just that I've slowed down
um ad so the children are growing up um
Maria my partner is doing lots of
interesting things she's um she's
currently has a fellowship from um
Yale's life worth living network uh to
um
uh explore what it is that makes uh for
a flourishing
life um I'm not sure if she's going to
tell me but um she's working on that um
which a very interesting project and
she's focusing in particular on how you
live a flourishing life in a world
that's increasingly dominated by uh
intelligent
technology and I think this is something
that's we're all we're all going to have
to think a lot about
um I suppose that's the biggest change
that's happened in those three years is
this sudden
um uh well I was going to say emergence
but it's it's it has been coming for
some time but it's suddenly burst into
public awareness the possibilities of
deep learning um obviously through
things like CH GPT um
and
the potential benefits
and risks um and threats that this poses
and this is something that philosophers
have suddenly um I like to say this is
the Philosopher's moment this is the
moment when we're suddenly needed
because who
can who can who can advise Society about
um how to how to think about these
things about the ethics uh of them and
about the if you like the metaphysics or
at least the psychology of these things
are these do these do llms have have um
are they actually communicating with us
do they have
beliefs um um do they uh are they are
they performing intentional actions when
they communicate when they when they
respond to us are they actually replying
to our questions are they assisting us
uh advising us informing us it looks as
if they are we tempted to think of them
that way as if they're being helpful and
so but is that Just an Illusion I tend
to think it is um
and what are the dangers of having
things that seem so like Cooperative
Partners um but maybe aren't um
so this is seems to me this is the
moment maybe when philosophers
are are finally in in public demand
whether we can rise to the occasion I
don't know but there's a debate here I
think that that everybody needs to be
involved in um it was one thing that
my um another thing that has happened
recently of course that my my um
intellectual hero my friend um Dan
dennet has uh has died earlier this year
and I know this was something that was
um exercising him very much uh during
the past few years he was devoting most
of his time to thinking about this about
the risk he was always looking forward
um and it it's difficult to say that
it's the most urgent problem that we're
facing we're facing so many of them from
climate change to political instability
war and but it's certainly one of the
mix of big challenges that are facing us
so that's certainly something that's
happened in the world and I suppose it's
I'm trying in my little way to to
respond to it too there's there's two
things you brought up there that I'd
like to touch on one is are you familiar
with the work by Eric schwitz
B I am yes indeed because he talks about
a lot eth the ethics of ethicists or the
philosophy of philosophers and whether
we are actually important for the for
these um topics of discussion because I
think he found that if you take a group
of ethicists together and give give them
certain philosophical or ethical dilemas
that tend to do pretty much the same as
the average person which is fascinating
work yes it's it's
up I say this flippantly though there
may be a serious point to it if
um if someone had to make an ethical
decision that would affect me might
affect my life perhaps where um uh who
would I prefer to make it um a
trained ethicist philosopher ethicist or
just somebody who um had had a lot of
experience of of life and just lived a
rich and um nice ordinary person if you
like with a lot of
experience um or would I prefer someone
who really thought through all the
principles of it now it may be and some
ethicists would say this that the two
would tend to converge I don't know but
I think I would go for the ordinary
person the nice ordinary person um yeah
it's a sort of Spock versus mcoy I
suppose
um situation yeah it's exactly where he
sort of headed with that thought I think
is that you can sort of you don't need
that academic training to sort of have
the wisdom involved with making those
decisions but I suppose in defense of
ethicist they might say well we're not
that's not exactly that's not really
what we're we're trying to do what we're
trying to do is to probe some of the
principles behind ethical thinking we're
not trying we're not claiming to be
great yes ethical people we're trying to
think about some of the principles
behind ethical thinking principles which
the ordinary person might have
internalized um and be intuitively
following we're trying to make them
explicit trying to find the rationale
behind it it's not enough just to say oh
well trust uh um so and so they're were
wonderfully wise and person we want to
know
we we like to think there's some
rational basis to our decisions uh and
even if the person can't articulate it
themselves we feel there should be some
rational um uh basis for their decisions
and I suppose ethicist might say that's
what we're trying to to unpick and
uncover so maybe Eric's being a little a
little hard on them um physician heal
himself you know it's it's the it's the
um the the the doctors to smoke most and
live the unhealthy life life have
unhealthy life lifestyle well yes yeah I
mean I know that for sure because I know
there's times where I'm telling patients
to sleep well exercise diet while I'm
working like a 30 something hour shift
it's the irony is incredibly apparent so
but but then on top of that the second
thing I wanted to ask you was about Dan
Dennett he's right behind you there's a
beautiful picture of him ah you see the
picture that was in Creed yes years ago
and he he sort of touched on this giving
us those intuition pumps in order to
make us have the tools to make decisions
that are better more informed and yeah
it's such a great loss as I said you
were one of those people when I was
writing my dissertation and obviously
Dan two of you combined and then we
worked on that together you assisted me
since we last spoke we've had a great
loss anything you want to say about
Dan
I I wrote a little piece just after he
died um um which perhaps we could we
could link to um yeah for The Institute
of Art and ideas
um uh there's so much I could say and
it's it's interesting that people who
knew Dan um
I I think we all had a each of us felt
we had a very special relationship with
him he he
he he was a wonderful person wonderful
human being as well as a great
philosopher
um uh when it came to academic battles
he he didn't take any prisoners he could
be um yeah he if he thought somebody was
uh uh there's a section in his
Autobiography on academic bullies in
which he certainly doesn't doesn't
doesn't pull any punches
but for
um towards younger people towards people
who he felt um would benefit from his
help and advice he was wonderfully
supportive um and a wonderful friend um
I think that's what I miss more than I
mean he's always been my intellectual
hero but in a way that that dennet is
there in the work and I can go back and
revisit um uh dantian ideas dantian
themes he's left these with us and so we
can continue to engage with that it's
the person that I miss more than
anything um though of course the two
were were inseparable and I think that's
I think that's that's something I've
been saying about him that um
I just made a separation between um denn
the philosopher and dennet the man but
you can't and that's that's the point
that's why he was such a good
philosopher I think that that all of his
activities he was he was deeply engaged
with life I he was a farmer he was a
sailor um uh he enjoyed good company
good conversation he enjoyed um he was a
um a musician he was a sculptor he
considered becoming a professional
sculptor he was deeply engaged with life
in all its
richness and that's what made him such a
good philosopher um because he had a
huge context in which to see things I
mean I repeat this every time it's a
thing that he often repeated with that
the the line from wilred sellers that
the aim of the philosopher is to see how
things in the broadest possible sense of
the term hang together in the broadest
possible sense of the term to see the
big picture to see the pattern in the
noise if you like and I think he did
that better this is a bold statement
better perhaps than any human being has
ever done that's a very bold
statement of
course he had a huge inheritance to draw
on he was born at a particular he would
the first to stress this he was born at
a time when um there was uh there was a
Confluence I think of work in philosophy
in emerging cognitive science Computing
Theory U Neo Darwinism um working
evolutionary biology it there was a
Confluence of all of this really
exciting and revolutionary work and he
was
able to synthesize it in a way I think
um synthesize it in a way that perhaps
no one else had been able to and
communicated he was a great
communicator um so I think he perhaps I
would say that he achieved sell's aim
better than anyone has done to date and
we're all in his de and
what he would want us to do is to is to
continue
that that um that Journey that um that
exploration I would sometimes say to him
that I'd found things in I'd found
myself saying things or writing things
that I thought were my ideas and and i'
I'd reread something from perhaps that
he'd written 40 years ago and found that
anticipated there um and he was never um
displeased by that he was always
delighted by that he said that's what he
wanted to do he wanted to feed into the
the stream of of thinking about things
and it was the the ideas that mattered
and the continuation of the ideas um so
I think the most best tribute to him is
is to continue in that Spirit which
doesn't necessarily mean agreeing with
everything he said of course he wouldn't
want that either um but I think he he
saw the big he saw the pattern more
clearly
than then anyone's done I have to say
that um when when I first started doing
this he was probably the the person who
got me into this like just genuinely one
of the most iconic prolific thinkers
that I could think of when I was a kid
just growing up reading his stuff and we
chatted via email quite a few times he
always signed up with that
DCd um and he was we planned to have a a
podcast together and it never came to
fruition and it's so sad for me because
I wish we got to chat I mean I never got
the opportunity to really pick his brain
I don't think if I ever told you this
but I once I almost considered calling
this podcast quing qualia oh
wow yeah I would have lost quite a few
um non- Illusionist uh listeners and
viewers with that
title
I I can see I can understand why people
um
um uh disagree with with with with
um with Dan um
what I can't understand is why some
people dismiss his work that I can't
understand it's if you think Quia Quin
Quia is a paper that can be
dismissed uh quickly then go and read it
again and then read it again and then
read it again dance workor is deceptive
in some ways it's it's easy to read you
don't have to struggle too much to to
read it because he's a clear writer and
it's easy to think you've got the
measure of the argum
well I just said that and
so
yeah I don't agree now it's easy to fool
yourself into thinking that you've that
you've fully grasped the argument and
that you've seen through it I every time
I read qu and quietly I think I see
something new and it's something I'm not
fully
appreciated um maybe if you'd written in
a more obscure style more um with and
made reader work harder to get through
through the paper it would have forced
them to think a little harder um about
what he was saying but he did them the
the the favor of writing easily but
don't think that that means you can you
can understand easily um you need to
really reflect on these um on the the
the uh the intuition pumps that he uses
there they be thinking about almost a
you see what he's asking us to do is his
not presenting your standard uh bit of
analytic philosophy where it analyzes
some um uh bit of language or he
presents some uh organized deductive
argument with premises and you know
formally valid and then he defends the P
he's not doing that kind of thing he's
asking you to look at things from a
different angle um to try a different on
a different pair of spectacles if you
like um or to move to a different Loc to
look at the landscape that's bit more of
a ran metaphor maybe say you know come
over here climb up this hill and see how
the landscape looks from this
perspective and he can tell you what to
do he can set out the um the examples
the intuition pumps the things that he's
that he's using to try to get you to
take that view but then it's up to you
to take the view and to look at the
landscape from that perspective you can
come to the point he's suggesting you
can climb up with him but if you don't
look at the landscape and explore how it
looks from that perspective and how that
things the the relations between things
appear different from there if you just
stand there and sort of stubbornly look
the other way or something um tend to
over I'm overextending this metaphor
then you won't get the benefit of
it
so uh it's in that way it's it's maybe
more like like a Zen exercise that's
requires you
don't okay he's a VI St about if you're
in the grip of one picture you don't get
um to appreciate another
picture just by you know it's not a
matter of flicking a switch you have to
work yourself into it work yourself out
of the old way of thinking first and
then into the new way of thinking and I
think this is something perhaps that
that
people they see that that that he's
asking them to give up an old way of
thinking so about free will or
Consciousness or intentionality whatever
they seee asking them to give up that
and they think well
okay I've got that he doesn't think we
should think of it that way so I'm lost
so that means I don't have well I don't
have
Consciousness all the foundations have
gone oh God that can't be right so I
must stick with where I want but he's
never doing that he's never saying give
up that and
just be a sort of nihilist no he's
saying there's another way that is does
all the work that that one did and some
more too
that's a better way and you've got to
take that second part of the journey and
get into the the the um the the
framework the picture that he's offering
the alternative on Free Will how people
how can he say he's a realist about Free
Will given the just asked you to give up
this sort of view of what free will of
of of what free will is
well work your way into it and can
see um so yeah I think some of the dis
missive aspects of all people's views on
dennit in
general stem from the fact that he
obviously was one of the four hor
Horsemen who just who came at religion
with so much Vigor and and life that
many people just associate him with that
onlyi and they purely dismiss any
philosophical argument because of that
and and people tend to do that quite
often I when I often think about Richard
Dawkins and his amazing work with the
the selfish Gene and then now that's
complete nobody cares because once he
wrote The God Delusion people have
completely dismissed such brilliant
ideas that came before that and that's
quite a bad habit and I think dennet has
fallen into the same trap because his
philosophical work he science he's he's
a cognitive scientist as well he's
immersed himself he was one of the first
people to bring the Sciences
neurosciences into this philosophical
sphere um it reminds me of Patricia
churchin and the way they did this
neurop philosophy and they were these
people who brought this together for us
and and we cannot take that for granted
absolutely um I think that the uh it's
one thing I'm not talked much about when
I talk about Dan um The Horseman thing
um I think from things that that I've
heard Dan say he he did that uh
as a piece more of Public Service than
something that he was deeply passionate
about I mean yes I mean understanding
religion is an actual phenomenon is very
interesting task task for
um uh cognitive science indeed
psychology cultural Theory and so it's
an interesting T it's a very interesting
phenomenon um but I think he thought
that I don't think he was as hostile to
religion um or certainly to religious
attitudes instincts as some of the
others were I think he had a lot of
sympathy
for many of the attitudes that would
find expression in
religion he said a beautiful thing on a
podcast I can't remember which one it
was not an interview anyway he said um
that there was many valuable things
about religion that we shouldn't we
should take care not to lose when we
lose the the the the the dogmatic forms
of religion that are that are causing um
that can cause so much harm and um one
of them he said was the idea that
religion uh is like um a religious
community is like a family it's a place
where when you go they have to take you
in and that unconditional acceptance and
forgiveness and so so in many ways he he
valued these the attit the the attitudes
that find expression some of the
attitudes that find expression not the
some of the more dogmatic um um ones um
he valued some of the attitudes that
find expression in religion um but he
also thought there was a lot of harm
done by religion people were exploited
and persecuted and um of division caused
by religion um and of course he was
thinking I suppose from an American
perspective where there was certainly uh
I mean won't go into this but certainly
some forms of Rel that seemed quite
exploitative so I think he thought of
that as as a piece of public service
that he was doing um and which actually
distracted him from the things that he
really wanted to be doing and it was I
think it was also because the fact that
these four guys had written these books
around the same period it just sort of
clumped together as like a cult in in
themselves this new age atheist yes but
but what you're talking about is very
clear because it's it's true that not
like unlike the others who were not pro
professional philosophers he had this
ability to do that and break away from
it in a successful manner whereas the
others had this almost anti-religious
anger towards it um and I think he was
sort of different in that way yes yeah
yes yes I I I I I
don't
I I mean look he definitely was
anti-religion but I don't think it was
to the extreme that the others were
absolutely I mean he was he was
insistent that I think one thing that I
mean there was that piece he wrote after
he had his serious um um when he had the
his 2006 and he had a iotic dissection
and um V early died he wrote a wonderful
piece almost I think he wrot it from his
hospital bed um um uh called thank
goodness he asked people not to thank
God for um uh uh preserving him for for
for for for saving him but to thank the
goodness of the people who had been
involved in doing it and again I think
this reflected his practical approach to
um to life in general there were lots of
people to thank lots of people who had
worked really hard um both the people
who had done the research behind the the
techniques that were used and the people
who had actually been there implementing
those techniques and they and the people
who'd come and brought him food and
washed him and looked after him all of
these people had played a
huge practical role in saving him and
those are the people we should thank and
in society those are the people we
should think the people who keep things
running and keep and who preserve us who
preserve our our way of life I happen
those are the people we should think not
some intangible um being who's whose
rolling all this is totally mysterious
and um so it was I think there was a
sort of indignation at people ignoring
the true sources of goodness and the two
sources of meaning in our life again
it's he wasn't wanting to take away the
um it's another illustration What I
saying that he yes he said don't don't
thank don't thank God don't thinkk
a some
some abstract being from another realm
of
existence but it wasn't saying don't
thank anyone don't be don't don't have
gratitude yes have lots of gratitude but
have it to the right targets so the the
emotion that people are expressing
through oh thank thankk thank God that's
fine but direct it to the right
Target and I so I think that's that's I
guess that's how he would have wanted to
at least his attitude to the best in
religion would be let's preserve it but
set it in a better
framework yeah now it was more about
breaking that spell similar to the
Consciousness spell I mean let's let's
let's head to that while we're here one
of his famous quotes I think it was in
my essay as well um denn's quote was
Consciousness is an illusion of the
brain for the brain by the brain and I
know in one of your papers you said um
if I'm paraphrasing incorrectly just let
me know um you say that if Consciousness
if it's an illusion to think
Consciousness is an illusion then you
are not disillusioned yes I did say has
that held true since we lost spoke yes
yes and well always in in with with the
caveat that it's a certain conception of
Consciousness that we're talking about
I'm not saying that we're not conscious
in any sense obviously
um we're not unconscious we're not in a
coma we're awake and we're perceiving
things and we're aware of
things vividly aware of the world around
us and of our own bodily condition and
of course we are I'm not suggesting for
moment the people that are ordinary talk
of um seeing hearing feeling smelling
tasting being in pain having feeling
pleasure and so on isn't doesn't capture
anything of course it does capture one
most essential things about it I'm just
denying a certain picture of what that
is um which says that it
involves immediate acquaintance with
with mysterious mental qualities that
are somehow produced by the
brain um now maybe Keith Define it
because it's not you're not saying
Consciousness is an illusion you are
saying a concept of your perception or
thought or idea of Consciousness is
actually the elusory issue I'm saying
that there's something that happens when
we um attend to our own experience when
we think about our own experience that
induces us to adopt a certain picture of
what it is to be
conscious that is deeply misleading yes
and that there's something about this
when I say we attend to our own
experience I could use the word
introspect when we sort of look in we
pay attention to how it is with us right
now what it's like to be us if you like
to use a phrase um there's something
about what happens
then and what does happen then is a very
very interesting question for cognitive
science that produces this if you like
this or or tends to induce us to endorse
this
view of of ourselves and um the nature
of our
experience that I think is deeply uh
flawed and misleading and we could call
an illusion because there is this deep
um tendency for us to to to to um uh to
endorse this view it's not it's not that
this view is one that it may be that you
don't endorse The View until it's
presented to you by a philosopher has to
be articulated but once it is
articulated it gets a great grip on
us and uh I think there's something
about the nature of of of introspection
itself that makes us susceptible to this
picture even if we don't uh pre
theoretically articulate even if we
don't articulate it to ourselves until
we get to do some philosophy sign I was
a little confused so the picture is that
there's a if you like an irreducibly
what I call an irreducibly
subjective world there's a
that that my being conscious involves
their being their coming into
existence a world that is just for
me that it's it's that is somehow
distinct from the world that we
share there's the shared world with all
the things in it that we can all uh
communicate about and point to an
identify and and agree on the the
features of but then there's this
private World which is how that outer
world is as it was rendered and
presented to me
internally um what the Out World feels
like for me where me here is a bit
unclear because it it's almost like
there's an inner me that is it's not
just the the physical me but there's a
sort of inner me aware of this inner
World which is how the outer world is uh
is is is is is is rendered for this
enemy
um so there's this irreducible subject
subjective world and no one can know
what that world is like they can guess
it from their similarity to me from the
things I say I the the the organism from
the my behavior from my attempts to
describe it and so on they can speculate
about it and guess that it's probably
like their own to a large extent um but
they can never
actually detect it um there's no when
neuroscientist or any form of cognitive
scientist can can
uh examine this world
can directly detect its its
properties um and it's a mystery how the
physical brain produces
it
um some people may think it's it's not
physical at all that it's a that it's a
an immaterial Soul others think that
it's something that the physical brain
produces but that is more than just the
activity of the brain it's it's some
creation of the brain and its relation
to what the brain is doing is very
mysterious this is the hard problem how
does the the physical public brain the
objective brain like produce this
subjective
world and now I think there's something
right about that picture the brain is
doing something um that involves
representing the world and creating a
perspective on it but it's not creating
this
radically
separate realm of reality
that's the
illusion it's the way we think about
what the brain is actually doing which
is again it's like the detan thing that
that it we shouldn't think of it's not
wrong to talk about us as having a
subjective perspective on the world it's
just wrong to conceptualize it in this
um inflated way as a separate realm of
reality so we we need to remove oursel
remove that picture but then replace it
with another picture of
subjectivity that
is less metaph physically inflated and
that is more tractable and that we can
begin to understand and theorize and
gradually
unpick using the tools of COG science
and thereby integrate ourselves more
with the shared world so that we're not
separate from it but part of it yes yes
I mean it's a when I listen to it I
often think I I know exactly what you're
trying to say are really just not
listening to what you're saying you know
they're not taking it in similar to what
we were talking about with denn paper
and K and qualia they're reading
dismissing it but not really
understanding exactly where you're
trying to come at it and I think the
first time we spoke for about 3 hours
and nobody really understood I think
they should really go back and watch
that because I we went into quite a lot
of detail we spoke about the ethics the
ethical implications how some of my work
um I also helped defend a little bit of
it and and you they just there's so much
backtracking I I feel your pain I don't
even know what else to say except I feel
your pain um because when I try to speak
about it with colleagues or if I try and
have the conversation with other
philosophers or professors on this
channel I I see immediately the the
misunderstanding and and it's difficult
because I sometimes don't want to to
play devil Devil's Advocate too much and
I also don't want to defend someone
else's view too much so I find myself
just letting them have that
misunderstanding because this podcast is
not about me having an argument or a
debate with people it's to let them
explore their ideas so that's what this
episode's about while while we're
talking about these misunderstandings
let let's Robert just released that
paper the the landscape Consciousness I
think it's a perfect time to talk about
this because this would be your way to
sort of give us
examples of where people's Illusions are
coming from or or where their illusory
opinions of their version of
Consciousness might be he broke it out
into boneism idealisms psychism he
referenced you as well um at some point
there's a lot many points where he
actually referenced you uh and cited
your work MH anything you want to say
about that paper first before we begin
I'm going to chat to Robert in about two
in about a month or so fantastic um yeah
I to be honest I've only skimmed it so
far so I I I will need to I'm I'm going
to read it again much more carefully and
5,000 words Keith H it's 175,000 words
it's crazy rather long it is it is but
so um I I won't start digging into that
because there's so much there and um
uh let me just say two things one thing
I I think the I'm convinced of this that
that um whether or not the sort of view
that I have you have danad is right uh
it's a view that's
worth articulating and
uh offering to people for their
consideration and I think uh once people
do consider it
uh carefully and comprehending I think
they will find it attractive but there's
a bigger now this is what you were
saying there's a big communication
problem I think I've got the picture um
uh but as you see so just I
was struggling somewhat to articulate it
yes okay and I was qualifying it partly
because I'm aware of the things that
people will say so I'm trying to and I'm
trying
to say something that is fairly bold and
clear to put across the the the the the
the the uh the structure of the view but
at the same time being careful not to
make trying not to make it too bold so
that I overstep and deny something that
I don't want to deny it's more a matter
of a reconceptualization of things so
it's not as much a
denial as saying again as I said before
like free will or whatever it might be
it's it's not saying it doesn't exist
it's saying it's not what you think it
is but trying to get this and it's a
change of perspective and once you if I
can get people into the right position
to look at it they will see for
themselves what I'm trying to say do you
think that you think that maybe you
should have considered Nicholas's
Nicholas Humphrey's slight Twist of the
word I mean into phenomenal surrealism
because I think that might have been a
good move now in hindsight I think
that's I think that's I think that's
good um and I think it's useful part of
the tech of the the technique um I I
worry though that um you wanted magism
eh or magical ism I originally did I
because I like this idea that um again
this this this quotation from Lee SE SE
seal um a writer on Magic that Dan used
so often with the distinction between
real magic and Magic that is actually
real real magic being the magic that is
that Wizards and people in in stories do
in fairy tales do and Magic that can
actually be done the sort of magic that
pen and tell
do uh and
so I I would like to say that
Consciousness is Magic not in the first
sense but in the second sense it's a
very very clever trick and the point
about these these these they both have
the same effects really they both create
the same effects on us on the Observer
whether it was done by real magic or
done by penella Magic it still looks
like there's some body floating in the
say Okay um and the power of nature of
evolutionary processes to
craft the stage magic type of magic and
to uh convince us that things are that
there's real magic in the fairy fairy
tale uh way um occurring I think we
shouldn't underestimate the power of
nature to craft those kind of magical
effect for its own ends which is exactly
what Nick talks about in Soul dust which
is subtitle is the magic of
Consciousness so he he did initially
like this this um this notion of magic
and illusion um but
his worry and I I share I share this way
because his worry I think is that the
effect the magical effect what we the
the effect that we use phenomenal talk
to describe is something very real and
it is it expresses something very
important this is the thing for Nick
when we talk about what it's like we
we're expressing something very
important we're expressing how things
affect us they significance for us how
we react to them he talks about um not
the perception of red but not um but
reading uh the sensation of red is a a
response to a certain kind of stimulus
um uh red stimuli it's our take on those
things it's what uh it's the the
significance that red things have for us
and I completely agree with this it's
something I'm trying to develop in my in
my current work and so if you like when
we talk about what experience is like
we're talking about how it impacts on us
how it affects us what the complex
multi-dimensional significance that it
has for us and
we ex we um I was going to say we
experience the experience but we we're
aware of this if you like as a sort of
condensed essence of
significance okay so we encounter the
world as packed with significance
because what it's doing
the shared world
is bombarding us with stimuli we are
reacting to those stimuli in multiple
different
dimensions uh cognitive emotional
physiological um all sorts of different
dimensions uh uh many of these reactions
are not actually overt they're just sort
of subtle changes in our expectations in
our tendences priming us to respond to
the next round of stimuli and I think we
have a sense this is what introspection
gives us a sense of how that unfolding
reaction this complex multi-dimensional
reaction of how it of how it is
unfolding at each moment and that's what
we're gesturing at when we talk about
what the experience is like we have a
sense of the condensed significance of
this stimulus for us nothing here that's
essentially private it's all due to
mechanisms of of of sensitivity and
reactivity and monitoring of those
mechanism but it gives but it doesn't
come to us in that way it comes to us as
a sense of this is what that stimulus
means for me and that meaning that
expressive um um that expression of our
response that's perfectly real okay so
when this this this reading that is
perfectly real that response is real and
this is why Nick doesn't like to talk
about illusion because he thinks the the
the stuff that I'm describing as ill
they talk
the talk that I constru is referring let
me say this again the it think about the
function that talk about what it's like
about phenomenal Consciousness think
about the function of the talk now he
agrees with me I think that and with Dan
that the function that talk isn't to
track mysterious mental proper qualities
that are directly presented to us that's
illusion but he he thinks it's doing
it's tracking something else this um uh
uh the the um expressive um the the the
significance of of stimuli for us it's
expressing that significance it has an
expressive function rather than a
descriptive function it's it's saying
what this means for me and that is
perfectly real because it does mean that
for me and that's why um uh he doesn't
like to talk of his an illusion and I
agree with him that in that sense it's
not an illusion have you read
sentience I have yes yes and which which
which which applies this framework I
need to reread which applies the
framework to the questions about the
distribution of Consciousness uh in the
natural world and suggests that um it's
there there's an important distinction
between cold blooded and
warm-blooded um creatures yes full of
wonderful ideas Daniel Dan actually gave
that book very high praise yes that was
the next closest where closest uh the
closest he's ever gotten to giving a
perfect definition of Consciousness in
his opinion yep I it's a wonderful book
I strongly recommend it um I've said
some I think I said some nice things
about it as well in um
so but the illusion talk isn't isn't
addressed um to to those people as it
were to the people that Nick's
addressing way it's addressed to the
people who who want to take um want to
construe phenomenal um language in a
different way and build metaphysical um
edifices around the
um upon basis of phenomenal realism and
I think those people are chasing an
illusion okay and it's important to say
that
quite it's a point to to be quite robust
about that we have to get rid of the
false picture so Nick is focusing I
think on building the positive picture
um I'm I'm focusing more the illusion
talk certainly is designed more to um uh
get people to to drop the bad picture
but I see them as complimentary for that
reason I think okay so let's do this
Keith let's try and frame this a little
better so people understand there is the
illusion problem of course which we have
to address but two there's two things I
want to bring up one was you have you've
been working on what's known as the
reactivity schema
Theory which I think we should
definitely cover at some point or unless
you would like to do that first and then
like sort of build our way up um
whichever you want to do what's what's
what were you going to how are you going
to continue there I think let's address
the illusion problem oh sorry the second
thing that I wanted to ask you about was
the last time we spoke of 2021 you said
you were going to write a book day
cart's prison do you remember is that
still something is that still something
in the in the making or it absolutely is
but I've um title have you decided on a
new I I think I that's the the sort of
working title but something I was going
to say to you um um in relation to this
problem of getting people to see the
view for what it is i' I've continued to
write more or less technical pieces for
for journals and and um collections of
papers about illusionism and the reason
I've held off trying to write the
popular
book is that I I want to build up a
sufficient mass
of um techniques for presenting The View
excessively I don't think there's much
point in writing a view that presents it
in a way
that only other philosophers who were
sympathetic to the position or at least
willing to take the time to unpick it uh
would would appreciate I want to write
it in a way that really presents it
accessibly and
attractively to a wide audience yes I
mean Dan made a pretty good job of you
know doing this in Consciousness
explained I think but it's needs
continually redoing and I I held off
thinking I want to get myself not just
clear about the details of the position
but also clear about how best to present
the position this is one reason why I
like doing podcasts and why I like
chatting on Twitter and so on is what
I'm doing each time is trying out
different ways of presenting it and
seeing which ones work um and I feel
like I'm building up a sort of uh um a
portfolio of of
ideas which I can then use but I want to
tr I like to think that I can write
fairly
engagingly um and that's what I want to
do I don't want to just write a book for
that other philosophers will read and
we'll get um you a few positive and a
few negative reviews and then we'll go
to the shelves yes I want to try to put
this so that's so yeah day pism it's a
little unfair to decart actually because
there's there's ways of constru what
decart was doing the meditations that
that that that are much more
um uh that that that don't
um
that there's there's a tradition of
using decart in a certain way I mean
they talk of the cartisian theater and
so um which may be a little unfair to to
what he was trying to do some had of
dispute exactly what he was trying to do
um but it may be that this use of him as
a as a Whipping Boy is it where is is a
it's a bit unfair to the historical day
cart but it's certainly there certainly
a popular day cart yeah I thought I
thought you might have been playing a
little bit um of a back and forth with
your buddy um Philip because I know I
mean obviously Galileo's era is paying
aage to yeah that was yeah and well and
that's another thing that's happened
since then you guys have mind chat do
you think that's changed anything
regarding your views over time I'll put
a link to the podcast as
well well it's it's it's wonderful to to
to talk to the guas it's fun it's one of
those it really does open your eyes to
many alternate ways of
thinking uh
I we've been trying to make them shorter
and more um accessible but I kind of
like the ear ones where we just rambled
on for three hours talking to
some it it was I enjoyed those we would
just sit and talk to um whoever it might
be David Pabo or whatever for for three
hours I'm chatting to I'm chatting to
David next week oh fantastic yes he's
always great to talk to um and
materialist or physicalist as you can
get that's a he's sorry he's as
materialist or physicalist as you can
get oh yes yes I he doesn't like the
term illusionism but I whenever I talked
to him we we seemed to end up on very
similar similar page so I think that
suspect the differences are more in
presentation and anything you want
anything you would like me to ask him
Keith clarify for you uh I can't going
off the top of my head but if I do I'll
let you know um so yes the popular book
but I want to do it right that's the
point I don't want to I don't want to to
to to to waste an
opportunity um to um to do that maybe
I'm just putting it off but so I thought
oh I'll I'll for instance I've just
published a paper um on the ethical
implications of
illusionism in which I um look at some
some ways that people have um
particularly some some concerns raised
by my fellow Illusionist fris CA um who
is a committed Illusionist but thinks
that illusionism might Force some
revisions to our ethical because I don't
think they it does in fact I think that
in so far as it does invite ethical um
um revisions there they're entirely
benign positive ones that involve
expanding our our um our Circle of
ethical concern um so I but I wanted to
I wanted to get these worked out
in in detail for myself before I tried
to and also to find the metaphores I I
keep playing around with metaphor the
rainbow is the one that i' I've been
using um uh recently well little while
know it's are rainbows Illusions um well
depends what you mean by rainbow if you
mean a certain sort of atmospheric
effect created by a low sun in a moist
Laden
atmosphere um uh the effect that it
creates on a perceiver standing at a
certain with their back to the sun well
that's perfectly real I mean you take a
photograph of it if you mean an actual
colored Arc at a certain spatial
location in the sky moving down to meet
the ground at a certain position no
there's no such thing if you go there
you won't find a
rainbow um so I I kind of like that it's
that Rainbows are real but they're not
what you might naively think they are
like arcs in the heaven and so I I I I
kind of like that one because it means
that you can robustly say you know
Consciousness is real like a rainbow's
real but don't expect to you know find
it in the brain in the way that you
would just any more than you expect to
find a a rainbow at the particular um
location in the Sky Go for the the pot
of gold at the end of it is like looking
for the neural correlat you also need to
really Define people also need to
realize that the word needs to be
defined correctly as wrong and they
misund that is a yes of course of course
it's a provocative one of course a lot
of people say an delusion is itself a
conscious States Of Consciousness can't
be an illusion goodness say yourself
contradicting yourself well of course um
sure Illusions are experiences but I
treat them The Illusionist treats them
like all other experiences are states
that are not don't themselves have
phenomenal properties so we can
perfectly well explain how phenomenality
could be illusion provided the illusion
itself is is not defined in in
phenomenal terms so that's um that's a
bit of a red herring but I think any
word I want to use magism mean so
realism too which which Nick uses which
I do like I'm sure I'm sure that has has
or Michael's
caricature caricature yes I mean all of
these are gesturing at the same idea
that it's not what you think it is that
it's in some way distorted exaggerated
um in a way that leads us to form C it's
Nick's view be like looking on a
Picasso's painting and expecting to find
people with distorted faces and arms and
things I think France I think France
will do a good job at also assisting you
with building up that database that will
allow you to eventually write the book
you want because he is very actively
involved with this and you gave me his
email address and allowed us to have the
chat I'll put a link to that for
everyone who's watching fr's great he's
doing this sort of David Charmers of
Illusionist I like thinking that he's
he's he's doing this this careful
taxonomy of positions and options which
David is so good at um uh I guess I'm
more more not uninterested certainly I'm
I always enjoy reading fr's work to see
how he um
um an um analyzing The Logical space if
you like for um or mapping mapping The
Logical when you guys did the um
illusionism as a theory of conscious um
Theory Of Consciousness your paper the
one that you had edited and got put
together I didn't realize how young
frano was at the time
actually he just finished his um his his
his PhD but's he's a fantastic
philosopher um we wrote a paper together
last year on um in fact doing this very
thing um taxonomizing logical
possibilities of for introspective
systems um and F himself is working on a
book on illusionism which I which which
which will I think be a really important
contribution to um to the to to it's
again to
to exploring the the the landscape of
possibilities here which is much richer
I think than some people think much much
richer and of course he has his own
particular um path through that
landscape but
um it's been relatively underere explor
and the way in which people have been
exploring say pism over the past few
years um it's good to see this being
done for the alternative position
um I just recruit more and more people
to the cuse I think yeah he does he he
is sort of doing a a very valid taxonomy
I giving you the absolutely and more
than that he's also arguing for a
position within it is um yes exactly
fantastic it's great to have him on
board he one um it's you know it's
fantastic I he what sub hitting would
you put for the book day card's prison
what would you have oh do they have to
have things yeah catch I don't know let
me think I might not even go with that
but something catch you
something well it's I want I want I want
to get allow people to escape from this
um from this person so it's um no I
escaping the illusion of phenomenal
Consciousness or something like that
maybe um a lot of it's surprising how
many people you find who are interested
in philosophy on social media media
sites like on Twitter on Reddit and so
on are absolutely convinced of uh that
all they are directly acquainted with is
their own mental States they even if
they're um even if they're realists even
if they think that they're still
indirect realists even if they're not
idealists they think that we're all
locked into a private all locked into
private mental worlds um and they they
cannot see some of them how there could
be any other way of taking
this um so they're locked into what is
uh may not be idealist but it's strongly
idealist Tendencies to think that they
they um that um at best we can infer the
presence of a non-mental world seems to
me such
a
uh the viewers never remotely appealed
to me and it
seems such a strange and anthropocentric
I suppose view of of of
uh of the world which centers
our I mean one way of trying to unpack
this is to imagine um I suppose building
a an artificial creature that is
gradually acquires more and more
perceptual capacities and uh and
abilities to monitor its own perceptual
capacities and to talk about them and to
talk monitor its own reactions to
perception talk about those and to and
to and this is something I'm trying to
do and to trace uh the the the progress
to the point where it's convinced itself
that it is that is only aware of its own
mental States I think there's a certain
um I animals I take it and non-human
animals just just live in the world
there's just the world there and of
which they are part and their bodies are
part and they live in that world and
that is immediate to them and they never
a moment think that they are just living
in the world of their own experience
um uh
now what do you need to add to that sort
of animal um experience what sort of
self monitoring me um systems do you
need to add self-monitoring processes do
you need to add to get to the point um
where you start to think of think of
think of of your experience that way um
as merely a a screen a screen between
you and the
world you touch you touched on idealist
views now at this point France and I
when we were chatting he asked me about
my view and how it's changed over time
and I'm pretty sure you're curious as to
it as well since yeah
but I I I I told him that I still have
very much intu Illusionist intuitions
but my openness to discussing these
concepts with other people has really
grown since then and and and while prior
to starting the podcast I would take
idealism completely I would I would not
even consider it to put it on the table
to discuss but now I find some of them
very fascinating very intriguing some
panus theories are very intriguing so
the more so what he said that I'm doing
is is I'm creating these wonderful
pockets and virtual realities and then
going into it with these people having a
great discussion and coming out which is
very good because it does allow me to to
not make it feel like a debate for them
and not um make it feel like I'm I'm
there to bring down their view but
rather to explore it but when I think
about it now what has happened to my own
view is I still very much have these
Illusionist Tendencies and intuitions
but I've become more and more Mysterion
at this point I really don't know what
Consciousness is and and nor do I think
we'll be able to find the solution to
the Mind Body
problem Oh H interesting first I think
you're absolutely right to enter into um
into the um to the world of the person
you're talking to otherwise you don't
appreciate that perspective you need to
enter into it this is what I was begging
asking for people to do to the Illusions
I'm here Kei I'm try I'm gonna try and
do that for you J we need to do the same
thing with um people we disagree with in
order to uh appreciate uh in order to be
fair to them in order to um we have to
inhabit their point of view to re to
understand its it's it's its power you
can't evaluate a point of view from an
external point of view um you need to
inhabit it for a while see what it feels
like try it on see if this if this suit
of clothes works for you or you know my
metaphor climb up that hill and have a
look from there and see how things look
and if you don't like the video thing
doesn't fit well fine okay but that's
the only way you're going to really
appreciate it its its attractions and
there may be stuff you can bring back
from that uh insights from that you can
bring back and incorporate into your own
perspective I'm mixing my metaphors
horribly um so yes I think that's
absolutely the way to do it um uh in
fact if you if you don't do that then I
think really you're not doing philosophy
you're just rather dogmatically
defending um a certain position that
that that that you've you've decided to
um to now to pin your colors too um no
but are you mysterianism
I'm not even sure to be honest I just
have no I'm so ontologically agnostic at
this point that that I just don't know
it's become blurry let I suppose my
attitude
is
i d is a nice example that the uh what
is it that they I think a bowl of yeast
has about the same number of cells as as
a human
brain and the cells themselves have
individually considered in isolation
have much the same uh lexity similar
internal
structure um and metaphysically I guess
on a part the difference is in how the
cells and the brain are connected
up
um the complexity of what they're
doing um and so I I think the the
default metaphysical positions would be
that we don't need a new
metaphysics for what the brain is doing
um the metaphysics that will work for
what I don't know the liver or the
Digest system or the cells in a bowl of
yeast are doing let's assume that that
works for the brain too which is just a
bunch of similar cells connected up in a
very very special way that is the
product of billions of years of
evolution and of um thousands of years
of
cultural um Evolution too so let's just
let's take that as our default position
and see if we can't explain everything
within that
now if in the end we can't if there's
some things we can't explain fine then
we might need to expand our our ontology
let's just try it first that should be
the the default approach I think and the
fact that um you can sit in your
armchair and say well I can't see how
how we could how we could account for
the Manifest features of Consciousness
um in that way uh well you can't that's
that's an intuition you have that's
you're predy disposed to think that okay
fine that doesn't really establish
anything except that you have this sense
that there's something
mysterious and it may be that we can
explain why you think there's something
mysterious in fact why you have an
unshakable con some people have an
unshakable conviction that there's
something mysterious and that it seems
that this mysterious thing is the thing
they know better than anything else in
the whole world maybe we can explain
that and if we can then you have a
situation
where we're saying well okay I have this
unshakable conviction that I'm Direct
directly and immediately presented with
something that can't be explained in in
physical
terms but we've explained exactly why I
have that conviction I know exactly I
have that conviction and it's not
because the explanation doesn't actually
mention anything that can't be explained
in physical terms it's all um um couched
in the terms of cognitive science so it
completely explain that that sense I
have without assuming it's true but I'm
going to trust it
anyway um that would be like someone who
says look I saw a UFO last night and uh
some investigates and says well actually
it was due to this a piece of space junk
we entering the atmosphere or some
atmospheric effect or whatever and they
explain exactly why it looked as if
there was a UFO at that place there and
the person says well yeah I grant you
that that all those things you mentioned
those um those non- UFO things were
present and they they would have looked
like a UFO but there was still a UFO
there maybe it was hiding behind all of
that I'm just going to trust my
intuition anyway
well you can do that but it's but our
intuitions are not the best source of
information and perhaps particularly
when we're thinking about ourselves why
should our intuitions about our own
minds be wonderfully reliable we'd
expect them to be useful perhaps maybe
unless they're just side
effects um if they're adaptations then
we'd expect them to be useful but a lot
of um useful um um uh uh uh
attitudes are not strictly true um and
uh it might just be a side effect of of
other processes so I think yeah to to
give you an example of where the
Mysterion aspects start to come in for
me at least is when you see people's
work like let's say Michael Len and how
he's he's working sort of build up into
a pan cist View and and his work is so
compelling and so amazing that you can't
help but give a lot more Credence to the
philosophical View afterwards there he I
don't necessarily believe he does
consider himself a pan psychist his
thought process and the science behind
it does eventually lead to that um and
then on the other someone like Donald
Hoffman with the physics behind it and
then you try and you sort of ask
yourself if we don't understand the
nature of reality can we really make
plausible Arguments for certain natural
phenomenon and then I get stuck in that
dilemma but well there certainly might
be a case for expanding a mentalistic
vocabulary quite wiely I'm downall
because he thought that the intentional
Stones can be use usefully applied at
all sorts of levels including at the
levels of um molecular biology so maybe
that
intentional idioms can be usefully
applied quite
widely
um grafts Theory also assists with that
so who's Dan's multiple drafts Theory
also yes yes yes yes yes in fact
um so maybe that that certain aspects of
mentalistic uh um sentim mentalistic
Concepts can be but I don't see
how I don't see how pan pism doesn't
have any explanatory power at all um
this a thing that Philip insisting
doesn't it doesn't contradict or needn't
at least contradict anything in um uh in
um uh in physics or in molecular biology
or Neuroscience or anything like that
any the third person physical um science
it's simply providing an account of the
intrinsic nature of all the things
mentioned in those accounts where that
intrinsic nature itself doesn't make any
difference to
anything and so all it's accounting for
is our intuition this intuition that
there's something intrinsic that's not
accounted for by by by by by the third
person story um now it seems to me that
scientists as such have no need of that
hypothesis it's not it's not doing any
work it's a fifth wheel um so I'd be
skeptical
about uh about that and the thing that
strikes me about about about Don's work
is of course that he's
he's stresses how much perception is uh
distorting and caricatured and so on for
um um adaptive per purposes but it seems
that introspection is
completely immediate and reliable and we
Consciousness is our own Consciousness
is known to us in a in a in such an IM
immediate way that we can even
we we even justified in taking it as the
foundation of all reality but our
insight into our own our insight into
the our awareness of the world around us
is deeply deeply distorting but our
awareness of our own minds is so perfect
that is actually window onto fundamental
reality of the world I don't think
that's taking Evolution seriously I
don't think it's taking the idea that
introspection itself is evu that with
Don at least I I appreciate the fact
that Don admits that so don yes he yes
he will bring he will say that reality
fundamentally we have zero insight as to
what reality really is but here I am
making a leap because I have to make
some sort of a prediction in order to to
S sort of prove this so so at least he
does that which is I mean if if he
wanted to say that reality is utterly
utterly unknown to us then I I would
okay maybe it is but what what I I I I
there's this idea there's a sort of hole
at the at at the fundamental at the
fundamental level
and so what should we put in it well we
need something um something that's not
derived from the higher levels and so
what is there well there's our insight
into our nature of our own Consciousness
well I just I suppose it fits the bill
in the sense that it it does seem
anomalous in some way it doesn't seem to
be easily explained in terms of this
higher level so it does seem as if it's
something
extra and the sort of thing that might
be fundamental and so might therefore be
capable of being plugged into this Gap
but I just think the idea that that just
massively over um estimates epistemic
Powers has evolved creatures why I like
to have imagine that there's
some uh there alien species that have um
they've never evolved our sort of
Consciousness
they let say they've evoled as
illusionists okay so they think of
themselves as complex pieces of
biological um complex biological
organisms that have a certain awareness
of their own mental operations which um
may be simplified and so on but they
never it never tempts them to think that
there's anything non-physical about
their own minds they don't think there's
a hard problem they just think that they
can be completely explained by cognitive
science they're quite happy with this
but they have noticed this other gap at
the fundamental level that there seems
to be a something that we don't have an
account of what the fundamental nature
realities now it doesn't occur to them
to think that their own minds Supply
them with any evidence of this because
they think their own minds are
completely explicable in but then they
come and visit us and they noticed that
we seem to be um uh aware of something
in our own minds they come to visit to
and this tiny little planet on this you
know this remote um uh you know Douglas
Adams location on the Outer
unfashionable Outer reaches of the
spiral arm of the G and they say oh look
these creatures have found the answer to
the problem of what the
it's something in their
minds I mean it just seems too parochial
too
contingent too self
aggrandizing to think that I sitting in
my
armchair reflecting on my own mental
capacities can see to the fundamental
nature of reality I I don't know that
it's somehow my waiting in my basian
network just won't allow me to go that
way Ator and I honestly find it quite
difficult to think what the waiting
would have to be like for me to go that
way I'm looking at this this landscape
of Consciousness I mean and this will
just sort of reiterate why I'm becoming
so much more and more Mysterion I mean
look at this so there's we should talk
more
often there's I mean look there are
materialist views Quantum views
integrated information pan cisms monism
dualisms idealisms anomalous and Altered
States challenges non-reductive physical
physicalism
um illusionism of course as part of the
materialist ones there's just so many
different theories right now this just
looking at this when yes but now divide
those now divide those into ones that
take phenomenal realism seriously ones
essentially ones that that trust the
zombic
hunch TR divide those into ones that
trust the zombic hunch and ones that
don't and you'll find that I predict
something like I probably
I don't know 90% of them do maybe maybe
that's so B A lot of them do and a lot
of that variety comes in trying to spell
out ways of what H paths you can go down
once you trust the zombic hunch and
there are many but if the zombic hunch
isn't reliable the explosion of this
proliferation of ways you can go is
really it's Testament to human
Ingenuity um but as dam would say it's
they're all just variants of chest that
no one really played that reality
doesn't play they're all just if you if
you if you you know Dan has this idea of
Chess which is a game where just like
chess except the king can move two
squares at any one time okay now you can
study the theory of that of Chess and it
will be as elaborate and complex as that
diagram shows it's not the game that we
play and maybe phenomenal realism isn't
the isn't the game that reality plays
and if it's not exploring all this
wonderful um
uh um very brilliantly articulated
options isn't getting us anywhere it's
also quite a it's quite a wonderful time
to be alive with h with with
Consciousness being such a a vibrant
Topic at this point it's it's it's
pretty cool to see this happening which
is the premise of this podcast and your
podcast which is quite cool I think yes
certainly it's exciting and because we
are thinking about the
um I was going to say something
like the essence the heart of our exist
and in a way I I I think that too
because I do think that what we're
talking about when we talk about
conscious and about way things feel
is how things matter to us this is the
reactivity thing maybe which we come
it's our talk about what experience is
like is is an attempt to express the
significance the it to capture the
essence of uh um an essence of
significance if you
like um in
which we can't articulate but which is
somehow um
um uh we have a sense of the shape the
overall shape this is what I think where
this is this is where I get to talk
about schemas and so I think that um we
have uh
introspective processes that model the
overall shape of um our responses our
internal responses to stimulate and that
capture in a few
crude Dimensions their um uh their
overall um outline
and when we ask
ourselves when we reflect on our own
experience this we have a sort of we
have a we have inarticulate
sense of the shape of our current
reactive
State and it seems to
us it seems to us inexpressible we we
have a it's it's it's a it's
a we can
compare the shape of this reactive um uh
pattern with other reactive patterns we
can say it's a bit like that one it's
not like that one and we can say
something about its veillance whether we
like it or don't like it we can talk
about how um other occasions when we've
when we've when we've been in States
like this we can suggest to other people
that they might like try to cultivate
States like this or avoid them or
whatever um but we can't we don't see
any of the the the detail and so it
seems inexpressible it seems well it is
inexpressible um uh in certain ways uh
and it seems to
us um and so it is very very important
to us it's how the world is affecting us
and there's hardly anything more
important to us individually than that
um uh but
uh I where I was going on this I'm sorry
um I was trying to give you those uh
slowly I think you were slowly going to
take us into reactivity I was going to
but I realized that I was trying to take
you too far into to it without um
Without Really setting the ground up so
um uh so much for my attempts to convey
this
um accessibly look it's it's complicated
do you want to do you want to take me
back to the beginning of the reactivity
thing and let me try and do it do it
better let's actually frame out this
reactivity schem of theory for this is
some new content that I think people
would want to know about yeah excellent
well look I've got a quote here let me
introduce this with a quote from from
Dan again Dan always in my mind
particular my mind now um it's on a
paper in
193 I think um in which he was uh I
think it's his response to contribution
to a symposium on Consciousness
explained and he says this he's talking
about um
the uh
effects that stimuli have on
us um and he says this what
anchors our naive sense that there are
such properties as
qualia are the multiple asymmetrical
interdependent set of reactive
dispositions by which we acquaint
ourselves with the sensible world so
he's stimuli
impact on our sense organs and they
produce a lot of effects on us and it's
these effects these multiple
asymmetrical interdependent set of
reactive dispositions associated with
each stimulus that he says Roots is the
root of our sense that we have qualia
which will be the solution to the to the
illusion problem our sense that the
color red has as it word an
identity a
personality all of its own is
due
to the host of different associations
that go with each color so he's not
notice how there's a complete inversion
here it's not that that there is an
object
there the feeling of red the qual of red
that we are reacting
to it's
that there's simply the external
stimulus that we're reacting to and it's
our awareness of this complex of
reactions that gives us the sense that
there's something in
us that that has that richness of of of
of the
that the feel of red if you like is not
something here that we're reacting to
it's our sense of how we're reacting yes
there's a process that's occurring
between that and and and then your
actual response to the stimulus the idea
is that there isn't anything occuring in
between that it's our awareness of the
downstream effects okay perception
so it's not
that that when we talk about the feel of
experience we're not talking about
something that causes the downstream
effects we're talking about the
downstream effects themselves let me go
let me read a little bit more before you
continue I remember even a part of one
of your papers in the past where you
mentioned that the actual neurons firing
in themselves is exactly the the it's
technically is the feeling is that is
what's
occurring yes but not not just the the
neurons what the neurons are doing when
they
and but not just the ones on the
perceptual side there's a this is the
thing that that that Dan continually um
uh
presses we we tend to talk about what's
the conditions that are necessary for us
for for a bit of information bit of
perceptual cont to enter
Consciousness what how how so there's
some stim stimulus and it's processed by
say
uh uh visual certain wavelength of light
impact on the uh on the retina and that
triggers all sorts of perceptual
processes and then we then we think this
is building up and building up and the
more and more processing more more
integration of different features that
have been detected and so on and some
point it enters
Consciousness and as as down put many
theor of Consciousness just stop there
they say what's enter conscious right
well but
then as Stan puts it what happens next
what's what's the upshot of this
entering consciousness
and if nothing happens then there was no
point in it entering Consciousness in
fact you if if if there's no Downstream
effect of it entering Consciousness then
it might as well not have entered
Consciousness because it it doesn't
affect how you react in any way then
what was the point of it I mean it's
just like some epip phenomenon I suppose
now his thought is when you start
tracing out what happens after that all
the
effects that the stimulus has the
downstream effects that's where all the
action is because even if the thing had
definitively enter the bit of the
content had definitively entered
Consciousness it was it would still have
to have all those down Downstream
effects for it to mean anything if it
have any psychological
significance so the real impact of the
stimulus the real sense that it matters
to me is due to those Downstream effects
so you can just cut out the bit about it
entering Consciousness that's not doing
anything even if it did it would still
have to be processed Downstream for it
matter to me that's where the actual
um clout of conscious experience is so
forget about that so where does
Consciousness come in well Consciousness
is our sense of all those Downstream
effect of what the stimulus is doing how
it's uh I like to say I like I got loads
of metaphor I keep trying them out like
um it's like the vibration that occurs
in in a bell when you strike it the
certain complex pattern of or the
pattern of ripples that happen when you
throw some sand into a into a pool of
still pool of water that's the conscious
or the effects let me just read a bit
more supposing that there is something
in addition to these complex families of
reactive dispositions is falling for
wait for it an illusion plain and simple
an illusion of subtraction you might
call it um Dan's commenting on something
Sydney Shoemaker had had written about
his work he mentioned Shoemaker
Shoemaker seems to go along with the
natural but treacherous assumption that
reactive dispositions must involve the
person reacting to a qual presented
somehow to the reactor and causing by
its presentation the reaction the given
is then taken for instance here's how
pain works the pain networks produce
somewhere Central the awfulness quy
which is then the very property to which
one again one who who's reacting here um
reacts with a bance my view and this is
the this is the the cernic shift my view
is that this confuses cause and effect
that was my word cernic shift my view is
that this confuses cause and effect it
is the reactions that compose the
introspect property and it is through
reacting that one identifies or
recognizes the property now I think if
you dwell on that sufficiently
and um Trace out it
consequences fully then I think you've
pretty much got an answer to what I call
the illusion problem and you've got a
theory of Consciousness that is at least
a good placeholder until we get uh until
we get empirical work that um that
really Maps out the territory properly
for us I see now why reactivity schema
Theory at first I thought you were going
to refer to your attention schema
Theory it's it's it's a it's a um it the
name which I may not stick with actually
some people have me not the name is
modeled on that the idea what Michael
gratiano has a tension schema theory
proposes a tension schema the and the
idea is that um uh the brain needs to
control its own attentional processes
attentional processes are complex how do
you control them well you need to have a
model to control something you need to
have a model of it so the brain creates
a model of its own monitors its own
attentional processes and creates a
model of them but the model doesn't need
to represent all the detail in fact it
would not be very useful for control
purposes if it if it did so the brain
creates a schematic simplified model of
attention I can't exactly how
characterizes it but it's it models it
almost like a an energy that flows out
of the eyes and attaches to things and
tracks them and that itself can
magically capture information and uh
produce uh effects um uh on the rest of
the the Mind models it in that
simplified way that's enough for control
purposes and for attracting other
people's attention as well in fact he
started the interest was more in
tracting other people's attention I
think yeah and it's very cool the way he
he has some of that work where if
someone's looking at you or if you show
someone a diagram of them looking at a
tree they'll think the tree is tilting
away from the person because because
they feel there's a sort of potency in
the in the in in in in in attention
itself that it's like an energy in
itself yes exactly that's his idea is
that's how the brain models attention
for its own own control
purposes and then when we try to
introspect and ask ourselves about our
tension what essentially what we do is
we we we tap information from that model
and we don't we don't have it all it
doesn't come to us like oh this is the
model that my brain has constructed of
attention we just get this sense that
attention is something like an energy
that flows out of our eyes that's that
we have these intuitions that attention
Works in this kind of way and then when
we try to reflect on this we elaborate
this into
a a theory of the Mind as as as as a as
a something that's separate from the
physical process in the brain that we
elaborated into a dualistic theory of
the Mind as a as a as an immaterial
thing that can that can uh catch on to
things in the world and get information
about them and have uh uh uh magical
effects on the rest of of of of of the
physical brain so it's this model this
simplified model that then when we um um
that when we drawn information from that
model and try to reflect on the nature
of our own minds it induces us to adopt
a dualistic uh perspective now my idea
was to extend this a bit I don't I I I
don't I don't think anything that I want
to say contradicts what grat says but
it's more of an extension of it I think
um and the idea is something like this
that that it's also useful for the brain
to have a model of how it's being
affected by current stimulation
uh if you think that any stimulus is
going to have all sorts of um well if
you like affordance as it's going to
suggest all kinds of actions we could
take approaching
retreating um might be
um treating as a source of food
um a potential mate or something or
whatever I don't um there's many
different
dimensions uh of possible
action uh along which each stimulus can
be uh assessed and the IDE is the brain
is continually doing this it's not just
it's not just observing the world just
you know for the fun of it like an
esed it's it's it's searching for
significance in everything around us and
this significance is going to be uh if
you like encoded in the pattern of Rea
reactive dispositions that are being
strengthened or
triggered so the brain is going to be
priming itself for Action even if it's
not actually initiating action it's
going to be uh certain
Readiness potentials whatever are going
to be going up and and so on and
expectations are going to be changing
and if you could you could think of if
you think of the the map of the re
reactive potential as it were of the
brain is going to be continually
changing on all sorts of Dimensions one
basic Dimension might be veilance is
this is this is this a good situation or
a bad situation for me that might be the
dominant one do I like this do I want
this to continue or do I not like it I
want it to stop but there could be that
could be broken down into many
subdimensions okay so you think about
this overall map of reactivity that is
like a multi-dimensional shape that is
continually evolving as stimulation
comes in now for most
animals there's no need to model that uh
you know you just you just go with the
the first order reactions as it where
you just live in the world but suppose
you're say a social animal or an animal
that is capable of certain sorts of
higher order um uh higher um reflective
thinking then it would be useful to have
information about this because for
instance one thing if you're if you're a
social animal you can communicate this
to other people you can say that
stimulus um that that thing
is it's not good don't you know it's
kind of that um Berry tastes very
bitter don't don't don't don't don't try
it it has this effect on me I can if I
can be aware of the effect and
encapsulated in some way in in in speech
then I can usefully convey to other
people what sort of effect it would have
on them if they were to try it without
there having to actually try it animals
can't do that I mean non-human animals
well that's simplifying but a lot of
them can't do that a dog can't really
convey to another dog that it shouldn't
try that food that made it sick the dog
the other dog might see the dog being
sick and decide you know it's not going
but the first dog can't just say don't
eat that it's it's horrible can't do
that um we can because we can have a
sense of how the thing affected us and
we can encapsulate that in crude
linguistic terms
we can also use this information about
how things affect us about um sort of
reactivity profile of different stimuli
to uh plan courses of action we can say
well that was really nice I like that
I'll try I'll make that recipe again or
something or you know I will I will
avoid I will make sure to avoid doing
that again again an non-human animals
can certainly learn by reinforcement
learning and so not to do things again
but they can't reflectively plan and
think I really like that thing I will
actually make a strategy for get you
know for seeking it out they can as it
were hack their own
reactivity um uh uh patterns so it'd be
really useful I think and I think the
social use is key be really useful for
the brain to be able to model this
reactivity in some again schematic way
not in all of the massively complex 86
billion your or whatever but in
schematic way that gives a sense of what
the stimulus means for you it's
significance now then again when we ask
ourselves when we
reflect on our current condition what
it's like to be as right now we tap
information from this model and again it
doesn't come to us in a in a in a
detailed form it just it's just an
intuitive sense of positive negative
attra you know different you know
frightening
comforting um
sweet um beautiful ugly whatever
different dimensions of of of of of
assessment it just comes to as as an
intuition of significance a sort of
essence of
significance uh which we can we have
words for but we can't seem to pin down
because it's not articulated in a
detailed enough way and this this
essence of significance is what we're
gesturing at with our talk about what
it's
like but it is in fact uh simply there
we have here are judgments based on a
schematic model of the reactivity
patterns created by
and that's in outline the the solution
to the illusion problem and it's based
entirely on this suggestion from
um from Den I I think it's quite cool
that he's right there by your shoulder
because you obviously stood on the
shoulder of a giant while prepping
absolutely it's very nice it's a very
nice touch Keith I wanted to tell you
there was when I spoke to um Carl
friston MH um I actually eventually got
him to say that I the the basian brain
the basian brain approach um Act of
inference and then free energy principle
could sort of lead you to an Illusionist
Theory Of Consciousness and eventually
agreed because I I don't think you I
don't I'm not sure if you remember but
in my paper I spoke about how if you use
this sort of inference and active
inference and if people sort of get
these PRI informations that tells them
that they have this ineffable
qualitative experience that is Essence
like they're more likely to then have a
posterior decision make decis decision
that is I am conscious I am physically
conscious and if you give them less like
a psychotic patient who's having this
almost unrealistic derealization from
reality they they're not conscious and
and then he sort of agreed he said yes
if you do take it to that if you do
frame the argument that way it will lead
to an Illusionist Theory Of
Consciousness I just thought I'd share
that with you and I think that's very
much the perspective that Andy Clark has
developed develops on on this um
uh there's a paper in the um C of essays
on there's a collection of essays um on
the work of of dennit again paper in
there by Andy Clark which really applies
predictive
processing um Theory I think along the
general lines you're
suggesting um so yeah I think I think
there I should yeah I should have
actually gotten that paper published I
just got so lazy afterwards and forgot
to do
it so yeah probably should because
people ask me all the time where is this
paper I should probably make it
yeah I think I probably will want to go
to some of the questions from the
audience or oh yeah sure I see someone
asked when was fire invented um yes I Al
I saw that
one do you have an answer to that
question I don't know if you uh well I
imagine fire itself has been around for
a very very long time youan I suppose he
means the human um um
fire ability to um to to manipulate
fire I just think that was is playing
good question actually because I think
played a very Nick hum has a wonderful
suggestion about um the role of uh the
uh fire as a center of community for
early human societies coming around the
fire and telling stories and the role of
this in early human society and its
importance and he actually suggests that
maybe one of the reasons humans lost
their body hair was precisely so that
they needed to congregate around the
fire and um thereby cultivate this
importantance means of social um
exchange and interaction and creativity
so um uh I think it's a very important
question it is I think this person was
making a joke but unfortunately you gave
a very good answer all jokes have a most
of them have one here from Tom Clark it
says this was two days ago perhaps note
that qualia is now frighted with
anti-physicalist and anti-naturalist
connotations in a way that's speaking of
sensory qualities like the feeling of
pain or taste
is not why deny that there are qualities
present in
experience well look I trying to sketch
a oh first of all because a lot of it's
It's freed with a lot of all that stuff
and I want to get rid of that um now
I'll then go on and tell you some
positive story which I sort of tried to
do in a somewhat POS somewhat garbled
way there about um what is actually
happening and about modeling of
reactivity and so okay and the
reactivity is what I would be to Call
Conscious I don't think by the way you
need to do this modeling in order to
count as being a conscious being I'm
quite happy to say that creatures that
don't do the modeling whose brains don't
do the modeling are still conscious
because they're still actively engaged
with the world they're still resonating
with the world this pattern of ripples
that as I talked about is still
occurring within them and that's what um
that's what I think that's what we
should use the word Consciousness for if
we're going to creature Consciousness if
if you're like as opposed to um um
unconsciousness so look I I will get
there will then go on I will say car in
that sense illusion and I'll explain
what picture I put in its place I won't
use the word K in that now if you want
to say someone wants to say look I like
that picture I think it's it's great
good and I want to pin the word qualia
on that feature of it well you know
knock yourself out I mean call it what
you want um uh I just don't want you to
bring any of the baggage that that word
used to use and I think the neatest way
here is just to use a new word so that
it's quite clear it's like someone
saying look uh you know IST Theory oh
yeah flist all wrong with it now this
oxygen stuff this sounds really quite
promising but I want to call it oxygen
fistan well go on if you want you'll
confuse people and you might end up
confusing yourself if you're not careful
but you know if you really want to go
for it um word doesn't matter the
question is what work was that word
doing that I've that my story isn't
doing now if you can point to some work
that needs to be done and that my story
isn't doing great I'll listen if what
it's doing is the kind of stuff that the
word qu Quia was mostly doing which is
pointing to something that PR as a hard
problem and that is
conceptually um completely independent
of of the vocabulary of cognitive
science and so on and you know that you
just well I don't want to do that work
so I don't think that word needs
doing yeah and here's another one
actually Keith doesn't call
Consciousness and he
just phal but it's an interesting
question of what picks out conscious
States from a firsters standpoint if
there's nothing qualitative about them
right well look you can recogn you you
can recognize when you're seeing stuff
you know um uh you can tell you you uh
if you're having if if let's compare it
with unconscious perception you don't
know that you when you're if you're
unconsciously adjusting your position
say because of a of a of a of a of a
long-standing um let's say back problem
and you're unconsciously adjusting your
position you might say that that you
explain that by an unconscious
perception of discomfort or something
but if you're not aware if somebody says
are you aware of discomfort you say no
no they say well you seem to be sitting
in a funny way you must be well okay
maybe there's some unconscious
perception of discomfort and that
affected your behavior but you w aware
of it so you so it's being able
to it
figuring
look again Dan
well con cerebral celebrity it having
enough effects of the kind we typically
associate with Consciousness the kind we
take to be look think about what would
we take to be the signs of Consciousness
what are these symptoms of being
conscious well one of them is be able to
report it so if you're doing experiment
say was the subject conscious of that
very faint light well one way to do it
is to say um you know ask them say when
you're conscious of the light it reminds
me a lot of suan Blackmore's work of who
Susan Blackmore reminds me of yes
absolutely absolutely another way is to
use non-verbal measures to say for
instance whether there's you know look
IM movement and so on use all these
measures they they're probably not
always going to deliver the same results
but if a sign if you're getting a
positive score on a significant number
of them it's conscious and the same goes
how do you know you're conscious because
it's having enough effects on you for
you to be able to talk about
it um do you notice the do you notice
that you're in the state simply do you
recognize this
state um I often feel like it also comes
down to language a very big part of this
is the fact that we have these internal
thought monologues that occur in a
specific language and we've given these
terms to these things and and I think
that's a big factor we often don't
consider and the effect that that
internal monologue has on what comes to
our attention yes uh this is the thing
about the multiple drafts when you start
question yourself did I see that did I
not see that um uh that
pulls up bits of information triggers
them boosts them into into into
popularity suddenly and so as soon as
you start attending to some internal
sensation it blows up it becomes much
more significant much more significant
than it was it's effects become greater
um and um the great trick to living with
mosquito
bites is to try and distract your
attention from them um as soon as you
attend to them they become unbearable um
distract your attention from them they
go away and they they
vanish
uh we we're continually attending to
stuff that's happening in our minds some
of us more than others perhaps and
perhaps people of a of anxious
disposition like myself over attending
to things that are going on in us and
we're there by boosting their their
significance and
this and there's there a sort of I think
there's this is something that Susan
talks about yeah Susan Blackmore talks
about that the way that it's the fridge
light phenomenon when you when you when
you open the FID the lights on again
when you probe yourself there's always
stuff to be found and the more you probe
the more there is and it can seem like
there's an sort of endless richness
there because the more you probe the
more you find but it's better better to
say I think perhaps the more you probe
the more you create the more you
stimulate the more reactions you provoke
and therefore the more awareness of
those reactions there is um I I I'll
tell once again my f my my f one my
favorite this is one of the one of the
examples I'm working uh that I like to
use that might will come into the book
eventually you go to the fridge and
you're looking for something I probably
mentioned this three years ago you're
looking in the fridge and you let's say
you're looking for the pickles the J
pickles and you open the door and you
look and you don't see it there's just
no pickles okay and you call to your
partner where are the pickles you said
we had some in your partner St they're
in the fridge on the middle shelf just
look and you open the door again and
bang they're there right where you'd
been looking before now it's very
tempting to think what
what was my experience like the first
time if I could rewind the inner tape of
my experience and examine it again when
I first looked in the fridge what would
have been at that location well we know
what would have been at that location in
the fridge namely the pickles but what
was at that location in my experience of
the fridge was there a hole there was
there the pickle gel there but somehow
it was in my experience but I didn't
experience it that doesn't make sense
was there something else that did my
brain make up some object there now the
point is there is no answer to that
question because this the the the the
light bouncing off the pickle jar didn't
produce any reactions there was neither
something there nor a hole there nor
anything there there was just you didn't
simply missed it it simply didn't figure
in your Consciousness in one way or
another no reactions this is where that
basian sort of framework might have
might come into assist as well you've
been now you've been given the PRI
merely by your wife saying that it's in
the fridge you now go in look looking
for something very different you know
you know where to attend that spot yes
exactly um yeah exactly that's that's
that's that's why the experiences
transformed the second time but if you
think that there are determinant
contents of
Consciousness then you have to answer
the question what were the determinant
contents of my Consciousness at that
particular location at the moment of the
first time I looked and there is no
answer to that that is remotely
plausible neither a pickle jar nor a
kind of black hole nor any other sort of
hole nor any other sort of product why
would the brain create another there's
no answer to that this is like change
blindness experience remotely plausible
the answer is the answer is there was no
determinate stream of Consciousness for
that to be a question
about yes it was simply the fridge and
you and your reactions to the fridge and
we of forget about this poor predictive
processing power in our brains the
limited resources we're using the
absolutely just it's we're just
continuously confabulating lying to
ourselves it's we're not perfect
absolutely and again this is something
that that
um Don Hoffman for example emphasizes so
much with regard to
perception but simply doesn't extend to
awareness of ourselves now if you take
seriously the idea that we are part of
this same
world as the world we our perceptual
systems are monitoring that we're just
another part of that then our awareness
of ourselves is going to be subject to
exactly the same limitations and
constraints and if it doesn't seem so
well that's very interesting and maybe
there are good evolutionary reasons why
it doesn't seem
so but let's ask ourselves why it
doesn't seem so rather than just
trusting that it actually isn't so I
think that the the one positive about it
um or let's say illusionism is a theory
of Consciousness or an idealism or
psychist view is that all three of those
have a better moral ethical implication
in the sense that we would treat all
species around us in a similar manner
whereas an emergentism phenomenon will
will will break away that so you you're
no longer part of the same structure
you're no no longer similar in that
regard so I guess there is that Pro with
with these that's the moral I Tred to
bring out in my my recent paper on the
ethical implications of Illusion I
address arguments that um what is the
illusionism has negative ethical
implications try to show that they're
not found well founded at all and then
Str some positive consequences and I
it's absolutely it I
mean
if most views of Consciousness actually
um have this consequence that
Consciousness is a binary thing it's
either present or not okay it might be a
phenomenal Consciousness
we um it might be very limited very very
small it might be it's but it's like an
in a light and there's either the inner
light is either on or off so there's a
switch that goes maybe when it goes on
there's just a very very very very dim
light or maybe suddenly it's like you
know sort of the Las Vegas illuminations
come on but it's either on or off
now that's I think and that's quite a
natural view given that if you
conceptualize some Consciousness as
something irreducibly subjective well
there's either an irreducibly subjective
World there or there isn't you can't be
sort of bit irreducibly subject you
can't have any there's another world
subjective world that can't be just part
of an you know half there it's either
there or or there isn't one no matter
how tiny it might
be well so then you're going to have to
divide the world into the the conscious
sheep and the non-conscious
goats and if you're going to tie moral
Worth to the possession of this Inner
Light then you're going to have to say
that the the the the the goats don't
have intrinsic moral worth best um their
instrumental value I think that's a
horrible picture actually
um which is completely
insensitive uh to the uh the way that uh
creatures are actually affected by the
the world um which we can see you know
you don't really need to do a lot of the
of theorizing to see when a creature
suffering it's it's it's kind of obvious
really um and yeah unless of course you
locate suffering in some private World
which is a really odd place to it's a
really odd to locate the primary source
of ethical value in a world to which no
one but the individual in question has
access it's really difficult to develop
a shared
ethics if you think that ethical
judgment should be responsible
responsive to facts to which we
systematically have no access whatsoever
except in our own case that's a very
sistic sort of Ethics i i find I get
quite yeah
I don't want to get
too too moralistic about it but I think
it's bizarre you um and even on views
like pany views which which say well
this this in a light is is is in all the
fundamental particles of of matter you
still have a a binary division between
those creatures in which these microc
consciousnesses of the their components
combined to form a macro Consciousness
so you still have this combination
problem is still there com the
combination well it's not just the
combination problem but the binary
problem the the the the sheep and goats
problem is still there either it either
the microc consciousnesses have combined
or they haven't and you've no way of
knowing yes or you can just speculate
and you can do a bit of you some sort of
a prior theorizing about this but you
know we're testing whether they do all
you can test are their
reactions so seeing significance in the
pattern of reactions in and isn't that
where you should locate it isn't how
what what you're doing to the creature
is affecting it in a
concrete what what effects is it having
on its psychology is it resisting is it
producing all sorts of distress reaction
stress
reactions
yeah is it something the creature want
doesn't want you to do and desperately
wants you to stop doing these are all
questions which you can answer and which
seem to me directly what's happening in
some other metaphysical Realm associated
with the creature to which you have no
access that seems a very odd way of
assessing of assessing whether you
should do
it yeah a there's we in our last
conversation we also went quite deep
into the ethical implications because
that was also a part of what I focused
on when when we do take ourselves out of
that pedestal and we move ourselves this
heliocentric view or this
anthropomorphic view of we are the most
important illusionism becomes a very
very good ethical position to take
I think so
and I think it's it's it's it's also
bound up with the conception of the self
I think this is very this is something
that again Dan had um
uh revisionary views about the self he
thought the self was something like a
narrative we tell about ourselves a
construction The Selective construction
from events in our lives that we put
together to create a sense of who we are
um and the continuing thing is this
thread of narrative that is linked of
course to a particular body and human
animal but our sense of of being of
there being a self a private self is
really a um the it's more like the
relation an author has to their fiction
we know ourselves because we are sort of
authoring ourselves as we go along and
so that's how we have we can offer uh um
authoritative statements about ourselves
not because we have access to some to
what we really are we can see into our
inner nature and describe it to others
but we kind of
expressing what we take ourselves to be
in the way that an author is is is is is
inventing the character that he wants to
play a certain role uh and again this is
the part of breaking down this picture
of the there being a presentation of
something to an inner
self and then of course this Con up with
free will because of this inner self
then is supposed to have the freedom to
respond to what's presented to it in a
completely un constrain un unconditioned
way it's got uh it's it's it's it's got
this presentation of the world it uh
appreciates it in some way like The
Spectator and then it's completely free
to decide what Downstream effects to
have on the deting picture all of that
is is is a a sort of
imposition kind of fictional
imposition on what's really happening
which is that this H patter of
reactivity we are reacting and then we
are constructing ourselves as the
authors of that
reaction but is it where it's not that
there is a little thing that a little
self that initiated the reactions it's
that the reactions occur and then we
construct ourselves as the author of
them and perhaps some of them we disav
we say I didn't mean to do that I don't
know why I said that I mean I'm saying
this now I'm thinking why did I put that
that way that's was a bad way put but it
came out of my mouth so I I probably at
least been recorded I have to stand by
it but in other cases when I'm
just playing around with ideas or
whatever I will say no no I don't mean
that why did I say
that it's the self is the bit is is is
the portion of our activity that we that
we endorse and author and um and hold on
to and of course we can also do this in
a in a way that can be um somewhat
damaging to ourselves if we hold on to
to to to mistakes we've made and
failures and incorporate those into
ourselves and think of ourselves as the
person who made these mistakes the
person who let these other people down
the person who who who failed to achieve
things and build that into our
narrative then that can in a real sense
become
ourself um and the the story we've
constructed then has all kinds of
effects for on how we later respond to
other situations because if you're the
sort of person who according to the
story does this or that then you'll tend
to continue acting out that
story yeah yeah I've got another one
here Keith um physicalism obviously
true
no I don't think I don't very much
anything is obviously true yeah um uh no
it's all a matter of trying to find out
how things in the B sense of the term
fit together in the in the in the B
sense of the term um no no no no in fact
I I suspect for a lot of people it seems
obviously I don't think what's obvious
is
always it's obvious that the sun moves
through the sky um the earth flat
there's all sort things I see we're
getting we're getting quite a few more
questions now do you want run through
them so this one's from Tim Stevenson
ask Keith if the perception of time is
elusory in the same way in the same way
as the perception of phenomenal
properties oh hell heck what a
question I I think perception of time is
something that's constructed by our
brains MH uh and the question of how
that construction relates to concepts of
time employed by by
physicists uh I don't think the brain
probably constructs time using using the
same sort of conceptual apparates
physicists use no so A and B series or
whatever um well that's that's
metaphysics rather than physic but
um I certainly think it's a construction
whether it's as Mis leading a
construction I it's it's a useful
construction um it's useful and very
inaccurate yeah and of course perception
of time is um is is very variable as you
get
older it runs much more quickly um so i'
certainly think there' be losery aspects
to it but it would depend on what
you take what you take I think for
instance I think neuroscience and you
know the cognitive Sciences generally
probably give us a good model of what's
occurring in the brain now what gives us
a good model of what time
is is less clear I suppose physics I
suppose ultimately
but I think there probably might be as
good a case for using the word illus of
as I think I think Thomas mitinger talks
about the Su that temporality um when he
speaks about it he he does sort of
hinter that eluc effect of it I mean we
often perceive things as happening right
now when we never really are seeing oh
well yes well we could never yes I mean
there got to be time for everything to
be processed certainly I mean
literally behind yeah so quite literally
in that sense everything temporarily is
illusory but of course it's it's what's
what's the um within that frame you can
then you could you could
take uh some a standard representation
of time and sort of that's that's that's
normal representation and then have
specific temporal Illusions within that
so you could regard the Baseline
perception of time
as as as as practical uh reality and
then talk about specific temporal
illusions that can be for instance if
you're in a sudden car crash or
something and everything seems to slow
down um so I suppose it's illusory
relative to what relative to what
Baseline so there's multiple levels of
elusory effects of time here well
there's multiple levels of
representation and the point about
talking about talking about illusion is
really to stress that some of them are
misrepresentations now they're probably
all going to be uh misrepresentations in
some sense they're going to miss out
stuff they're going to be incomplete all
representations are going to be there um
the point about talk using a word like
elusive is to stress that people are
being misled about something that they
feel confident about that's the point um
er if everyone was used to C say the mul
illusion if everyone was completely used
to it and used not trusting it at all
and um then the fact that it's an
illusion wouldn't really be very
significant it's the fact that people
are trusting their intuitions about
phenomenal Consciousness and directing
an awful lot of attention to building
theories on on the basis of this uh
misrepresentation that's why you talk of
Illusions appropriate so it's it's it's
it's
pragmatic value of the word Z Yu I hope
I pronounced that correctly
asks is his views on determinism ask his
views on determinism sorry is he a
compatibilist you of course uh yeah I'm
certainly a compatibilist in the sense
that if determinism was true I don't
think it would be any threat to free
will uh whether it is true is a matter
for for for for for for physicists I
guess I don't think that introspection
gives us any reason to think that it's
not true and I don't think that anything
that matters to us about Free Will is
dependent on it not on on determinism
not being true I think if the world were
completely deterministic we would just
be as free as we are uh I think it's
it's it's a matter of it's It's a
totally different kind of of of
um set of concerns if you like
um Freedom doesn't depend
upon
uh uh determinism being false that's
what I think um but that's not to say
that
determinism uh is true or false
um don't think it matters to be honest
this this question from Michael addyman
I think asking which version of a
physical brain in inverted commas exists
inside his head as you to sit there
speaking 8 billion human versions to
choose from countless other animal
versions which perceptual model of a
brain exists when no model is being
rendered by an observer in
principle not quite sure understand
about versions well it's mine it's the
one that's been been shaped by my
particular genetics and my um
particular experience um throughout my
my my life it's been um tuned up by a
distinctive pattern of experience but
which version of a physical brain
that's well
obviously other animal versions have
been shaped by different genetic um uh
uh information different genetic codes
and the other eight billion humans have
been trained up by different tuned up by
different sorts of experiences which
perception I said which perception model
of a brain exists when no model is being
rendered well that sounds a bit idealist
that's what that's what I'm getting from
it as well uh well I'm not an idealist
so the brains exist unperceived um
so uh if that if it's IDE if idealism is
the
the then I I just don't um just for
those listening or watching we're we're
looking on we're on Twitter at the
moment or X yes I'm just I'm seeing this
on Twitter on my other screen um any of
these questions at the moment Keith that
that stand out to you that you'd like to
answer before I I'm not sure if I've got
them all well I see one from argon so
yeah yeah go for that one do you believe
philosophers ever evangelized do
philosophers ever spread the truth of a
theory rather than explore the
possibility the the is true
um I suppose they we do I was someone
once said it sounded like you were
preaching in that um that in that talk
and I suppose I was in that I wanted
to um I do think evangelism good news I
do think illusionism is good news I say
that I think it's I think I think it's a
liberating um perspective I think it
liberates us from this prison of the
self liberates us to
really know each other um to know the
bats instead of thinking the bats are
just
mysterious who you know what they inner
lives are like who could know well we
could know just study bats carefully
enough if you you know if talk to people
who've studied bats you might think you
might be surprised so I think it's so
maybe I do evangelize a bit in that way
but
I and when I talk trying to get people
to see the perspective see another
perspective Aran goes further by saying
should academics
evangelize well I think I think there's
a role for it there's a role certainly
for getting people to say come over here
come and look at this view it's lovely
it's really wonderful you're missing
something come and look at the rainbow I
know it's
lovely so I think there's a role for it
but that isn't the whole purpose it's
not that I've just got this view I think
it's wonderful you know and I'm just
going to try and use any means of
advertising and persuasion to get people
to adopt it no I've got to back that
I've got to cash out that sort of check
that I'm issuing I've got to I've got to
try and do the hard work of spelling out
these attractions in a more um um sober
and
uh less rhetorical way and I I hope I
try to do that in my academic papers but
I think there is a role for trying to to
get people to see why the picture is an
attractive the sum of all that is an
attractive picture so yeah I mean we're
human beings we we don't just deal in in
uh in
emotionless rational
exchanges a ro for saying this is good
and bad yeah do you think that there are
things out there that exist as a
standalone ontological primary of
reality little bricks of stuff that come
together objects
subject what was the last bit bit bits
of stuff I don't see that one bits of
stuff but at some point now people are
just having their own discussion I don't
think little bit of stuff I don't I
don't know that would me but I think
there's there's a I mean out there out
where what was the question at the
beginning yeah where is this do you
think that there are things out there
that exist as a standalone ontological
primary of reality out where out there
out where what's what's what's in here
yeah good I think there's a world I
think there's a
reality um and I think that the entity
that I um pick out by the first person
pronoun and I say I is a bit of that
reality um now what's is it made of bits
of
stuff stuff's about as vague a word as
you could use isn't it um what it all
what's the the fundamental nature of it
all Heaven Knows
um uh but I don't think there's an in
here and an out there I don't really
these questions sound like they're
coming from idealists do you find that
idealists tend to disagree with you more
than p p
psychist oh interesting question that
one um this is from me now this is no
longer this just oh that's from you now
yeah oh I liked it
um okay I'm going to say something may
may not be very fair and so perhaps I I
just should say but I I don't know there
seems to be a certain sort of culture I
I I find
idealism okay this this this won't sound
good but I'm going to say that there's
that I feel sometimes idealism is a bit
cultish I can people seem to find a sort
of
emotional comfort in it or I'm not quite
sure what they find in but they seem to
find in it something that goes beyond
its mere satisfactor as a as a as a as a
metaphysical theory that they find
something in it that that that
deeply that answers to something that
they really need and they I find they're
more
both rather more aggressive I think
triggered yeah because if they'
fundamentally formed the their entire
life's ontology around this it is a lot
more like attacking their religion in a
sense yes I think that's right whereas
pansan is certainly the ones I do with
like philli are um I mean yeah Philip
believes it ABS but he's also an
academic philosopher he's been he he
he's he's assessing this and the other
theories in the way that an academic
philosopher does and he'll be quite
passionate and but you'll also have
powerful arguments but then when we've
finished it's just you know well that
was fun wasn't it you know we each and I
think he and Philip understands my view
I think pretty well and I hope I
understand his
and I hope we're trying to regulate our
interactions much more by the the Norms
of
academic discourse and I don't think
I on my part there's no personal Animas
at all I enjoy talking to and I find it
I mean compared it these phenomenal
realis positions to versions of Chess
and some of these are quite interesting
versions it's interesting to see what
moves can be made even if one thinks
it's not really um uh capturing anything
about reality I think ultimately the the
main goal should be having these
discussions with with without sort of
attacking people and and then going
going toward like because I I can see
some of the com comments when people are
trying to ask questions for you if it's
an idealist you can kind of sort of tell
there's an animosity there and that
needs to be eliminated people need to
have open discourse well as you say if
it really means something point to them
I can understand and I've have no wish
to upset people or
um and people should not wish to upset
you either because I mean
that's I prefer not uh um but if it's if
it's Express I mean I suppose there is
an interesting compon with religion here
that that
religion people invest a lot of their
identity in it and they see it as
foundational
to their morality
um and naturally if you do that you're
going to feel quite very
threatened by its denial and you're
going to feel that it's that its denial
has terrible consequences because it's
the foundation of
morality and if you feel that way well
suppose the ultimate the first question
is are you interested in exploring
whether there's an alternative or are
you just if you're if you're perfectly
happy with that and you don't see any
problems with it you don't feel there's
any tensions in it you don't feel it's
creating any um of dissociate uh
dissonance in
you and you're not going and you're
going to feel threatened or by anyone
who tries to articulate an alternative
then let's leave it
um
I when I spoke when I speak to idealist
philosophers physicists scientists I
often there is a genuine uh respect for
Academia when they when some of them
talk about it you can tell that they
dislike the fact that their followers
make these cult leaders as well so so on
their behalf I'd like to actually defend
them in that regard because many of them
notice this and and don't particularly
like like it either I think that's I
think that's I think it's certainly true
of Don Hoffman who yes most definitely
for him um and one of those people I'm
definitely referring to as well um but
it is it's an interesting cultural
sociological psychological phenomenon
that I'm not sure what it is about our
current I mean we could start getting
into Grand sort of speculation
I I have a theory of of why it's because
a lot of them when when they provide you
with their Theory there's almost always
a
teic aspect and I think that really hits
home with some people yeah the fact that
there is a purpose now because because
with an Illusionist view there is no
there's not necessarily a theological
outcome here we're still going through
the universe in the middle of
nowhere um what can we do whereas when
an idealist Theory comes out there
ofering is something it's the universe
trying to experience itself various
versions of itself the outcome is love
there's purpose there is and and and
look there are many different versions
of idealism so I'm not speaking true but
um yeah it often comes with an
overarching theme that that is driven by
a tileology that provides
meaning yes it's so which is in essence
like a religion and if you do attack the
philosophical view you're almost
attacking attacking the I I think that
that's that's pretty plausible as you
say there are many versions and some
idealis and so it's difficult to
generalize but
yeah for all those listening and
watching I'm I'm I'm sorry if I'm sound
like no no I think
it's I guess I never really felt the
need for that or even if there were some
objective purpose we would still be able
to well stand back and say well so what
so this objective purpose has been
established but do I have to run along
these rails that have been established
um I suppose in that respect I'm
have maybe existentialist Tendencies I
what I think on the flip side the one
good thing about most idealist theories
is that they often do preach very
positive behaviors it's not that the
other the alternatives are not are
negative in essence it's more that the
Alternatives do not preach it as much so
uh there is that element of one does
talk about it a lot more the other is
not negative inherently but they just
don't go out there and give you this um
sort of moral grounding and purpose
actively let's
say I yes yes am I articulating that
correctly do you feel like I don't I'm
not sure um one thing I mean I I if
we're talking about um Frameworks for
doing Consciousness science then um
doesn't seem
terribly relevant um I mean you would
hope that reality is is is is is is is
fairly benign but um I don't I don't um
I me I can I can empathize with the
idealist view in the in in so much as
the aspect of reality that we just don't
understand so and that's as far as I can
go and other than that all I can do is
explore the ideas but then there's also
the panus view which we have to consider
and I wanted to ask you what were your
thoughts when Dennett and the group of
scientist philosophers all signed for
the iit's non-scientific approach
to their work do you remember the
infamous dilemma oh yes I signed it yes
I think I think I remember that and I've
um and I've written a paper actually how
did how following up on that um how did
Philip feel about that were you guys
able to have a mind shet episode without
having a little bit of
animosity well it's not technically
going against Philip it's more I'm not
sure Philip I think he's sympathetic to
I I'm not sure he's um
I I
I'm my take is that IIT is is a
metaphysical Theory that's um that's
that's dressed up with maths um and to
that extent is is is not regular science
because it starts with a bunch of uh a
priori
intuitions axioms uh that are just
derived from
uh
introspection now if you think that that
Consciousness is something irreducibly
objective that there really is this this
this essentially private world that's
what we're trying to to do to do science
on then that will be reasonable way to
start um there be no point in in trying
to Define it in third person terms in
terms of whatever it how do you define
memory for instance well it's whatever
processes are involved in in being able
to recall information about the past or
whatever you know they report realizable
reports about the past you can give us
some kind of operational definition I
suppose definition in functional terms
and you can do it that with all
psychological um faculties and then you
can say okay what are the mechanisms
involved in producing these
effects now if you think that
Consciousness can't be divided that way
or this the essential The Heart Of
Consciousness can't that it's
irreducibly subjective that it can't be
captured in third person terms then
you're going to have to approach it by
you know your direct first person
acquaintance with it and you're going to
have to start with some principles that
seem to intuitively obvious and then you
then you elaborate it and you devise
postulates about the physical correlat
of the physical basis of these things
and then you start doing all this
elaborate math well yeah but that
started with a metaphysical assumption
about
the iru irreducibly subjective nature of
Consciousness and to that extent it
starts with a metaphysical assumption
that no other science starts with yeah
all rest of science assumes you know
this it's just it's just one reality
which can be object investigated by
third person means okay somebody's going
to say quantum physics but you know
let's leave that out from
um so it's at least anomalous science
and it's anomalous because it begins
with a metaphysical pres presumption
that no
other area of science has and if you
think as I do that that metaphysical
assumption is is deeply flawed then
you're GNA say well it's not really
science it's so yeah but then I would I
would say the same of all uh uh science
that's that's that's predicated on that
same metaphysical
assumption um it's just a bizarre of
doing science that you start with a
bunch of things that seem to you
intuitively true about it and treat them
as
axioms and then start looking for
objective features that
might uh uh provide the physical basis
for whatever it is that is described by
those act it's no no other we don't
start with saying look the sun is the
thing that the sun is a thing that moves
through the sky now what must the rest
of reality be like for that to be true
we don't do it that way anything any
observations can be corrected in the
light of wider theorizing so if you
start with some introspective
observations if you like though they're
not thought of in that way and treat
them as axioms that Define the shape of
the whole project then that's a
different way that's not the way that
the rest of science is done so it's the
very least
anomalous the yeah and I think that at
that point then obviously that would
apply to many quantum theories of
Consciousness and you would sort of have
a similar
approach yeah
because Stewart's very active on Twitter
Hammer off he's he goes it with people
are yeah well I mean I mean there
there's all issues about comp
computability that seem to be pretty
much irrelevant to things to the hard
problem because they're
about proofs and so which um and also I
just I mean the the idea that
observation plays some role um without
specifying what you mean by the
observing subject and giving some
account of that on which it's what's the
metaphysical state of the observing
subject is it just the animal is that
you know the whole cognitive what's the
observing subject that come I I don't I
don't understand how this works out I
don't see how you can get um features of
an immensely complex system such as you
know human being to you can get
explanations that sort of start at the
level with the fundamental concept of um
of uh basic physics but then somehow
introduce elements from an extraordinar
uh uh from a a special science of of
extraordinary complex uh physical beings
namely
psychology I just don't see how you can
get these into the same
explanatory um
um
discourse well Keith in in terms of from
an Illusionist perspective if is there
anything about illusionism as a theory
of Consciousness illusionism according
to how you define it and not to people
thinking that you Consciousness doesn't
exist that you feel that you haven't yet
touched on or that you'd like to
reiterate because it's often going to be
misunderstandings oh
uh well look illusionism is
a
a it's a label for a way of looking at
the the issues and a way of it's it's
it's a it's a label for you like a
program a bunch of questions to be asked
okay um and it's a rejection of certain
questions and an introduction of or
promotion of certain other questions in
their
place uh now what answers you give to
those questions the questions that
Illusionist imposes or asks you to focus
on I mean there's going to be
a yeah that is consciousness science as
far as I'm concerned that's you that's
so much to do there and so U much um
that we don't know so many possibilities
so many theoretical possibilities and
I'm just sort of waving my hands around
a bit I mean people the people are doing
um much more detailed work in that
um so my main aim is to stop people
obsessing other questions that I to get
people stop people going down a road
that's leading to a dead end and get
them to go down the road that opens up
into many many many more fruitful roads
um so again it's the
the the the stopping the the bad
approach and promoting the good approach
um I
think there's a certain amount of
compromise I can do with people who who
who say look we can't give up this
approach we can't because it's just what
we're most certain of it's what's mostly
born it's the heart of the matter it's
what we're trying to it's that's what's
need explaining and you can't you
mustn't tell us to stop asking those
questions because those are the
questions are perhaps the only really
really important questions idealist
would saying well I can do a certain
amount of negotiation with them I can
say look there's a question I'm asking
that kind of does the same work as that
pretty much um just as in case of free
will you can say well we don't have we
shouldn't talk about absolutely
unconstrained free will but we can talk
about autonomy and self-control and the
mechanisms that support that and that
really does all the work that you think
you're doing with that Concept in fact
it does it better and more effectively
and so I can say look I hear what you're
saying I hear there's something there
that needs that needs explaining um but
come with me over here and I'll show you
that I can give
you most of what you want in fact
something a little bit different from
what you thought you wanted but that
does the work that you wanted and in
fact does a lot of other work too and
the bits that it can't do don't really
need doing anyway all the free will
worth wanting as St say all the
Consciousness worth wanting I can give
you I can't give you a sort of con it
may be a sort of Consciousness that you
want that just escapes the
the uh the the
physical um I was going to say Nexus but
I'm not sure that's word that escapes
the the the physical world but if so
that wouldn't be worth wanting because
it wouldn't wouldn't matter in the
physical world and we live in a physical
world um so I can give you most of what
you want and I can give you a bit more
and I can show you that the bits that I
can't give you you don't really need
anyway so I'm willing to do that sort of
thing so I'm will to to bring people
across and even to perhaps use some of
the terminology that they want to use if
it's really important to them with a
certain sort of adding a a star or a
prime or something to it to just to
indicate I'm willing to do all that but
they have to meet me they have to be
willing to come over and have a look um
if they just insist on banging the table
that they've already got it nailed down
that the conception they have is already
perfectly accurate that this is all this
is revealed to them um just in some
uh primitive way it's some fundamental
way it's revealed to them whoever they
are then I can't do anything
um all I can do is is say I you know
there's another way of looking at it yes
and if you ever willing to to try and
exploit I'll I'll be there it's an it's
illusionism is a is an intuition pump
for Consciousness in a sense it's a
massive one it's yeah it's it's a
deliberately Pro I think the term has
its value I think I can defend the the
use of it it's a term that Dan used a
lot and that matters to me because he's
the he's
my my compass in all of this um Dan Dan
wrote a paper called illusionism as the
default theory yes I proud that he wrote
that and um so but it is a provocative
word it's it's it's and if it offends
people then I
I'm well yeah I don't I don't mean I
don't mean to offend them I mean to
shock them a little or at least alert
them to the shake them out of the comp
the complacency a little bit I do mean
to do that I do mean to shake your
complacency strategic well it's it's a
good word it's not it's not necessarily
badly chosen because you want one you
want a word that actually elicits a
response you can't just have some sort
of absolutely yeah absolutely but once
I've shaken you up then maybe I can I
can I can
um restore your do a little bit to to
settle you down
again um and I think that's probably one
Nick's word surrealism is is quite nice
though it does
suggest I don't know he what I I don't
like the the fact that Nick does
continue to use words like phenomenal
properties I don't like that but Sur
realism isn't that but it's yeah well so
illusion illusionism is more intuition
pump to help you escape de God's
prison yeah it's not it's not really
even a a pump because it's just a word
but it's yes it's a it's a it's a bit of
Tri maybe in itself I mean if if you
take the word with its meaning it can
become a sort of an intuition part yeah
and and the metaphor for me was always
it wasn't people it wasn't people being
U taken in by stupidly taken in by some
by some trick it was people going to the
theater and seeing I and I love
illusions I absolutely love illusions um
it's people going to the theater and
seeing a wonderfully crafted piece of
stage magic which they know is an
illusion they're not under any they
don't think that this guy is really
levitating or something um but they're
enraptured by it it has a wonderful
uplifting effect on it it's wonderful
and I I think that the if you like what
the brain does this this coming back to
Nick's perspective on this I think that
this illusion is wonderful what the
brain this sense of ourselves and our
and of our immediate presence in the
world as something as a little locus of
of of of meaning and agency that's
wonderful wonderful story that we'
crafting about ourselves
and I the effect is fantastic I mean I
illusion isn't a a a um derogatory
term poetry is an illusion if you like
it's it's it's a dis or at least an
exaggeration a distortion of reality but
for expressive purposes and that's what
I think that phenomenal talks do
Distortion of reality for expressive
purposes again getting close to Nick
again it's a realism so um
it's Sur realism is not a bad term Nick
Nick's also very he's an excellent
thinker and I think fact that you guys
are still on the same page slightly just
terminologies are just changing a little
bit here and there it says lot as well I
think I mean the way I want to see well
I I I love wh Mick's doing I think he's
alongside down he's been the major
influence on me and I see what we're
doing as I I don't know if you would
agree with this but we're essentially
doing the same thing and we're sort
of uh we've got different
um I think perhaps we're addressing
different audiences possibly uh slightly
and we' also got different techniques
we're but we're operating in in
in in collaboration I think we're we're
sort of advertising the same product but
in different ways if you like it's just
like strategist like the addition you
you published all those years ago when
was it 2018 I think it was I mean
Blackmore Humphrey you
Dennis
peroom CRA it's all you guys just doing
it doing the same thing in just a little
different here and there yeah and it's
it's something of course that it's not
something completely new this is another
thing I've been um exploring a little
bit recently is the history of this
there although the name is relative this
the position's been around quite a long
time I mean have people like um um
uh oh my goodness me I've forgotten his
name lat um
uh
uh let me
just
uh
um DM me my my my brain is is not um
it's working I can't remember now but
there'll be people uh
talking in it's very much the Brian
farell Brian farell 1950 paper in mind
called experience which is fargoing um
illusionism
without it might even use the term
illusion at some point I think Thor
going absolutely going influence on
dennet briyan Farrell excellent paper
1950 mind everyone should read it so
there's there's quite a long history um
of as soon as uh uh as soon as people
started articulating physicalist views
this this has been an option um and so
the the real advantage of having the
term is to collect these the these
closely related positions uh under under
under a collective term so that their
similarities can be emphasized and their
the different options um
explored um
completely last time we spoke we
mentioned someone else we mentioned
um yeah even Darren Brown also it's
after we're after speaking for almost
two hours two hours this tends to happen
but fine Darren Brown I would him on
this podcast at point it would be
amazing to chat to Darren Brown about
the mind I would I would love to I mean
I I called my I called my my blog tricks
of the mind which is which is a I didn't
actually borrow it I think from him
unless unconsciously but I realized that
he' written a book the same I'd love to
know what his views on this I've read
that book actually and it's he's been
someone I've always looked up to in
terms of the way he uses psychology to
he did this wonderful thing which um he
hea traditional magicians had had
presented magical effects tricks as
Supernatural yes and he did the he did
this really clever thing he
presented tricks of I suspect often very
similar tricks as not as Supernatural
but as super psychology yes and a lot of
people thought that he was using a real
psychological techniques that they could
perhaps learn so they could get this
super psychology too and maybe um sort
of hypnotize people and convince
people that was as much that was just
part of the trick there
was there was no super psychology I mean
I'm sure he's very smart and very good
at at at dealing with people he's a
performer but the they would the tricks
I think are just basically standard
mentalism and stuff like that um but
presented in this fantastic way for a
modern audience as as as as as as um as
bits of super psychology um and I'd love
to know what he thinks about the brain's
own trickery that it performs um on its
on itself
um it would be interesting to to know if
his perspective as someone who who knows
how effect to
exactly I would if anyone knows Darren
Brown anyone listening or watching send
us his email address we need to we need
to I I would I would love to I'm assume
he's very busy and yeah me too very I've
reached out once I haven't had a
response so I do know someone who knows
him but I suspect his time is is is too
precious to we've got we've got to do it
at some point we need to do it um I'd
love to unlike unlike unlike uh uh most
academics people people will pay um for
his time as we do it we we we talk for
Vanity's
sake
yeah he doesn't need the Boost to his
self-esteem that comes from being
interviewed enjoys the academic
discourse you never know some of these
people really are really are
intrigued one of them though I it would
be very interesting to have the
perspective of of someone who who knows
how these effects are created uh uh to
to look at some of the things people say
about the
effects uh uh the um to look at
introspective
reports they know how perceptual reports
can be manipulated they know how people
can be got to report seeing or not
seeing things that were actually
there I don't there in front of them are
not there in front of them how you can
manipulate people's perceptual
judgments I wonder if have any insights
into how you can manipulate people's
introspective
judgments it would be an awesome POS
that would be a fantastic question to
ask so if you take the parallel I mean
here's sorry I'm getting tired so I'm
just free associating now it's
interesting
that the people really resist the idea
of introspective illusion but look
suppose just take a naturalistic
perspective if introspection is an
evolved mental faculty just like various
forms of perception why wouldn't it be
just as liable to illusion
misrepresentation as the various
perceptual capacities are we all accept
the perceptual capacities are subject to
misrepresentation illusion Distortion
why wouldn't introspection be the same
and I I think pulling at the back of all
of this then it talked about cartisian
gravity I think pulling at the back of
all this there's the cartisian sun which
is substance D and I think
it's that's what's exerting this point
the idea that really I am not something
uh I am not just my
brain H and my awareness is not just my
brain being sensitive to features of the
world around it and reacting to them
it's there something some other um
something happening on another plane as
it were and of course you will you will
you won't find many people who would
actually endorse that strong form of
substance but I think it's exerting a
pull in the background and so you're
having D talked about cartisian
materialism which was people who were
thoroughly going materialist and say no
it's just a brain doing stuff but they
still tried to conceptualize it in a way
that retain some of those intuitions
that were true um on the on the on on
the on The dualist View so this idea of
direct acquaintance with mental
qualities the idea that you have this
this this this infallible knowledge of
what it's like to be you at least when
you're paying attention and using the
right Concepts that's something that
doesn't really make sense within a
thoroughgoing naturalistic perspective
where what you've got here are evolved
representational mechanisms but it does
make sense I suppose if you've got an
material soul that is simple and sort of
knows its own States just in some
fundamental way so I think there's this
pull of the cartisian sun there um
and substance dualism I see I've noticed
nowadays there's also a lot of dual
aspect monists um this seems to be also
quite a a new growing philosophy yes
well yes well it's it's just that is
just a way of of of um it's again it's
it's a way of hanging on to key
cartisian
intuitions um dual as the nice thing
about dual aspect staff is that you
don't actually have to mess with the
unless these things have emergent causal
Powers you don't have to actually mess
with the the physics there's no or any
other aspects of science you don't have
to you don't expect these things to show
up in any way but then of course if they
don't show up then how are you even
aware of them if they're not making some
difference to what's happening in your
brain how are you aware of them if you
are just an
embodied uh if if you if you are just an
embodied brain I mean if
if if that's all you are then if the
things aren't making any distinctive
changes to the state of your nervous
system then you won't be aware of
them um and you could say well yes but
they're sort of aware of themselves well
you know this this brain state has an
intrinsic nature it's it's like
something for the brain state lies for
the brain State lovely the brain state
is like something neural covets are like
something lovely what about me I'm not
the brain state I'm the whole the whole
organism how I get to know about what my
brain State's like unless there's
something else in my brain that's
sensitive to the intrinsic nature of
that brain State and then produces
certain distinctive effects and tells me
about that so that I can report them
as I mean my whole body could be infused
with a kind of intrinsic wonderful
intrinsic quality but if the nothing
tracking that no psych no no mechanisms
tracking that producing appropriate
psychological effects and it's nothing
to me my body could be infused with
radiation or something and it would
unless it's having some effects what
happens next as Dan says you mentioned
your you are compat compatibilist with
the free will uh is it similar to dance
position and what are your thoughts on
someone like Dirk Pier booms and GRE
kuso's approach oh oh now that's a
tricky question because I'm not really I
haven't written
L hard incompatibilism I mean obviously
Durk was part of your Consciousness
paper the wasn't I think he was eh yes
he he was but he was he was writing
about um about about the he's he's
different topic in his 200 12 book he
considers ill not under the name
illusionism but he considers it as an
option alongside velan monism as another
option he doesn't commit to either of
them but he articulates a version of
illusionism as a theoretical possibility
very clearly um you will I I just never
felt
the this again it's a cartisian
intuition that I have to be something
that
escapes
this causal web in order to be able to
be really active and responsible and
that only seems to
be that worry only gets a grip if s let
me say again it's that I have to escape
the the the causal web if I'm to be
genuinely active and and and morally
responsible but that assumes that I'm
not already part of that causal web if I
am just a certain portion of all that
causal activity that is what I am I am
just a certain complex of of of
processes within a wider network of
causality then I'm having an effect and
being and and can be held responsible in
virtue of the causal processes that
constitute me
I don't need to be uh disrupting those
ca in fact I couldn't because they are
what make me those are my actions my
decisions are those particular causal
processes that are basically centered on
this
fleshy Bal thing here okay so um it's
only if you think of yourself as
something separate from all that that
you're going to need to have a the
freedom to intervene in it if you think
all this stuff's going on here and this
rain and this fleshy thing is doing its
stuff but I'm not really having a say in
it that's because you're thinking
yourself as something distinct you've
got this cartisian intuition that you're
something distinct and therefore you
need to somehow push around stuff uh in
in inside here so I just completely
reject that another idea is I suppose
that if everything's were causally
determined then the outcome would
already be settled
well I just I don't really I
mean that that doesn't seem a con
consideration that remotely enters into
my thinking about my activity in the
world maybe the future I mean you get
exact with you don't need to be a
determinist to have this word you can
have it if you think that God know
already knows the future if you think
that that there there are facts about
the future future facts um so you can
have that perfectly the same worry from
a theological perspective if God already
knows the future the future settled
there's only going to be one course it's
going to go down and indeed only one
thing is actually going to happen on any
of you and you can't
given that a certain thing is going to
happen you can't do anything to make it
not happen but then why would you want
to have that sort of um uh Power in
order to be able to do the things you're
doing you that's not stopping you doing
anything
um uh it's not it's not confronting you
as an obstacle in some way you can only
do the things that you're equipped and
and and sort of wound up to do as in
your particular by your but but what has
gone into making you putting you in this
position where you are going to act in
certain ways is
up hugely complex history of of of
fine-tuning and exploration and
adjustment
and self reflection and
self uh manipulation and so on and it's
put you in this position where that is
the thing you'll do next and that's an
authentic expression of you so what do
you want I me it's it's it's it's
wanting to be a a little God who can be
an uncaused cause and well I don't even
think that would be a particularly
that's even a particularly coherent
thing to to want to be I mean what how
would you make your decisions if you had
this sort of completely
un I just again I think it's an illusion
that I mean I suppose one of the reason
is that we just don't know the sping
we're not aware of where our decisions
come to they seem spontaneous because we
don't know their their ideology we don't
know their
their uh the Springs of action are
hidden from us or we can explore them a
bit but there's always going to be
further stuff that we can't explore so
it seems spontaneous to us and provided
it's not constrained in unnatural ways
what more do you
want
um I think once you reconcile yourself
to being the kind of being you actually
are you see that again as dances you
have all the free will worth wanting you
have all the Consciousness worth wanting
you have the all the the meaning and the
purpose worth wanting it doesn't need to
be uh validated on
some separate metaphysical
plane it's it's so after all the things
that you want to be validated are all
you know the moral intuitions that you
want to be validated the purposes that
you want to be imprinted in the universe
are ones that come from our Evol nature
anyway I mean the purpose that a that a
that a that a that a a lion would want
to see implemented in the universe or
that a that a spider or a virus or
heaven knows what sort of alien we want
to see imprinted on the the nature of
the universe totally different from the
ones that we want to that we we you know
cudly sociable argumentative Apes
do Keith I don't think you realize this
but the that that photograph of Dan
behind you the way it's he's it's almost
like he's looking at you smiling at uh
to it's so it's so amazing it's it
really it was taken here in in cre in
2018 um it's a nice photo isn't it yes
and the position I mean you must put it
back in that spot don't don't do not
move it from that spot because it's as
if he's looking at you smiling as you
talk so proudly of him and it's and what
actually got us to have the second
conversation it was your Tweet about
your I think you did a lecture on down
just a trip to him for that yeah I I did
a I did a lecture on the hard problem
then I used the second part to try and
set out this what I'm provisionally
calling reactivity schema theory if the
provisional title changes what do you
think you would opt for there's
something about reactivity but um
possibly calling reactivity schema the
idea of schema is perhaps too specific
it tends it suggest just a simplified
version rather than a distorted version
it also suggest something that might be
arriv or an add-on to gracianos which
it's not it's not a rival certainly but
it might be an add-on but I maybe want
to it's it's more of a again I'm not in
the business of constructing detailed
scientific theories I'm in the business
of suggesting avenues for exploration
yes and so I maybe want something that's
a little bit more open that says these
are the sort of I'm I mean I I love
interacting with Scientists but I'm not
doing well I'm I'm I'm ask I'm setting
out questions for scientific exploration
so maybe I want something a little more
open um but um you have any ideas let me
know um Kei thank you first of all this
was such a wonderful conversation it's
been a few years in the making which is
a bit too long so I think our next round
will come very soon any final words from
your
side uh yes let's let's uh first of all
thank you it's a pleasure to talk to you
um you you have a fantastic podcast um
I'm honored to have been one of the the
first guests and it's great to be back
it's great to talk to as always
because uh although I tend to talk too
much we do have a there's there's a real
conversation going on with I feel that
I'm I'm learning from you as well as
hopefully um giving you something to
think about um so it's a pleasure to to
to talk and let's do it again soon
especially given this rather alarming
mention of mysterianism so I I I think I
think uh it's been too long and we need
to um we need to I think I should change
I I don't actually want to be in that
label I'd rather just say I'm I'm just
unsure at the
moment uh
I
convincing doubt is always good um um
but um I I I you've
been one of the most
um uh responsive and
open-minded uh uh people I've discussed
this
with you see you you you get what's
going on Dan used to say this this
things he would say um you get it um and
it was a big compliment it meant tuned
into the right wavelength you know you
get it I feel you get it and uh so
that's what makes for a productive
conversation even if you don't endorse
it at least getting it getting the idea
getting the
attraction I I was I think some people
think I'm just being I'm just
being awkward or difficult or contrary
or maybe that I am not my
self-conscious um
and that can be a little frustrating um
can only imagine so
uh having a productive conversation with
someone who gets it is always
interesting so and as I said my
intuitions are still very much the same
as they were 3 years ago um just a
little bit more open-minded in a sense
but yeah very much still I do understand
exactly what you mean when you say you
have to backtrack you have to sort of
defend and I see exactly why where and
when you have to do it
and it's very difficult because with
some audiences you need to you need to
sort of go on the attack and others you
need to you need to you need to defend
it's difficult to pitch it whichever way
I pitch it somebody's not going to like
it pitched at that level it's not going
to work um um and of course you said
about Mysteries all I think all
questions all explanations are relative
to some sort of framework um
and the the bigger you make the question
um eventually you run out of Frameworks
within which they can be answered so if
you're asking why is why why is there
something rather than nothing there's no
framework in within which that question
can be answered I don't think it's just
make the qu we have this amazing
capacity to
ask more and more general questions and
of course you're going to get to some
point where there's no framework for
answering them now my point about
Consciousness is that that doesn't take
us to that point where it's an ultimate
mystery that there there are going to be
questions that
are beyond our ability to frame any any
explanatory uh framework but
Consciousness doesn't pose one of those
that's what I want to say I think that
for me the more the more I'm learning
about this the more you I'm I know about
it the less I feel like I know anything
about this
and and I think it's a good way to live
life in general because that's often the
case especially with the Dunning Krueger
effect I mean the more you really start
to delve into a subject the more you
realize there's way more to it um that
you really need to go it's it's a
balancing act humility is definitely
good definitely and I wouldn't want I
don't I wouldn't want people to think
that I'm just happy that i' sorted it
out that um but you have to strike a
balance that if you're going to argue
for anything if you're going to put I
see what I'm I'm putting forward a
perspective I'm saying look at this
angle I think it's interesting I think
it's fruitful I think this could be the
way to go come and have a look see what
you think but I'm not going to settle it
whether I'm convinced or not doesn't
really matter in the slightest
it's the question of whether these roads
are going to prove fruitful yeah whether
we're going to find things going and we
need we need people like you to be doing
that because then I cannot have these
conversations cuz you guys are the ones
putting out the work that I'm talking
about I'm merely just joining in and and
I think you're doing a bit more than
that actually I think you're
underselling yourself a bit there but
you're certainly helping us to to to to
communicate I appreciate that ke thank
you so much once again I really
appreciate your time you keep up the
excellent work always enjoy it you too
yeah no definitely and and I'm looking
forward to we have a scheduled lecture
that you're going to give us soon and
I'll I'll I'll definitely let everyone
know once once we get that done
absolutely yeah fantastic de great
talking to you again thank you so much
Keith
