if I were trying to earn your respect
throughout this conversation if I were
to want to come across as somebody that
I know what I'm talking about if I was
somebody that wants to come across as
being high value what do you think's the
biggest thing that I should focus on for
me to portray that to you it's a feeling
and that feeling is warmth if you really
want to portray confidence there's the
Temptation I feel like you have to be
big and you need to be right in their
face hey hi energy hi impact all the
time that does not convey confidence
right away it
conveys desperation it might convey
eagerness it might convey too much
soever somebody's just you're you're
sitting with me uh or with anybody and
you come on super strong that might
throw off the equilibrium of the
conversation where it's going oh this is
this is this is too much I'm just
getting to to know you so it's much more
easier if you think about the Fe feeling
of warmth and what that is and how that
sounds and how that resonates with you
so if I want to portray
confidence uh it's to slow down my words
to make sure that I don't upt talk with
things it's to make sure that I am
pausing correctly with you and making
eye contact and having that intention
I'm not looking around the room I I'm
focused right with you my Chin's up I'm
not looking down my shoulders are back
and I'm just wanting to engage fully
with who you are and who I am and making
sure that we match the same frequency
rather than coming in hot and heavy why
do you think people come on too strong
in
conversations a desire to be loved A
desire to be liked a desire to feel like
they are special and they're different
from somebody else it's it's just
overcompensating most of the time if
somebody is you're wanting to project
high energy it's different if you're
performing in front of a whole bunch of
people you're speaking to a bigger
audience got it you need to have that
energy because it has to be spread over
a lot much bigger number of people but
if it's just one person you you don't
need to come on that strong it's much
easier just to meet them where they are
in other words I don't have to I I don't
have to come parachute into the
conversation I just need to walk up and
shake your hand and they need to feel
that in your voice and your tone and
your tenor and how that operates yeah I
mean I've noticed with myself that the
lower my self-esteem was at the time the
more I needed to fake it in a
conversation and try to show up in a way
that wasn't who I was because I was so
miserable with who with the person that
I was I felt that the other person would
automatically know that there was
something wrong with me um because of
the way that I was feeling and then what
I realized is you know most people
aren't really paying attention to that
you actually look more unconfident when
you're trying to you know fake it to
somebody throughout the course of a
conversation like I'm wondering
I know for me it helped me a lot to work
on myself through other mechanisms
Fitness my relationship to myself my
personal relationships purpose and so on
that that allowed me to be able to I
think sit here and be able to have these
conversations like this do you think
that for you personally is that the way
to appear more high value you know high
level of self respect Etc or is it just
exposure therapy through practice
through having conversations like this
it's a comfort with
yourself it exposure helps just by
repetition you can only know so much it
has to have
application but it comes from within I
see this a lot of time in at a jury
trial so as a litigator I go to court
and often I will have a witness or I'm
cross-examining a
witness who is trying to be somebody
they think the jurors and the jury want
them to be they want to need to portray
some maybe they need to portray sympathy
hoping they gather sympathy from the
jury but people have a six sense about
them we can just tell there's no way to
really put words to it but it's very
easy to go that person is not being true
to who they are something is off
something is I can't describe it but I
can just feel it I can hear it you know
what when you see it and so there's that
temptation to be something different
than who you are but that typically
draws away it doesn't it rarely if ever
gives you the outcome that you want
authenticity is being exactly who you
are on the inside as you are on the
outside people it's leave the window
fronts for for shopping but don't don't
make it your home base of who you are
and your personality because eventually
it's going to either hurt the
relationship that you're trying to have
which is based upon a A falsity or it's
going to eventually grind you down
because after a while it's just going to
be friction and and that's going to have
a rub and that's going to get worn and
that's gonna be hard to you're GNA have
that identity crisis further down the
road much better to to be who you are
now yeah we often have that problem with
overcorrection right where if we're
feeling a lack of self-esteem we want to
overcorrect it by trying to portray that
we have a higher level of self-esteem
than we actually do and people can pick
up on that right way but I will say I
think on the the opposite end of that I
can tell a lot by somebody when they
shake my hand if they have a weak
handshake I can just tell like they're
struggling they got something going on
they have a low level of self-esteem
maybe this is me overgeneralizing but
but for the most part that's just maybe
my perception and my bias and people who
walk with and looking you know at the
ground when they're walking because I
did all of that and I wasn't very
confident so do you think in situations
like that where people are feeling
less confident passive they're maybe not
an extrovert but they're trying to
appear confident how like in your
experience like what's the best way for
somebody to bridge that Gap so that
they're not turning somebody off by
being too passive having a weak
handshake looking down but they're also
not coming out as this over charismatic
person which can be easy for people to
pick up on right
away it's a it's a balance and that
balances specific to context it's
specific to the situation and a lot of
different factors there's this fear and
it's it's a it's a type of psychological
threat of identity and that makes you
question what if they don't like me what
if they don't like who I am is who I am
enough in this moment and that causes
you to have maybe not the weak handshake
but it causes you to to feel down to
have that negative energy whereas on the
opposite end if you're
always always needing to be the person
to say something often the person who
says the most knows the least you you've
been in those boardroom meetings and the
person who's always chiming in is
typically the person who's least
connected with what's going on but the
confident person the authentic person
knows that they don't have anything to
prove so the advice
is understand you have nothing to prove
your value is exactly what your value is
you don't dilute it by saying too much
you don't undervalue it by not saying
enough so it's this this understanding
of I don't have anything to prove not
with my words not with my actions I know
exactly who I am and that allows you to
be able to use pauses more effectively
it allows you to have stronger
conversations because less is often more
when your words are more concentr ated
when you say less confident people know
they don't have to have an answer to
everything they don't have to say every
little thing that comes to their mind
the person who's the most knowledgeable
in the room typically in that board
meeting is the one who says the least
and so it's it's it's always the the
reverse of what we what we originally
think speaking of practicing the pause
if you will I know that that can be a
very valuable technique when you're in
the midst of a high conflict situation
you're in the IM midst of a high
conflict conversation is learning to
take a step back look at things
objectively instead of just
reacting in the
moment you know I talk a lot about
relationships on the podcast and it's
pretty obviously well known at this
point one of the biggest things that
destroys relationships is the couple's
inability to
navigate
conflict what are some of the things
that you've used throughout the course
of your marriage and in your
relationships that have really helped
you you know use conflict as a way as a
mechanism for growth there's several
different tools that I use that I have
developed over
time my favorite and most used is what I
also train my clients in uh in
litigation is let your breath be the
first word that you say so you think of
your breath as where a word would be you
just put a breath and you lead with that
in your sentence so if somebody is going
to say something that's going to make
you defensive instead of going I didn't
say that that's not what I said and you
immediately just b boom you've now
ratcheted up five levels instead when
you have a breath where they say
something ugly and
you I did not say that now you have way
more control now you have a much more
firmer grasp so that helps you control
yourself another tool or thought that I
allow myself to use uses I just picture
words that are not helpful I just let
them fall to the ground I I you you
picture as their words coming out if
they're not helpful they just fall we
have this fear that we have to catch
every single thing that somebody says as
if it's tennis we have to hit it right
back it's baseball we got to catch it we
got to swing some pitches are balls not
everything is a strike and so if you're
just swinging at every pitch that's
thrown it's going to Tire you out it's
going to frustrate you it's going to
frustrate the other person and you're
going to hit a foul you know if we're
going to go with the baseball metaphor
here and so when you have the ability to
understand just because you said
something does not mean I have to say
something not everything you said
deserves a response you don't have to
attend every argument that you're
invited to there is a wisdom and a peace
and a comfort and a confidence that
comes with knowing I don't have to say
anything that I don't want to say and
often that gives you an immense sense of
confidence going into the conflict I
know you're a big fan of Chris Voss as
well um he's been on the podcast or he
talks he talks a lot about tactical
empathy I know you're a fan of that as
well for people who aren't as
familiar you know with that term maybe
they didn't catch that episode um like
why do you think that's so effective
when trying to dissolve a not only just
conflict but to bridge relationships
closer together well I know Chris could
explain better than me but what I
understand tactical empathy to be is
really informative empathy let's say it
that way by understanding the other
person's
struggle by being who you are as a human
it makes you easier to relate to them
and be curious to create that connection
so if he uses that a lot by labeling and
by mirroring so if you were to say
something to me and um I don't know
let's let's let me come up with a
sentence if somebody
says you always talk that way to me when
we're in front of
people I could respond with in front of
people yeah in front of people and they
and they will give you a whole another
paragraph and then you do it again and
you continue to listen and while you're
listening you are having that empathy of
that must not feel great no it doesn't
feel great and they keep on talking to
you you I bet that that probably makes
you feel bad like if I were you I'd feel
I'd feel rough about that I apologize
and and they'll use that you use it as a
way to continue to roll with it but the
word
tactical is really um I think just kind
of a a sexy word for it but it's to me
it's just it's way that somebody's
feeling informs you of the empathy that
you can use in that given situation
right because at the end of the day I
feel like when people are in some sort
of argument the other person just wants
to be felt and heard they want they just
want acknowledgement that's mostly it
they they you don't even as long as you
acknowledge somebody you don't have to
agree with them agreement is typically
not what they want they just want to
feel like you understood them I think
one of the biggest problems with with
some of the stuff that we're recently
talking about is people want to feel
like they're they're respecting
themselves and they're standing up for
themselves they're not letting people
walk all over them in conversation and
some of the stuff that we've been
talking about over the last few minutes
is really how to make the other person
feel Hur how to not pour gasoline on the
exist existing existing fire with our
words in the context of speaking with
authority and conviction and standing up
for yourself to
somebody what have you found to be an
effective way to do so without being
disrespectful well I see two sides of
that question you know is what we just
talked about the person's desire to feel
acknowledged to feel heard and you can
do that with phrases like that's helpful
for me to
know I've learned that X is important to
you or I understand that this is
important to you and you can lower their
barrier that way but to continue to
stand up for you there's got to be a
boundary there's a lot
of I'm going to use the word peace that
in Clarity that comes with putting a
frame around your life and around the
conversation that means you are focusing
what is in it and excluding what is not
just like you would put a piece of frame
a frame around a piece of art you are
enhancing what's inside it so if you
want to put up a boundary with somebody
somebody's pushing your buttons you need
to say no you need to stand up for it
you're using assertive language so I
what I like to give it for people is
you're giving them a manual rather than
giving them a
remote so instead of letting them
control your behavior by pushing all
your buttons you're telling them I don't
accept the way you talk to me so there's
a difference in saying you can't talk to
me that
way I don't allow people to speak to me
that way so um or even stronger somebody
says you can't speak to me that way I
don't respond to that like it's just
this shift of this
reactive uh versus responding in a way
that keeps you grounded by having a
boundary of what's important to you and
how you're going to speak how you going
to assert yourself in the conversation
so in real time if if if you and I let's
just pretend we're actually having
coffee right now yeah coffee sounds good
I need some and you say something to me
about something and I go that sounds
really stupid of
you what would be the instead of you
what would be like the real time like
response to me in that situation so
there's two two that come to mind um
let's assume that we are friends that we
know each other we're good my immediate
reaction would be was was that meant to
be hurtful or are we just being
funny get that to clarify I'm giving
them that Grace
of I know you didn't mean to I know you
didn't mean to insult me now if we're
not friends I'm going to let that linger
give it five seconds of quiet and then
repeat what you just said or ask you to
repeat what you just said so if you said
some and for example if I just had quiet
I could say so that sounds that sounds
stupid to you all I'm doing is repeating
it and then like go who what I meant was
blah so but what you're doing is saying
hey this is I'm standing here I'm
standing right here uh and I'm not I'm
not moving so understand if I don't like
something I will push it back rather
than me continueing to carry your words
and me feel less and less and less of
myself so we talked about like how like
the biggest asset you can have is using
your breath and practicing the pause
before saying anything in the midst of
high conflict situations or Sation like
we just um went over is the opposite
also true because you hear a lot of
people and I've definitely been guilty
of this it's like the tick for attack
like somebody says something to you and
you try to one up with them with
something else and it's just this never
ending battle to the bottom right right
yeah the race to the bottom is exactly
what it is is that the biggest mistake
you see people make is just this tick
for tack approach when they're yeah it's
this perception that you have to win the
argument when my advice is is always
never win the argument that's winning an
argument is not a thing if you win an
argument you've You've Won contempt
you've You've Won
regret uh You've Won
resentment it's there's it's a lose lose
game um what you've really lost is that
person's respect you might have lost the
relationship the connection that you
once had because you thought that saying
that hurtful thing was going to make you
win it was going to end the conversation
like in a negotiation the advice is the
person who speaks loses right well in a
relationship you want to build it's
typically the person who speaks last
loses because you went too
far you you you ratchet you ratchet so
as soon as let's say you said something
to me Doug that was at a louder
Tone If I go louder than you in my mind
I'm winning got to beat you well I've
now just done two things I've Justified
your ability to go even louder I've also
just confirmed every fear that you had
about me i' I've now confirmed every
thought you had I am rude I am ugly
because I haven't denied it I've just
given you all the tools and resources to
feel even more afraid so it's it I'm I
am it's like it doesn't make sense to me
that how would you respond to a threat
with a bigger threat often that just
that does not create connection with the
other person it it it doesn't it just
makes them not like you
more U so that's that's that's kind of
the advice that I always fall back to is
that if you win an argument your
priorities are in the wrong place it is
a it is a race to the bottom uh whenever
you just ratchet it eventually it hits a
Tipping Point you know the the
sympathetic turns into the
parasympathetic the ratchet the fight
ORF flight you did something to you
fought too hard you threw that very
hurtful word and now it's the cooling
point where you feel regret you feel
dread you feel sad and you got I just
feel bad about the whole thing and then
you focus on what matters but you should
have done it in reverse yeah there's
nothing that drives somebody more nuts
like in the midst of a high conflict
conversation is when when the other
person says like nothing you know they
kind of walk away and it really drives
that I can't believe they're not
reacting and responding yeah to how I am
right and it's like it's like like
sometimes when you send like a hurtful
text another person just doesn't respond
you just more more and more somebody
answer because you wanted that dopamine
right you wanted that like you wanted
that like ah yes they are fighting back
with me and you feel powerless now
because you feel like that person has
gained authority over you because
they're not giving in exactly to what
you want like why why are we so dri
driven to not walk away from arguments
even though deep down we know that
that's how we gain respect authority
value through somebody else's eyes is
been is by knowing when to walk away
yeah absolutely yeah what's what's worth
your time uh and and exactly right you
can you can shoot that text that you
thought was a Zinger right you thought
you just sent that Zinger of a text and
then they don't respond to it
and all of a sudden when 5 minutes 10
minutes 20 minutes go by it feels less
and less like a Zinger and more and more
like you're wearing you know the dummy
hat of like why did I send that ah this
doesn't make and now you're frustrated
now you realize oh they just have full
control over my emotions now I feel like
I'm you know I'm not anywhere where I
need to be you all meanwhile they look
like they're calm cool and the bigger
person and do you think that's like an
ego thing that like people they just
they their ego gets in the way their
their self-esteem gets in the way and
that's why they feel they just can't
walk away and they they feel that if
they're not winning this argument or
being quote unquote right that it's just
a reflection of how they feel about
themselves that's part of it I think
it's part of a bigger picture it has a
lot to do with your upbringing I think
and just what you saw as conflict it's
some people I grew up in Homes at my
house my parents didn't really argue in
front of us they went in another room
you know if they needed to have some
words there are other people who had it
all out right there in the open didn't
matter where they were could be at a
restaurant it could be at the house it
could be in front of other kids so
conflict looks different to other people
and they've some people have grown up in
that very toxic argument Behavior where
they do say the terrible things where
they they understand the really bad
arguments as a process of feelings or to
get it out
so it's it's it's relative really to how
they grew up so ego is part of it but I
a lot I think too
is what they learned and
imitated to see as their measure of this
is how to handle conflict they they
weren't taught or equipped better ways
what do you think gets in the way of
that is it when somebody wasn't raised
in a way that modeled healthy conflict
they get into conflicts as adults a lot
of times there's physical
symptoms that come along with the
conflict because you're in fight or
flight
mode do you think that is harder for
people to deal with or is it the the
lack of um understanding on healthy
conversation tactics in the midst of
something like that I think the behavior
is is learned I I mean I don't
think yeah we're born we're born to say
no you to not like I got two kids I
didn't need to teach them how to argue
with me they just did it you know you
want them to have this F food no I don't
I don't want this it's the their
favorite word growing up no uh that
doesn't need to be taught it's just
within our our our system but the people
who that's what they grew up with are
these toxic behaviors I think are much
more prone to not knowing how to handle
it and on the other side there are
people that were taught it they just
find that when they behave a certain way
they get their sense of power they get
their sense of ego they get they think
this is what success is they think this
is what it is to achieve and to overcome
and be machismo with it all you know I I
think there is a a a fine line between
using what you know and falling back to
what what you think works speaking of
being charged I know throughout the
course of your life you've struggled
with anxiety
panic attacks Etc it's recent in like
the last two years yeah well I mean over
the LA I mean I know it exacerbated for
you I believe right when you started
your Instagram Channel and things
started to really pick up right uhuh
yeah when it started blowing up where
did that all come from and how did you
begin to diffuse it in a way where it
wasn't bringing you down so much I'm one
of these people Doug that I will I'm a
thinker I'm a internal processor I think
a lot on things whereas my wife talks
all the time out loud that's how she
processes I'm the
opposite
and when social media was starting to
take off totally unknown to me because
this is not why I got into this space I
never had ever the goal still of gaining
followers or this is what I want to be
it just started
happening and that was overwhelming in
some sense terrifying
because this time last year you know I
didn't I might have had maybe 200,000
followers which I thought was just
absolutely Bonkers and then within a
course of a week I was gaining I had
gained over a thou a million I was
gaining over 100,000 followers a day
just randomly uh about this time last
year and I didn't know what to do with
that I didn't I just the number just
kept going and but I felt extremely
exposed that was the that's what did it
I felt very alone and very exposed
because I was not prepared for this I
did not expect this and nobody in my
life can relate to it as much as my
family my best
friends they don't get it they it's not
it's not happening to them and we don't
see you know I don't see a million
people in a room all of a sudden but
they're there so that just felt very
Alone um that night at the kitchen table
yeah I mean I'll blame it on the Rock
that's fine but uh he'll take
it like when I saw that he started
following me it was commenting on my
stuff it was like I just I kind of got
dizzy for a second like what what is
what what is happening I I I make videos
in my car what are you talking
about and it was late at night at the
kitchen table and then that's when it
just all a sudden the way I explain it
is I felt like somebody just wafted a
sheet of paper in front of me like I
felt a cool breeze almost and then all
of a sudden my ears started thumping I
mean you know it and I had never felt
that feeling before I was convinced I
was dying told my wife I was absolutely
dying and the way I've dealt with it is
the one recognize when it happens it's a
very familiar feeling like you know when
it's happening once you've had it once
you know and then breathe
is the number one thing that helps for
me I started
therapy uh for it and as work I've
worked through that I did that for about
eight months and breathing is the
biggest thing that helped I just felt
alone I didn't I didn't know anybody
anywhere around me where they've called
themselves an influencer even though I
don't even like that word
and I just I couldn't talk to anybody
like hey what do you do how do I what do
I do with this now there's a lot of that
do you think if you had had other people
in your life life that were in the
creative space at that at that time you
would have still felt alone or do you
think because a lot of people when they
get to that point when they have a lot
of success Fame Etc they talk about this
how they feel way more alone than they
ever did before yeah it's it's different
in the sense of I'm not
really I'm I'm followed in the social
media world but I'm not a celebrity it's
like this hyper reality of like I'm not
I can go out the wherever I want and
some people might recognize me because
of social media but most of all I'm not
I got Paparazzi around me I'm not that
kind of type it's not I'm not even
anywhere close to that so it is I could
see how that could be much more lonely
versus in my life I still go to the law
firm I still work cases I still do
regular stuff nothing in my life has
changed zero uh aside from the number
that was on my phone the digits and
pixels that showed a number show a
different number that's much bigger um
but it was it was just that I if I known
other people who had large
followings then then yeah I could I
could probably feel better about it but
there's not like a Blog it's like oh hey
you you blew up and and are now have
millions of followers here's what to do
next you know there's just no there's no
none of that for me but so who was a big
still is kind of been a a big brother
type to me was uh Andrew huberman so he
he started following my stuff
and we got to talk and I was like man
can I just like use five minutes of your
time he's like absolutely within like 30
minutes he and I are on the phone and
he's honestly just making me feel more
normal like what's what's happening and
so I'm always I always be grateful to
him for that yeah I know Andrew he's a
great guy super great guy what was it
that made your account take off was it a
specific reel was it a specific couple
of reels like do you are you able to
pinpoint anything so it was about this
time last year that I was starting I was
just now starting to post once a week I
was doing it like once every two weeks
and then I started to slowly do it once
a day well out of nowhere I had this is
what happened I had three videos I had
posted two weeks before all just start
going nuts and they were all feeding off
each other and then they all in the
millions of views and then everything
just started it was all it was it was my
stuff was getting shown
to whatever you call it your for you
page or your your other stuff where it's
your
non-followers and they were just
following it like crazy and I related to
I was like there's been a mistake
because all of my analytics went quiet I
didn't see any more follows I didn't get
a single it was all gone I was getting
notifications of just like follow follow
follow follow follow follow but there
was Zero
analytics and then for days later I saw
it it was like a huge Spike where I'd
gained like 120,000 followers that day
and then the next day it was like
everything was over 100,000 on followers
for like a solid week and a half I just
thought so I thought Instagram messed up
I thought in my view like you know that
scene in a movie where like the security
guard late at night like has a bunch of
screens and then he falls asleep and his
coffee pors on the like keyboard you
know it was like that that's that's what
I was confident I was like somebody
mistake but that's what happened is all
all the same stuff I think it
just it found the right message to the
right people which videos of yours seem
to relate most to your audience to the
algorithm to the people that follow you
the ones that seem to do
most who well to to the let's just say
the algorithms form of success are ones
that are conflict driven so if I'm
dealing with a bad argument you're
dealing with somebody who's narcissistic
you're dealing with somebody who is a
difficult
personality uh the the hard stuff the
ugly stuff the difficult Stuff how to
maneuver those types of things tend to
go tend to hit
more but I'm I'm hesitant to to talk too
much about narcissism I I'll do a video
about that like
every five weeks ago you know five six
weeks or so I just feel like it's too
much of a dynamite for some people you
know it's just some people that they
make it their whole page all about that
like we didn't even have this word I
feel like two years ago it's wasn't even
it was even a real word so I gotta you
gotta be careful too many people are
real quick to just paint somebody as a
narcissist just because they said
something they don't like so I'm very
very cautious uh about using that word
yeah it becomes desensitized now for the
people that actually are dealing with
somebody who's like a diagnosed
narcissist
now their voice isn't heard as loud
because you know it's be it's been the
word's been so Overexposed I don't think
I've seen any DM from somebody who just
said you know hey I am going through
something with a regular ex a nice ex of
mine no it's always a narcissistic ex
every time it's whoever is not in my
life anymore or who is anymore it's it's
always a narcissist so I I'm not going
to say they they haven't been diagnosed
I'm just saying there is a a sense of
discernment you need to come into that
conversation with and for somebody who
has a lot of followers and gives advice
that's just all the more responsibility
to be very careful with your words and
so for for more difficult scenarios like
the ones that you're talking about
harder conversations people who are
quote unquote
difficult is is it the same PlayBook
take the breath practice the pause
it's the same thing yeah it's it's a lot
of the same thing except you just you
know when to walk away very quickly uh
because there words can be much more
harmful um understanding that when
you're dealing with somebody who's a
narcissistic type it is a game in a
sense they either want to provoke you or
they want the praise from you and
there's a a a line that that comes with
that so it's more of informing them when
they're in those situations and giving
them a sense of just because you walk
away does not mean you're a bad person
just because you need to step away from
a conversation does not does not mean
that you've lost you know often that's
it's You've Won you've won that your
peace of mind and what are you walking
away from or what are you walking away
with that's that's that's the difference
obviously in your line of work it can be
easy to feel manipulated feel like your
reality can be warped and that maybe
your truth isn't your truth you question
whether or not what you're thinking is
actually what's going on because of just
the Dynamics of a court case or maybe
what's another lawyer might be saying to
you or whatever and I think this also
happens a lot in these more difficult
conversations where because of the words
of somebody else and what what they're
saying to
them the person could have started out
great felt confident felt you know like
they had a level of self- respect but
now they're like oh no like maybe is
this person right like am I really doing
those things how do how do you you
maintain that balance to where you are
able to understand whether or
not somebody's words to you are actually
true and that you know you're not
questioning your own reality in that
situation well that touches on the
elements of gaslighting right have
somebody actually coming in and trying
to take advantage of you by by
distorting your sense of reality and and
Truth
what comes to mind is twofold really you
maintain that balance by understanding
who you are and loving who you are often
we want to look to other people for that
validation of of love because we have a
hard time loving
ourselves and the more you are good with
who you
are the more you're okay
with I'm okay if you misunderstand me
I'm okay you know if if that's what you
need to
you go do it I'll let you but that
doesn't mean that I'm going to take down
anything else that I have so there's
that that sense of loving who you are
the second end of that is to be firm
often when I talk about it in terms of
people who want to break up your
self-esteem who try to Gaslight you in
certain ways it's somewhat like the
laser pointer with a cat right they they
want to jump you from place to place to
place even though you get there and
there's no laser it's it's all just
distraction it's it's manipul it's manip
manipulation in that sense you need to
stand still and be still one of the best
ways to do that is to use phrases that I
I teach
are I remember things
differently I see that
differently I I take another approach
you it's often just using and repeating
the same
phrases eating means that you're
standing
still because they might bring something
up to you and you have that kneer
reaction and go that's not what happened
that's not what I said that's not true
well you're just jumping around to where
they want you and it's it's not where
that is versus if I just repeat what I
said I see things differently they want
to distract you you just
repeat I say things differently you're
standing still it's like the person
who's not responding to that text you're
saying I got I got control over me and
that's the only person who does do you
think there's benefit to saying it's one
of one of the things I've used in the
past is like it's okay like you have
your truth I have my truth you have your
perception of reality I have my
perception of reality neither or right
or wrong but we're GNA have to agree to
disagree on this like do you think that
saying something like that can be
effective or am I not being assertive
enough it depends on the situation you
know it depends how how much this person
matters to you often I like to use an
opening of is this something we have to
agree
on I use that a lot I say a lot I mean I
use that as a opening frequently is is
this something we have to agree on
almost always the answer is no because
then it it it Keys you into priority is
this is this something that matters is
this something we really want to fight
over the second answer is if it is
something you need to agree on the
question is is that something we need to
agree on now
at this exact moment at this at this
exact second or if we wait until
tomorrow or next week it is the world
going to shut down and so it is a um
timing is a big aspect because often
people will try to push you into
conversations and the problem you fall
into is when you agree to get into the
ring when you're not ready you're tired
you're hungry you know you're not you're
not you haven't worked out that day you
have you have built up built up tension
you don't go into the match if you're
not prepared for it so often you're just
not ready so you need to you need to
make sure that when you are it's the
conversation happens on your schedule
not theirs and is there anything that
somebody can do beforehand before
entering into a a
planned discussion that may get heated
like for instance if people who are
dating get into some sort of argument
they're like let's take some space come
back in an hour two hours
whatever is there any kind any kind
of best practices for being able to make
sure you're coming together in a healthy
way what I uh try to tell people is use
a frame around the conversation you you
frame it which is somewhat similar to to
others who talk about this but it is
calling your shot is what I say it like
a like an old baseball player you're
pointing into to the left field going
that's where we're going so right at the
beginning of the conversation say
I want you to know that before we talk
about this at the end of this
conversation that's key at the end of
this
conversation I still love you I still
care about you I still want to be
friends I still want to do
this and then you go into so here's what
we want to talk about so you make it
very short and concise of what you are
to talk about but what you're doing is
eliminating the
unknowns often somebody in a
conversation you have start to feel fear
of like if I say what I really want to
say am I going to lose this person uh
you you remove that barrier when you say
hey we're I want to have a discussion
with you about X Y and Z but just know
at the end of it I'm still going to
respect who you are we're still going to
choose to love each other and it's like
you're getting their permission and
their acknowledgement and now they know
the parameters now they know the
discussion it's much harder when you go
hey we need to talk talk about what
anything you know how does it end who
knows yeah that's that just that all it
does is bring anxiety of I have no idea
where we're going and so that's what
you're leaving an open pasture for you
just to roam that's the conversation
lasts forever because there's no fence
you just you're just going wherever it
goes and then you realize wow where did
this even start how did we even get to
this point so if you uh come in from a a
a frame you're going to be much stronger
because you're giving people less
choices like if you're going to like as
a kid you know pick out a pair of shoes
if you have like 30 shoes on the wall
you're going to take a whole lot more
time but if I give you two here's the
two subjects we want to talk about well
that's much easier to digest and then it
makes conversations feel a lot more
productive once you've chosen one you
know you I know you probably don't want
to be overly um structured with some of
these
conversations especially if it's like in
a romantic setting but do you think that
there's benefit to having some sort
of time limit within that frame so that
the other person makes sure that they're
feeling heard too and they don't feel
like the other person who maybe is
setting the tone for the conversation is
taking up a bunch of time to talk and
then now you know an hour has gone by
somebody's got to go to work somebody's
got to take care of the kids whatever
the example is do you think there's
effect there's a is an effective way to
make sure that both
people can hear each other out yeah I I
mean one tactic is to say okay I'm going
to
let I'm giving you five minutes here's
my phone we're gonna agree you get five
minutes to say whatever you want to say
and I'm not GNA say a word whatever is
on your mind about this you get to say
it all and then I get five minutes I get
to say all that I want and then after
the end of it that's the end of it we're
not going to bring it up again you know
I mean you you get to lay those
parameters as as a couple as a
relationship of if that works for you or
not but what it does make sure is of is
you get to say what you want and I'm not
going to be defensive about it we're
both just gonna bent pour it out get it
out because often that's all you needed
to do anyway is just to get it out what
about like non-physical cues body
language we talked at the beginning when
when somebody's trying to in
conversation you know gain Authority
respect Val you know value from somebody
eye contact
chest up shoulders back I mean you also
hear a lot about people who like you
they cross their arms that can that can
give off a certain so what are some some
tips you have for body language well
again it it depends on the person you
know who you how familiar you are like I
know when my brother is mad you know way
before anybody else knows you know I you
you know of sisters who can like come
home from a first date and you're like
she hated them as soon as she walks to
the door they just
know so crossing the arms yeah that's
That's a classic just closed any closed
position where either my body's turned
away from you my face is turned away
from you my eyes are looking away from
you anything that says I'm not wanting
to directly engage that doesn't all the
time mean that you're not wanting to
engage maybe you're thinking of
something maybe looking at somebody's
eyes bothers you I'll tell people
typically try to try to look at their
eyebrows people can't tell the
difference so if that that really sets
you off you can look at their eyebrows
and they really won't know
um especially if you're standing farther
farther away people who have a bigger
breath so
they I mean it's just that longer big
exhale that you can tell okay they're
they're not in a good they're not in a
state of mind maybe they're fence fist
or clinch or they're real fidgety but
again if you maybe if you have ADHD
that's you're on a whole different
Spectrum yeah I mean you're not gonna be
able to yeah that's much harder to
that's much harder to tell so it's it
generally just goes with Vibe like in my
view everybody comes into an argument or
a conversation with a particular
frequency just like a radio station can
you tap into that radio frequency turn
the knob and and get there or not so
that's that's the that's the real cue
how do you show up in conversation like
what are some things what's your body
language like when you're getting ready
to sit down for an uncomfortable
discussion with somebody smile that's my
because it makes me happier it's not
really so much for them it's for me I
need I I I want to feel like I am at all
times positive confident and settled so
you have to think in your mind the
values you want to portray so there are
things called conversational values that
I'm a big proponent of that is every
time you get into a conversation what is
the value that you're wanting to stand
by like a company has their own values
they have their own brand that people
know them by because that is the
corporate message that they have sent
out for their company same way applies
to you as in your human body that I
apply my values what I want to be so one
of my values is where there is room for
kindness I will use it any time if
there's space anywhere in that
conversation for kindness I will choose
it period I don't care if they've been
ugly to me is there space for kindness
that's what I'm going to do then it's
not a question I don't have to think
about what I say I know that my value
drives my action so another one that I
have is if I can't be a bridge be a
lious that's fine if they need to if
they need to go away from me if we don't
need to talk anymore that's fine but you
know what I'm still G to be I'm still G
to be light I'm still gonna be positive
I'm still gonna be somebody who you know
is here in case you need me so these
values of conversational values help you
show up more as you because these values
align with who you are is as a person so
you have to
think whatever I'm wanting to portray it
does not work unless it becomes you like
that's who I want to be in this
conversation I know we talked earlier
about like somebody who's portraying
this false sense of confidence they're
you know overly charismatic they're just
talking loud you know for no for no
reason all these
things is there a way that the average
person could pick up of somebody's being
fake to them when somebody's just not
telling them the truth other than let's
just say that they're not overly
charismatic is there like I mean there
was that there used to be that thing
where if they look to the right or the
or something they weren't telling the
truth I don't know if that's that's
that's a a thing or not like what are
your thoughts on that yeah there's
thought there's ones of like if you look
a certain direction that means like
you're thinking or trying to find
information if you look another way
trying to hide it I don't I don't know
how valid that is but I know that
typically you can tell if somebody is
not being them their authentic authentic
self
is if you can just sense it in the
little bitty
details so maybe it's the way their eye
looks right after they say something
maybe it's uh the way their inflection
is you know if you ask somebody a
question they go um yeah you know like
that that makes it sound like I you're
not you're not nearly a sure or maybe
they laugh a certain way that they
typically don't laugh like or something
feels forced it's often the the cue now
this that smile felt forced that laugh
that word that intonation in your voice
felt forced and if anytime it's forced
it means it's not natural and that that
just
feels that feels out of place um with
people one way often you can call out
that kind of behavior not really call it
out but inspect it a little closer is to
ask somebody to repeat what they said
that usually will because they have to
like oh I I got to re okay now I got to
get in the mindset again now I got to
rehearse I just gave it to you okay now
i' got to do it again and then you're
you're making them uh realize that
there's a a start
contrast in their behavior so that that
happens pretty frequently especially in
in my world in litigation when you're
conversating with somebody do you lose
respect faster when you can tell
somebody's not respecting themselves or
when somebody says something
disrespectful to you when somebody says
something disrespectful to you if I can
if you don't respect yourself that's a
that's a place for me to show you Grace
and kindness and patience like yeah I'll
give you time for that I understand yeah
you shouldn't have said that this is
what I'm thinking yeah you shouldn't
have said that but I'm gonna let it go
you know you shouldn't have said it
versus if they say something like much
uglier that
was only meant to hurt
again pretends on it depends on context
but yeah you can lose you can lose
respect for them much faster when they
choose harm over healing do you think
conflict can be settled at all through
text messages or online messaging or do
you think with when it comes to
friendships professional relationships
romantic relationships it's always going
to be best to hop on the phone video
chat iners meeting yeah I mean they can
be if you and the person are
mature and intelligent and give each
other the benefit of the doubt and not
make a you know Mountain out of a
molehill but if you're not or if you
don't know each other that
well always much wiser to just pick up
the phone let them hear your
voice U that makes a a a big
difference I I do it count I me I do all
the time text text with my wife and oof
I got a response that felt very cold
uh it anytime you get the K text K oh
well okay she they're ready to destroy
me you know my life is over I just got a
k or an m k an m k like there's all
different ways that we go oh that
doesn't sound that doesn't sound good it
depends on the person like my dad my dad
will just text okay to anything really
you you send him I just know that's him
and I'll call him and he'll be like oh
that's fantastic but you know the text
you got so it it just depends on the
person but yeah you're never going to go
wrong getting to hear their voice and
besides a lot of times like hearing your
voice can make somebody's day we we were
we are meant to hear and connect and
speak as humans to it's not good for
humans not to talk to other humans I was
always there's that show I forgot what
it's called it's like they go up they
send them to Alaska for like say spend a
100 days alone in Alaska oh yeah I know
what you're talking about yeah and for
and at first they love it they're so
excited they build their shelter they're
like oh yes I just you know got I just
harvested this uh rabbit and I'm doing
all this but by like 20 days they're
like I haven't spoken to anybody I miss
my friends I miss hearing people's
voices it's it's the loneliness that
gets them it's not their capability I I
was just found found that really
interesting what are some subtle ways
that people can sound more intelligent
they're speaking and like sometimes
people when they'll say when you'll hear
people say if somebody says like a lot
or um that they they don't sound as
intelligent I say I say like a lot num
and I'm like I think I still am pretty
pretty smart but I know I can get better
so what are your thoughts on just some
some subtle ways people can improve yeah
you want to try to eliminate filler
words the best you can but it depends on
context so if you and I are just talking
and I'm just being casual say lacking
them as much as you want but if you're
in front of a presentation a group of
people and you need to persuade like and
un become distractions that's the
problem it's not that they're not
comfortable everybody uses them it's
that they're distractions that
distraction is telling you I'm not
confident I'm not
knowledgeable I'm nervous and people
start to pick up on those little bitty
things so all you need to do is just
replace that filler with silence and you
sound a thousand times more confident
then it sounds
intentional but yeah it's it doesn't
mean that there's something bad about
them I I mean I use them in just normal
everyday
speech but it's when you want
to when you're on a different level of
conversation with
somebody that it makes a difference so
if you're like my boss or something you
see how I just said that if you're like
my boss then if I need to approach you
about a salary or whatever I come up to
you and I
say um yeah okay so like I am okay
here's the thing I like am really
concerned about my you've lost them yeah
you you just wasted 12 seconds of them
going okay whatever com is coming out of
your mouth I'm already not wanting to
hear it or if you say uh hey I hate to
bother you great you just told them I
what I'm about to do is bother you so so
buckle in you know there's these just
phrases and ways to talk that there
aren't going to be the best foot forward
if you want to come off with confidence
so the best way is just to be direct
like if you were talking to your boss
and you wanted a raise saying something
like hey want to talk to you about
something that's super important to me I
I would even make it more specific I i'
like to talk to you about my salary
when's the best time we can visit okay
you know just just right out of the gate
and there's no question because you have
to think of from their point of view as
a as a as somebody who's of the employer
side what what are they thinking they
don't want to be blindsided
either uh so why why do you make it to
where you wait until your face to face
for them to have any clue of what you're
talking about you need to be able to
prep them for that conversation you need
to let them massage it let them think
about
things so the more specific the better
and you think it's better just to leave
with that out of the gate sometimes
people will put a buffer at the
beginning like hey hope hope you're
doing well hope you had a great weekend
hope blah blah blah you just think it's
just like be direct with it yeah exactly
yeah yeah because it they know that's
not that doesn't
matter they know it it's the same way
with delivering bad news
right if if you're going to deliver bad
news same delivering bad news is the
same way of delivering sensitive want to
have a sensitive conversation with
somebody if if you are I need to deliver
bad news and I say hey so how how are
you so how you been I know I know yeah
you're doing good you feeling all right
okay okay well I got I got some things
to tell you and I mean you're just going
just making them Twist Off In The Wind
of going okay what's what's happening
what's going on here are you are you
quitting are you not quitting what's
what's going on versus if you were come
out right out of the gate with bad news
they say to you go I got bad news and
give it a two-c beat I need to let you
go well now now they know great but if
if you have need to have a sensitive
conversation about something it's much
easier to say hey I need to talk to you
about what you said at the party on
Friday when's a good time to talk that'
be very specific and then then they know
then they're
prepared instead of just the vague Tex
we need to talk period nobody likes that
nobody loves that text we need to talk
talk about
what yeah be more specific and if the
other person doesn't respond to that do
you give them any time window before
like I mean like for instance like if
it's a relationship situation you're
texting somebody like hey I'd like to
speak with you about what you said to me
on Friday and they don't respond to you
about it or they beat around the bush or
whatever do you follow up with them them
about it in a few days few like a week
like how does how do you handle that
sometimes that does happen yeah well it
depends how much that person matters to
you but the fact that they don't want to
interact should mean maybe you've made a
mistake on how high up that person is on
your priority list or how important you
are to that person because often you
know people people will want you for
what you give them not the other way
around and so if they're not willing to
talk with you and reason with with you
and and empathize with you and
listen they may not be your person they
they just they might just want to use
you for
whatever I I I feel like if they're not
one to engage that is a big red flag
of they don't value you as much as you
think they do which is a hard
realization how some people just might
they might miss the text they might not
get it they might try and push it off
but understand if it's if it's important
to you it should be important to them
that's a great place for us to end our
convo so Jefferson thank you so much for
your time really appreciated this
conversation um if people want to learn
more about what you're doing if they
want to follow along with you on social
media where's the best place to do that
you can go to Instagram Facebook
wherever search Jefferson Fisher you'll
find it I have a law firm where I help
people in personal injury called Fisher
firm uh yeah so I'm there awesome man
well thank you so much once again for
coming on the show really enjoyed the
conversation and I think my audience is
going to love it as well awesome thanks
for having me Doug I enjoyed it man you
got it thank you so much for watching if
you like this video I really think
you're going to like this video as well
I'll see you there
