welcome everyone to the
lecturn the video you're about to see is
a discussion with James filler James's
book Hyer NE neoplatonism and the
history of being it's had a profound
impact on me and I had the great
pleasure of getting to talk to James
about the core argument of his book that
tries to reorient us away from thinking
of the world primarily made up out of
individually existing things that enter
enter into interactions and Inter
relations with each other and argue
instead that
relationality is itself more primordial
more fundamental to understanding the
nature of reality and why
intelligibility the fact that reality is
informative and make sense to us is a
good and fundamental way for tracking
what is most real James and I talk about
his core argument we talk about
neoplatonism we talk about hoger we talk
about possible convergences between his
argument and what we see happening
within physics and
biology part of the point of this video
is to raise James
profile James deserves to be more well
known I consider his work Central and
crucial for the pivot point we are at in
history right
now so sit back and I hope you will
enjoy this discussion with James filler
welcome everybody to an episode of the
lecturn I'm really excited about this
this is a long time coming and uh James
and I have had a near Miss where we
almost met in person and and then we've
had off camera discussion and uh we both
realized that uh we could carry on a
very good public conversation together
and for those of you who don't remember
uh this is a book I have been promoting
almost everywhere where I do any work of
any philosophical depth which is his
amazing book how toer neoplatonism and
the history of being relation as
ontological ground and this is the one
and only James filler here so welcome
James we're here to talk about your book
but first uh maybe just tell us uh a
little bit about yourself and how you
came to write this book well um it's a
kind of a long story it was my second um
go around at uh pursuing a PhD the first
time was in Catholic University Len in
Belgium and uh things didn't quite work
out there and uh a few years later I uh
went back to pursue my pH PhD in
philosophy at the University of Georgia
and of course you have to come up with a
disertation topic and so I was wrestling
with that and uh I don't really remember
how but uh the idea of being as relation
the the problem that arises after day
cart has always you know kind of noded
at me a little bit you know Mind Body
how do we how do we know anything at all
how do we how do we avoid
solipsism um and this came to me I don't
know how don't remember how uh but it
did and um that ended up being the topic
of my dissertation I was kind of scared
when I proposed it because nobody at the
University was really that was not
really anybody's wheelhouse uh but I got
a good friend of mine to to guide guide
me through it and uh I was worried that
it was going to be too big because I my
vision was to start with the presocratic
and and go all the way up through
um contemporary heiger of course and
even even Beyond touching on process
philosophy and and relational ontology
Beyond heiger and uh but fortunately
they were up for it um I did have to cut
it down it was 220,000 words when I
finished and they made me cut it down to
170 palgrave made me cut it down even
further to 120 so so um so yeah so and
that's how it came
about logistically if you oh yeah so I
think when we spoke last time you said
that you're taking at least some of that
um excluded material and you're putting
it into a second book that you're
working on right now yeah substance
ontology and the crisis of reent should
be out December January that's what
Amazon keeps saying of this year yeah oh
I'm looking forward to it then I'll ask
I'll send you a copy they give me six
I'll send you one please James I would
love that thank you very much sure uh
yeah my book just came out Awakening
from the meaning crosis it's on it's on
Amazon and available right now okay take
um I'm very much looking forward to that
and maybe what we can do is we can I
want to go through the first book um and
then uh you know ask some uh exploratory
questions of you um and elus questions
sort of for further elucidation and then
maybe we'll get a chance to touch on uh
what like sort of you can give us a bit
of a preview of what the argument is
going to look like in the second
book so uh the place I'd like to start
is uh you've got this core argument uh
for that that's and I mean uh there's
there's a historical argument but
there's also what you could call a
conceptual argument the conceptual
argument is something along the lines
that there doesn't seem to be any way of
getting relations out of substance
understood in the Aristotelian sense as
the bearer of properties that that which
corresponds to the subject and a subject
predicate logic uh that sort that sort
of model so please everyone note that we
don't mean sort of substance as it mean
is understood today just as stuff it it
has this more distinct meaning it have
this independently existing thing that
can bear uh predicates in some fashion
is that fair enough for our discussion
James yeah I think the independence
aspect of it that it's independent was
important for me yeah coming to this and
of course that became sort of Paramount
there was a tension within
aristotelianism between the theory of
knowing that seemed to involve
universals and then this idea that
reality was made up of substances that
were Radical individuals if I can put it
that way and yeah and the nominalists
seemed to have chosen to privilege the
the radical individuals over like over
the real patterns in the world kind of
thing but you're you're making an
argument that's not specifically
directed at nalism I've seen a lot of
those arguments ments and those are
important arguments but what I found
intriguing about your argument was that
no no you didn't do any of that you went
right at sort of the have I can call it
the logic and maybe you could give sort
of that core argument about what I know
I
know did it make sure I can do it again
well maybe you know I've I've read it
several times and I've taught it in a
couple courses I've used your book
frequently um well let me let me how
about this I'll try and I'll probably
mangle it and then you'll be able to
correct it how about that okay so the
idea is you've got an Aristotelian
ontology and it's a very it's an
ontology that to give credit to
Aristotle sort of sits well with our
Common Sense uh our language divides the
world up into nouns and verbs or you
know and or at least subjects and
predicates and you know there are
things um and and then and then the idea
is the properties belong to the things
you know they're proper to the thing um
that sort of idea and then the the
problem you have is where are relations
in that
ontology um if you try to make the
relation a property of a substance then
it seems like you don't need anything
more than the one thing in order to have
the relation and yet relations are
quintessentially between things they
require a multiplicity for their
existence and of course that will work
either for this thing you know this you
know that's a completely symmetrical
argument um and then if you try to say
that the relation somehow exists uh uh
independently of them you have the
problem of yes but where does that
actually sit in that ontology uh because
the ontology says that what are what
exists are substances and predicates and
then third you need relations to have
anything happen or to make anything
knowable and so it seems we need to make
a decision here we can't get relations
out of substances we need relations we
as soon as we start talking about with
them we're already granting them an
independent existence well why not
understand relations as uh what exists
primarily and the things or the relata
are actually located or have their
ontological location within a relational
field did I do justice to your argument
yeah I think you know I I saw you talk
about this on a podcast I can't remember
which one but I was I was really pleased
because when I made the argument
initially and when I was coming up with
it and when I was writing it I was like
I hope this is clear I hope this makes
sense I hope and and when I saw you
discuss it I was like well yay it it it
clearly does make sense because that's
pretty much it the only thing I would
add is um the part of the problem that I
found is that to be in independent in
the first place required a relation re
relationality because to be independent
means there's something you're
independent from yeah yeah yes so um it
had to be it had to be prior to the
independence and I thought of that and
you know because you talk about heiger
it's not unfair to talk about it I
thought about that even in sort of the
the primary notion of standing out
existence and that is a right that that
that is an inherently relational notion
in and of itself that very notion of
existence and I've sort of supplemented
that this argument and I want to know if
you're okay with it I thought one of the
strong implications of your argument uh
and I think you you I mean especially
when you go into the Christian the
cidian fathers uh you know the idea that
the logos that intelligibility itself is
an inherently relational notion uh it
doesn't make any sense uh to talk about
things making sense without there being
uh relations and that has that I think
that's entailed by the we need relations
in order for there to be knowledge kind
of uh argument yeah I think I think
that's I think that's fair I find is
when I teach um heraclitis and
Parmenides normally when I teach
especially my intro courses I always
start with heraclius and per mines
because heraclitis is the philosopher if
everything's constantly changing or at
least that's the way he's presented I
think he's more nuanced than that yeah I
do too but he's that's way he's
presented and permin uses the the one
nothing changes nothing you know it's
all
Eternal Herod cus as he's understood
clearly has a problem it makes knowledge
impossible because everything's both
true and false Plato makes this argu
Theus and I think that's right on that
understanding of heric colitis but
perenties has the same problem if
everything's only one then there's
nothing to know that's right knowledge
requires a knower and a known um and so
they're already has to be a multiplicity
if you're going to have knowledge at all
so parities has kind of the same problem
so how do we get past that so I then do
I make a convergent argument uh that's
sort of more cogy based which is the
idea the notion of information which of
course overlaps between cognitive
science and physics and the idea of
information is inherently relational it
is a relation between events uh relation
between Alternatives uh information is
an integration of uh identity
differentiation it's and you know and
without
information knowing isn't possible
cognition isn't possible and then we're
get and then you get fundamental ideas
that are emerging in physics uh that um
you that you can't make any clean
distinction between energy and
information and energy is also a
relational notion relativity is a
relational notion entanglement is a
relational notion uh the fact that the
the uh the non-duality of light as
particle and wave is in inherently so
our physics also seems to be driving
down to the conclusion that at the
bottom the the ground of I don't like to
talk about bottoms but sort of the the
ground of things is you know
relationality and does that sit well
with you that sort of convergence
argument that it it seems like it should
uh here let me press a little bit more
before I let you answer because you know
if this argument is about your argument
is about sort of our fundamental ability
to uh conceive of an ontology and
physics is in some sense pushing towards
that or is at least regulated by that
ideal then your argument should bear and
we should see that sort of coming to
fruition as in within sort of
fundamental physics yeah I think I think
that's fair uh I find the idea of uh
entanglement uh very
interesting especially and uh I'm a bit
puzzled by it sure I quite understand it
but uh the idea that things affect
things at vast distances like that
that's that's something I find really
interesting I'd like to know more about
it well and the important thing that's
coming now is and I mean this really
would strengthen your argument is the
idea that
SpaceTime all that that the the thing
that was taken to be the container for
all the substantial things is now itself
thought to be emergent from the in ENT
non-spatial non-temporal relationality
of entanglement uh P does is talking
about this stuff in his new book
entitled by the way the one uh where
he's arguing that to return to that idea
uh the neoplatonic sense of the one is
where physics needs to go in order to
try and get past its impass as it's
trying to reconcile relativity uh and
quantum mechanics together so I find it
exciting that you've got sort of your
work that's coming out of the ancient
tradition and working at a very uh you
know pure ontological level seems to be
converging you know top down conceptual
with this bottom up um uh uh empirical
work I thought I thought that lends a
lot of plausibility to your case thank
you that would be interesting for me to
learn more about the physics because I
don't know near enough about
it so I wanted I wanted to go on there's
so there's two things that uh come to my
mind and they're related um and the
first is
I'm unclear in the book okay uh whether
or not pure relationality is that which
Lies Beneath relations and relata or
whether or not it is itself kind some
kind of
relation um okay I'll let you answer go
ahead yeah I think I think that's
a interestingly when I or maybe not
interestingly but interestingly to me
when I started started it it was the
idea that relation was uh fundamentally
and ontologically prior to
Alla but as I kept thinking about
it um and it's it it converges with
platinus because for platinus the one
emanates because it just overflows
there's just too much of it it desires I
think that's his word his desires um to
overflow and relationality
has to relate something it seeks to
relate something yes um so there has to
be relation there has to be something
that it relates um and this is where I
think you know you brought up the cidian
fathers this is where I think the
understanding of the Trinity really kind
of came together for me um but if it's
going to be ontologically prior to to
Independent Rada then it has to be a
rela that's itself relation and pure
relationality yeah and uh so yeah I
think the answer is
both well that's probably the answer I
was looking for because it struck me
that one could make a symmetrical
argument that I I I couldn't see I I
could run a a filler type argument about
I couldn't get rata out of pure
relationality either um I was trying you
know you know you you have the thing you
know the neoplatonic thing about you
know it it it relates to itself but the
problem with that and this of course
deviled the ancient NE Pless is you know
yeah but how does where did that come
from right you know because this bending
back on itself seems to require like a
space or something other than it it
requires an otherness uh through which
and uh and and and you see this showing
up in Neil platonism as the endless
intervention and mediations right of you
know you get more and more intermediates
trying to some how Square the circle of
getting um difference out of identity
and other things like that now you make
it very clear and I think you're right
that this relationality is De deeper
than identity and difference and I take
that to actually strengthen the point
I'm making if it is deeper than identity
indifference if it's that ER
relationality then I don't see how you
can get the Rada out of the relations
either I think you need like I I think
it has to be like you say both and
neither kind of thing so yeah like was
going to say something but I was just
going to get myself in trouble because I
was going to end up being incoherent and
losing so stop well the the reason I
mentioned that is
because um uh you know this leads to
sort of a non-u uh understanding of what
we're talking about here and that means
that I see a lot of resonance you went
into the capian fathers and that's a
completely legitimate thing to do and
and we'll come back to that uh your book
is had quite a huge influence on um
several Christians that I know largely
because I pointed your book to them um I
think it was actually instrumental in my
friend uh Jordan Hall becoming a
Christian um that's a blessing so
um but I see the same language
especially if you if we Grant at least
Prima fascia this plausibility of this
non-duality right this this this is is
very similar to the way you know Nishida
nishitani uh in the kyota school
described shata right it's it's and you
know it's it follows on Nara that it's
empty even of emptiness like it's it's
deeper than like The Emptiness is not
absence it's deeper than absence and
presence right and it's that kind of
idea and it's it's this I I I I I mean
who knows because we're getting at the
depths of the limits I should say of our
conceptual abilities here but those what
you were arguing for granted what we've
just discussed and what I see in the
kyota school's discussion of especially
of aspects of Zen seem deeply deeply
convergent to to me I I think so too one
of my one of my regrets is my deficiency
in eastern uh philosophy I don't I've
you know studied a little bit but I but
but not not near enough I think there is
a
a I saw on one of your podcast you were
talking about the book and you said I'm
a you said I'm a pluralist and I'm not
sure filler would agree with me or not
uh well I'm not really so much a
pluralist but I do agree with you at the
same time because uh I do think the
Eastern I do think the Eastern way of
thinking um is closer to this relational
yeah onthology than Western certainly
Western is
um
my don't want to use the word intuition
because that has a different meaning but
my feeling is that
uh it's still too indefinite uh it it
dissolves things too much um one of the
things I think is important about the
Trinity is that there are still a lot in
it uh and uh you know the father son and
spirit and uh I could be wrong clearly
but I think the Eastern understanding of
this ends up being too um too much
nothingness I don't know I mean uh I
don't know either you you do I mean you
do have the Buddha the Dharma and the S
understood ontologically like the father
and the Son and the Holy Spirit um and
and they they map on also pretty readily
to you know where the father is more
swords being and the the sun is the
logos is intelligibility Dharma is like
that and then you have the spirit
participation and that's the sa and
you I'm not I'm not I'm not I'm not
Huxley I'm not saying they're saying the
same thing I I understand but I do think
when we move towards ultimacy uh a kind
of convergence uh does seem apparent
between these two uh I've been sort of
it's not just me you see in the kyota
school something like Zen neoplatonism
starting to take shape where you have
people like Nishida and nishitani
talking about Zen but they're clearly
aware of the Christian neoplatonist
especially uh eart and also given your
argument haiger and I I totally take
your argument to be wellmade that heiger
is basically a neoplatonist without
acknowledging it um and I I think uh
well I I I I don't maybe that's a little
too strong maybe you wouldn't want to
put it that way but I think you you come
close to saying something like that I do
and I think it's interesting because uh
there was this there's this quote I I
put in the it's in the book and my
dissertation where hydar was uh I think
hydr doesn't really understand what he's
getting at I think he's seeing something
that he that he that he really is is
struggling to figure out how to express
um because there's a story uh where he's
reading I think it's Suzuki yeah if I'm
not if I'm not wrong and he he's reading
the guy and he tells a friend of his
this guy saying what I've been trying to
say my entire career yeah yeah and he's
you got the dialogue with the Japanese
other and you've got a whole bunch of
things there's a couple books on heiger
and Asian philosophy and heiger and
Asian influences he was not totally
ignorant of this stuff um at all later
stuff he he deals you know he's he's
dialoguing with them explicitly he's
dialoging with them
so so that's interesting but um
first of all let's so let's put a pin in
that that we've got that there and and
thank you for uh well part of what I'm
doing is checking in that I'm using your
work well I mean I'm trying to do stuff
Beyond it beyond what you did but stuff
that you would at least say well that's
a reasonable thing to try and do with my
work so that's good I'm glad to hear
that yeah now the one that a lot of
people I think are very interested in is
and I mentioned uh already Jordan Jordan
Hall uh as you make a very strong case
for mapping this
realization of reality as this
primordial relationality right nonu
relationality or something like that I'm
trying to come up with an adjective that
qualifies it the way we've discussed it
right and the Christian I I'll use the
Greek word because the modern word is
too trivializing the the Christian uh
symbolon of the trinity
right uh
and and the idea that again I'll try
your argument and then you tell me uh
first of all I want to praise you that
was the first time I've ever seen a
presentation of the Trinity that I
thought was insightful and wasn't just
conceptual
mess right uh you have to you have be be
patient with me because you know
whenever you try and read through you
all the attempts to interpret the in
Trinity get declared heresies right all
the attempts to resolve the tension and
then people then just say
endlessly like spiraling stuff uh but
then you laid it out in a way that I
found uh insightful so the idea is we
have this realization and I'm using that
the way I use that word both senses
right of Ultimate Reality having this
nature and then the Christian symbolon
captures that with the Trinity where uh
each one of the members is a relat but
that relat is inherently relational
because each of is this the right word
the titles I think maybe that's fair
each of the titles right yeah yeah okay
thanks each of the title yeah each of
the titles is in inherently relational
term father son uh Holy Spirit um and
then and and and then the idea is uh you
know each one represent you know things
like being and intelligibility and
participation and how they're all
interwoven and then you make the
very good ex exegetical historical
argument that this was taken very
clearly into uh
Orthodox uh theology especially the
capian fathers and was uh quite strongly
preserved in what has come to be called
Eastern Orthodox Christianity um a
friend of mine Bishop Maximus is reading
your book and we're going to uh we're
going to talk about it now that to me
was and I James I'm not attributing
anything to you I know you weren't
necessarily trying to do any kind of
apologetics that's a powerful argument
and I and I this is not an insult or
this is not some s of sort of Judo move
that's a powerful argument for
Christianity well I'm not going to deny
that there was at least a apologetic
hope uh in making the uh um you know and
making the
was it's a work of philosophy that was
my goal I was getting a PhD that but
certainly there was a hope that I would
come up with something that was
persuasive and that that did because I
agree with you that the discussions of
the Trinity have been
mostly nonsensical you either have too
much difference or too much identity and
and you know you can't really and then
you end up just saying oh well it's a
mystery and we can't understand it yeah
which ultimately is true uh you know to
cover my kind of backside a little bit I
put the quote in the in the book you
know St Gregory I think it's the
Theologian can't remember which one
exactly said any attempt to delve into
the understanding the Trinity will you
lead to Madness and uh and there's some
truth to that and so that was my little
caveat say look I'm
not now if this is retical I i' I'd
renounce it but this is the way I see it
it would be a hard case to make you out
as a heretic given your closeness to so
many people that have been declared
Orthodox I
mean I don't think you're in any danger
um I mean this is a powerful idea that
there's some there that we we we get
this notion uh uh of the nature of
reality fundamental reality as
fundamentally you know non-dual
relationality and then we have a way of
imagin apprehending it and you know I
don't mean that word dismissively imagin
is very important in my epistemology we
have a way of imagin apprehending it and
participating in it with this symbolon
of the Trinity given to us by
Christianity which is like that's very
very powerful and I can see why uh I
mean uh I I
I I will be a little bit vulnerable here
and say that that calls to me
uh in a very strong way um
I don't think I could be a Christian I
think I unlike you I would be
immediately declared a heretic and I I
don't I I don't want that job uh but
uh what
what sorry I'm stumbling
because all that and I mean everything I
just said it still strikes me that this
is not how most of Christianity is
presented or even understood
well it's certainly not the way Western
Christianity is presented and understood
yes I'm going to make a deliberate I did
already I'm going to make a deliberate
exclusion of Eastern Orthodoxy clearly
uh I you you that case is made strongly
in your book so let's talk about Western
Christianity then yeah I think
I
um one of the okay I don't know if this
addresses the issue or not
um well
protestantism uh I mean clearly to me my
wife who was a Lutheran before we got
married and she became Orthodox it kind
of gets mad at me for for saying this
but I think it's true it's it's clearly
true Martin Luther stood before the the
counsil and said you know I have to obey
my own conscience and uh that once you
make that move uh you're making a
you're becoming independent Arbiter of
what is true and and you see that in
protestantism with the constant
fracturing into all these different
groups almost where it is well it's
whatever my individual
interpretation is and and and that's
authoritative and normative and and
there's no real real way to to counter
that um I think well forgive me if I'm
wrong and I think Catholicism is is kind
of
follow following that same path I think
it started in that that path so much but
I think I think it's following in that
path especially uh
contemporary uh Catholicism there's a
tension there I think I see
conservatives fighting against it but I
think I think I think it's going that
way um one of the ways I understand the
difference and this may not be helpful
to anybody but me is Orthodoxy
um has an ancient mindset it it it
understands things in an ancient way of
thinking uh Catholicism understands in
things in a medieval way of thinking
with the feudal system and and you know
all that kind of stuff and protestantism
is a is a modernity yeah very much
modernity but uh but modernity and the
medieval uh because one thing that's not
thrown out with the scientific
Revolution you still you still you still
see it in Newton is the is the substance
onology and the subject predicate logic
of Aristotle dominating all the way
through and I take it you don't say it
directly in the book uh uh although you
you make use of heiger who does make us
this kind of critique that that
substance ontology and the subject
predicate logic that goes with it is one
of the things that drives us towards
this kind of you know these the isolated
autonomous individ I mean the autonomy
becomes the the quintessential thing of
the Enlightenment to the the European
Enlightenment and that seems to me to
just be a cartisian
internalization of the notion of artian
substance if I can put it that way yeah
I think that I think um but uh but I
would probably say decart's just
recognizing something that was already
there that's what I'm saying I'm saying
it's running all the way from Aristotle
all the way through in in in in a deep
way um do you so I mean you make this
argument about the the div the div the
diverging paths and so and this is a
little too simplistic but at least for
purposes of getting the discussion going
so it's it's kind of like you're arguing
that Eastern
Christianity basically chooses to follow
the neoplatonic path and go the way of
relationality and Western Christianity
chooses to go down the path of Aristotle
and the substance ontology and the fact
that it leads to nominalism and
protestantism are evidence for your
argument is is that fair to say that
yeah I think
it's I I know I'm putting you on the hot
seat a little here but but yeah I think
it's absolutely fair and I really do
want to say that and I do think that's
true but I'm I'm not sure every Orthodox
uh Theologian would appreciate being
labeled
neoplatonic um well they should I mean I
position as well I mean I I mean if if
if dionis and Maximus are important um
then you're a neoplatonist in some and
Bishop Maximus doesn't disagree with
that he thinks that Christian
neoplatonism is a Transfiguration of
pagan neoplatonism I'll give you that I
think there's some I think there's
something emergently new about it uh but
I still think it's a form of
neoplatonism through and through I agree
so that's interesting because goes
towards some of uh
um uh the later part of the book and
right where you you then say that you
know Hyer is coming along and he's
trying to break out of subject predicate
logic he's trying to break out of
substance ontology he's trying to break
out of the whole cartisian all the
disast all the disastrous dichotomies
right and he's trying to get to this and
he's getting to this notion of ala and
being right and and all of this and then
you make I think a very convincing
argument that he's basically feeling his
way back towards this neoplatonic
version uh uh that Vision I should say
that we're talking about here but now I
get a sense and I'm going to be having
sort of U an ongoing dialogue with um
yanis neuser about this but there's
other people too like rowski and others
but I get a sense that Hader can't get
there because he's got this antipathy
towards
Plato um what do you think
yeah I'm not as familiar with his book
on Plato as I ought to be um but uh yeah
I think
there's whether it's an antipathy
towards Plato I I know he U at least I
my understanding is he explicitly
rejects neoplatonism yeah um which is a
little ironic and I think
um he explicitly Rejects and implicitly
Embraces it yeah exactly
exactly but I think it's his own
conceptual limitations that um prevent
him from from seeing what he's actually
trying to make the AR he's trying to
make um whether those or he's still too
bound up in
substance
um maybe he's still too bound up in the
Aristotelian understanding the relation
which I think is is is a problem with a
lot of current process and relational
we'll come to that in a sec I want to
bring that up I'm wondering also if
nich's you know deep influence
on uh on haiger and even Kirk guard's
influence on haiger may also prevent him
from giving the neoplatonic view a fair
Shake
possibly yeah yeah be worth worth
exploring so towards the end and and I
know you you don't have you don't give
much space to it so I I don't want I'm
not going to limit to you to what you
said in the book because I know you're
going to do more I sorry I hope and
suspect you're going to do more in the
second book around this you sort of step
back and say of course there are
existing relational ontologies already
there are processed relational uh
thinkers a lot of white
heans understand themselves as processed
relational um thinkers now here's a
question I have before you get to your
criticisms uh about uh cuz and I want
you to bring them up but it seems to me
though that they are they are putting
their finger on something that was
lacking in ancient neoplatonism was
neoplatonism tends to Creek towards that
Parian static kind of ontology and the
whian process philosophy understands
this relationality is inherently
creative flowing ongoing in some way and
also therefore brings it a little more
closely to the physics I was talking
about
earlier yeah uh I saw I caught this in
one of your podcast too where you were
talking about it being too static and
not Dynamic yeah not sufficiently
Dynamic um and I was you know I think I
just came across that last night or the
night before so I'm still kind
of working with that um
it I
think okay let me ask the question why
is dy dynamism
important because I think the dynamism
is important because I think you do need
the self-organization the self relation
the self organization the emanation and
emergence the to make the platonic world
the neoplatonic worldview work okay I
think that's fundamental and the fact
that that shows up in the very grammar
of our cognition cogn is inherently
bottom up top down so the grammar of
intelligibility the grammar of being
like this is inherently dynamical
self-organizing right and and if and if
they have a fundamentally participatory
relation you can see the argument I'm
making this like it it go you get a very
strong epistemological ontological
coherence if you bring that Dynamic
self-organization into it so the so the
emanation nature of neoplatonism itself
is a dynamism well and but it's also you
know it's emanation and emergence
because it's of course procession and
return it's right right and and the
later neoplatonists especially aragena
right and take pains to try and like get
that to be equ like not just this way
because they they they're trying to very
and I I think I agree with them they're
trying to avoid kind of a gnosticism
where you know the emanation is a degrad
platinus thinks matter is evil right and
they're they're trying to stay away uh
uh from and I agree with that that I any
ontology that's going to make
physicality evil or embodiment evil is
one I'm going to criticize deeply and so
I think one of the one of the things
that acts as a ball workk against that
in neoplatonism is to really make sure
you properly emphasize the dynamic
nature okay I wouldn't I wouldn't
disagree with that necessarily um but I
think there's
a I would I don't like the word static
but I think it may be accurate um but I
think there has to be a uh a field
within which that dynamism occurs yes
yes yes I don't believe anything comes
out of nothing you know I'm kind of
committed to that XEX Neil
neide um so there has to be it has to
already be there in some sense in order
to
become what is going to become and
that's what I think the underlying field
of relationality is I I I get that and I
think field is a good is a good metaphor
I I like that is and is that part of the
problem you have with so one issue
that sort
of uh and I I might be unfair to
whiteheadian Whitehead is a very complex
thinker you know and I've been reading
him very deeply and trying to understand
but one of the things that sort of it's
like
you know and this is part of Plato's
critique of pratus not of not of
heraclitus I don't think right uh which
is if everything's purely flowing
knowledge is
impossible uh it's because there's
nothing to know because the moment you
knew it it it has ceased to be kind of
thing um and so there would be no
intelligibility which mean an
intelligibility is our primary sense of
realness comparative intelligibility is
it something like that that that there's
got to be something other than process
at work I think no uh and again uh you
know all these people
deserve Fuller attention from me
um but what I saw what I see and my
primary complaint about what they're
doing is their understanding of relation
they're still understand relation as as
having to be between two things so it's
it's upon so so you end up with this
infinite regress of Rada that just keeps
going down and down and down and down
and down and I and I saw that in
Whitehead too with his understanding of
event um I I have a similar critique of
Whitehead which is he and I think this
lines up with what you just said is it
the ontological principle that uh potent
uh possibility and potentiality are
completely dependent on actuality that
actuality has an ristian priority and
that's always bothered me because you
know I read bracken's book because in
the East it's exactly the you have an
exactly symmetrical intuition right you
know which just says no no you have to
have in order for there to be any
actuality there has to be a field of
possibility that's real right and and
and you need something and I take
platinus to be arguing that well maybe
not platinus uh but some interpretations
of platinus uh I got to be really
careful here
um that what we're talking about when
we're talking about Ultimate Reality is
something that holds together actuality
and possibility in some deep way and and
I and I've all
because if you make
potentiality own completely dependent on
actuality you do have the problem of
right understanding
if there are laws and I mean that both
scientifically and just
ontologically laws differ from
descriptions in that you require they
they are counterfactual
supporting so a description just says
how things are a law says how things can
be even if they are not that way now
okay counterfactual supporting the
counterfactuals have to be true they
have to be real they have to be real
Alternatives they have to be real
in some there has to be something that
makes them true and it can't be our idea
about them because they're laws right
this is the realist interpretation of
laws and so you you need you need
something real again in possibility that
is just as real as events happening um
in
actuality could that be
um going back to a neoplatonic
understanding and to be to be honest you
know this is my mind just runs off um I
think I'm a little bit unfair to
Aristotle in in my book I think he's
more complex than I present him I think
his substance understanding his ideas of
self-thinking thought uh being pure
actuality that all other potentialities
are striving for um
um I think
is kind of mitigates the substance um
thing that I don't think so I disagree
with you on that I think it's I think I
think it enshrines the subject predicate
logic as ultimate well you know thought
thinking thought thinking is him
attempting to keep the subject predicate
logic as
ultimate yeah and my my professor Edward
Halper the ug kind of argued the same
thing that the self-thinking thought is
radically simp simple Oneness um and I
had a discussion with him in class once
and he said well if I'm going to make my
argument then there has to be some
multiplicity in self-thinking thought
you know because a cabinet is not a a
cat so there if if that's going to be
the ultimate form of all things that all
things are F there pure actuality and
there still has to be a multiplicity in
there and I went away saying yeah yeah
yeah um but then I thought about it you
know one of those moments where a few
days later I was like wish I said this
um if you understand
function as critical to form and I think
Aristotle does um then there already is
a fundamental multiplicity in
self-thinking thought because it has two
functions it thinks and it moves it's
also the prime mover so if it's got two
functions then then there has to be a
multiplicity in the actuality within
self-thinking thought itself um which I
never talked to helper about that again
but that's that's something like I say
I'm still I still like platonus critique
of that that it still it still Falls
away from ultimacy because you need a
principle explaining what holds the it
together there's an implicit I think
there's an implicit Dynam I mean maybe
what you're saying is that you know God
the UNM M has some ultimate form um of
self-organization that keeps it it all
together and then I find that
problematic because then you're one
you're one you are one step below the
one which is you know the Fountain of
all possible forms kind of thing um yeah
so anyways um uh that was attention I'm
sorry pardon me no no no no no don't
apologize I'm enjoying this this is what
I want to be doing I mean some of this
gets into very nuts and bolts things and
some people following this might be
going what what does it matter well it
it matters in that right the these the
these as we said early this right this
isn't Ivory Tower stuff this ramifies
back out into fundly different
interpretations and therefore different
historical Pathways of Christianity in
very very powerful ways that affect
lives even today um and it's not just
Arcane stuff yeah we're talking about
we're talking about kind of like the the
conceptual genetics of a lot of a lot of
European thought in in really important
ways
there's there are deep ethical
implications yeah exactly and um that's
something that I can see possibly
working out as uh relational ethics uh I
think I think if you come at reality
with this substance understanding then I
as an independent existence become
supremely important or that but that you
see but that that's exactly the problem
and you know and and and the Protestant
cartisian ideal of the uh individual
conscience or the Kito ergosum right
this is actually flying in the face of
cognitive science I'm doing a lot of
work on the nature of rationality we
don't work well monologic we are
rational no there's a lot of work going
into this we work dialogically our
rationality is designed uh to work
dialogically that how it's op operates
and we are Mal forming it and therefore
tending to make it malfunction when we
limit it to a monological way of being
okay uh yeah this is this
is this is something that came up as I
was watching um your your lecture at
U oh I always I had it like you um
Savannah r r r Roston I keep wanting to
say roll
Ron yeah um yeah and the the one of
the couple things um let me try and get
my thoughts coherent one of the things
that um shocked me and you know kind of
slapped me in the face when I first read
Aristotle long long ago was and on the
soul he talks about the Mind becoming
what it knows mhm when when
when so there's a union between the
knower and the known and not just a
metaphorical Union it's an on real
ontological Union yeah it's I think it's
part of his argument why the brain can't
be the Mind why the mind and the Brain
have to be
separate um so that kind of
uh really kind of wow that's weird U and
uh which kind of leads
s when I teach my classes I and we talk
about reason I say there's two kinds of
reasoning there's discursive reasoning
which ends up being uh deductive and
inductive you see that in and there are
other things but I think they can be
subsumed under um one of those two
models uh and there's non-discursive
reasoning um this non-discursive
reasoning reasoning is an immediate
grasp and I think it's what Plato is
talking about when he talks about the
philosopher leaving the cave yes I agree
nois yeah and and I
think I think that has to be what
Aristotle is getting at when he talks
about the mind and its object being one
this non-discursive reasoning Y is this
ontological Union with what I know it's
this um it's the difference between
knowing my wife knowing my wife and
knowing a person who's called my wife
yes yeah yeah knowing things about my
wife and knowing my wife um so I think
that's important and I think that's I
think this is my my criticism of the
Enlightenment is that's what it
lost I make a very similar criticism I
talk about that uh there are multiple
ways of knowing and of course in in
ancient Greek thought you see this even
captured in different uh Greek terms
there of course is there's something
analogous to propositional knowing which
becomes to the Forefront um and and
becomes tyrannical um it holds like a
monopoly on our understanding of knowing
and then of course there's knowing how
and some philosophers have acknowledged
this uh procedural knowing and and what
what's interesting in cognitive science
is each of this ways of knowing has a
different sense of realness and a
different kind of memory uh associated
with it there's perspectival knowing
knowing what it's like to be you like
and this intrinsically involves
Consciousness and then there's this
deeper part participatory knowing
knowing by being coupled to uh
participating in the same principles and
patterns it hasn't as you say it's an
ontological joining um that's uh uh and
what's happening in cognitive science or
at least what's called 4E cognitive
science is these nonpropositional kinds
of knowing are coming to the for as and
and and that's a basis for a critique of
the Enlightenment reduction of all the
kinds of knowing to merely the
propositional kind of knowing
no it's interesting and what it what
this also holds out James is the
possibility that if there is genuinely a
structure of emanation and emergence to
cognition and now and I don't mean just
propositionally given what I just said
and there is this emanation and
emergence relation and then the knowing
is a relation of participation and
coupling then you have strong
Transcendence the kind of stuff platinus
talked about where we can we can know
and therefore be at different levels of
realization both how we are realized as
agents and how the world discloses
itself as an arena for Action to us and
I think that is very spiritually
significant yeah I mean it's Mystics
that's what the mystics are after I
think so I think so and what's
interesting is I'm teaching a course on
the cognitive science of religion is you
can the the now I think I'm going to
well defend this I'm turning it into
book you can make a very plausible
rigorous argument from within very
rigorous you know cognitive science
analytic philosophy that for what I just
said that converges with this with the
mystical vision and then we have the
possibility of a kind of philosophy that
was exemplified in people like platinus
but that is very hard to find um more
recently maybe Spinosa as a as a as a
more somebody within modernity that was
able to do that at the same time kind of
thing all
right so tell me a little bit more uh
because we got a little bit uh uh I I I
I I forced the
agression you said it and but I want I
want to give you more more space about
it you think the process philosophers
are still Bound in some way to the
substance
ontology well I hadn't thought of it in
those terms uh well they seem to still I
if I OD you you seem to be saying
they're still prioritizing the relata
over the relations and that's ultimately
a substance ontology isn't it you're
right I agree with you and uh I just
least today I was maybe when I wrote the
book I was in those terms but today I
wasn't I was thinking of it as being
stuck with Aristotle's understanding of
relation but that is founded upon his
and I think I do make this argument in
the book that's founded upon his
understanding of substance yeah but
how can relation itself be a substance
yeah I agree I agree and and so that
that just throws all sorts of wrenches I
think in the framework right there but
yeah I think that's what they're I think
they are still I think they're trying to
get out of it but they're I think it's
their um commitment to this okay we'll
call it substance understanding of
relation I call it pro because that's
the Greek word that she is towards a
thing yeah
yeah yeah and and like I said I think I
think and that's how we got on the
degression I think that reverberates
with this the prioritization the
absolutization of actuality over
possibility right I I think those two
those are the two the two things that
sort of press against me when I look
into Whitehead's processed relational
philosophy I think some of the more
recent
whiteheadian um are are moving out of it
um I think Bracken in The Divine Matrix
is really trying to break free from it
although he he still falls into it in
places um I think some of the other
people um are are trying to get free
it's very it reminds me uh only by
analogy of your point about haiger that
there feels like there's this turning
and groping and moving uh towards
something it would be good if there was
a more
continual explicit dialogue by people
like somebody I think who has the talent
um and uh the expertise like Matt seal
to engage with you know with the neop
platon like a much more explicit di
dialogue between right the ne
neoplatonic Vision as presented by you
and what the more recent processed
philosophers I think is best exemplified
in his work um are trying to do I I'm
Matt if you happen to watch this and you
want to have a discussion with me about
that I would uh I would dearly like
that J coming towards uh the end we sort
of covered off a lot of you the this
book now so I would like to move to you
giving us sort of a bit of a pricey
about the next one and what we can
expect for it and I'm very eager for it
and well uh as we've talked about it's
the missing part of the the first book
um the first book was intended to go
much more deeply into both sides of the
path right um but space limitations made
me pick pick a path to focus on and so
the the substance path got short shrift
um this this book
um picks up pretty much with the
Scholastics and goes from the
Scholastics through decart in a much
deeper and um you know where I say one
or two lines about coinus or SC whatever
um that's all expanded into to an
argument basically justifying my claim
um and I think I think the
problem I think the problem with
Scholastic understanding of God um is
that it uh Embraces this substance
notion and turns God into this uh
radical one
Simplicity that um and it's interesting
because you know anel's anel's
ontological argument the prooi on is
interesting he he starts making all
these arguments because God has to be
that than which nothing greater can be
no than which nothing greater can be
thought um and he gets to chapter 15 in
that and he says oh well God you're so
great you know we can't think about you
at all because we can think about
something that can't be thought of at
all and you know have to be that or
you're not that then which nothing
greater can be thought but then he goes
right back into conceptualizing God yeah
and he gets to the end of it and he
makes these Arguments for Why God has to
be one and has to be simple and all
these and then he T tries to talk about
the Trinity and it ends up just being
well we can't understand that part of it
it's a mystery yeah so I think and I
think that I will say
infects the rest of um scholasticism
this that's interesting
one simple understand and that's
essentially what I'm trying to show that
and it does pick up with the Scholastics
I can't I think permin actually because
I argue that permin is the first to see
being it substance terms and so it deals
with perenties then I move into the the
Scholastics and then end with the cart
uh the collapse of that whole um
framework ontological framework so it's
really just a
expansion of of of that part of of the
book you've got there which they made me
cut
out well and so I but I think it's good
I mean I I look forward to seeing the
more explicated critique of the
substance Scholastic line um and are you
doing like you did in this book where
there's a weaving between philosophy and
Christian theology you mentioned Anselm
for example is that taking place
the Scholastics are Christians so so
yeah I
mean but I think
it's what's the word I want to
use less favorable view of the
Christian Perspective ah I see well I
mean I disagree with the viewing God is
this substance in a substance way yeah I
I I I I I would expect so give the
argument in this book I mean how that
would be
um so
but I hope so maybe I don't know guess
that's my answer we'll
see do you think I mean so not just my
work Bracken in The Divine Matrix this
this this way of thinking given what we
said earlier about possible
deep uh I like the term you've heard me
use it dialogos between for example Zen
and neoplatonism at this deep level do
you think
this could afford a kind of lingua
philosophica whereby these Traditions
could perhaps enter into uh and I'm
reading these like Cobb and others where
Buddhists and Christians and uh and and
Jews and Christians and Buddhists are
all and and and you can tell part of
what they're doing is struggling for uh
struggling for a shared vocab a shared
grammar without making anybody
prematurely commit to the you know right
they're they're trying not to confuse
entering into good faith dialogue right
uh W you know they can be mutually
transformative with some crypto way of
trying to prze and so they're struggling
to come and i' I I feel called to that
task not because I'm a Christian or a
Jew but because I I I think there's uh
the there's a meaning crisis and coming
up with this kind of grammar and
vocabulary this linga philosophica could
help us get back to that deep dialogical
rationality that we need if we're going
to properly um you know address it and
respond to it um do you think that that
your work is consent with that
project well I'd be happy if it if it is
that would be that would be be nice of
course um my own goal in writing was
just to help me understand yes I I yes
but uh that would be be great um I want
to ask this I'm I understand the need
for a common vocabulary but one of the
problems I see is um and you can correct
me again if I'm wrong the problem
between the East and West understanding
each other is they just don't think
alike um y
um it's hard for a Westerner to
understand Eastern and being Westerner
because the Eastern philosophy just
isn't thinking like we do what I'm
hoping is that the difference is this
relational understanding of Theology and
that'll give us a way to think similarly
that that okay so that's exactly my
point and then I would say uh and we
also have exemplars we have you know we
do have the kyota school that was doing
it um and there's also the fact
that westerners can come to think in a
way that is consonant with Asiatic
philosophy if they're willing to
undertake the practices that go along
with the philosophy uh right I don't
disagree with that and um and so um this
of course is because the
non-propositional matters so much um you
know and I have been doing DST and
Buddhist practices for three decades um
and so I'm not I'm not saying I'm the
only one or something ridiculous like
that there are many people like this now
that understand uh you know my friend
Evan Thompson for as a clear example too
um uh I think you're right I think it's
difficult and I think if we think we can
simply sort of logic the beliefs against
each other uh we're not we have to we
have to I think you're right we need we
need this much more
expansive geometry of thought if you'll
allow me a way of talking coupled to a
willingness to take on each other's
practice in deep seriousness you see
this also from the you know from the
West you had people like Thomas meron
and John M and others who were taking up
Buddhist practices and John cob is you
know and and back and forth uh people
like that I think that does make make uh
a genuinely mutually transformative uh
dialogos possible between them and and I
think your work well this is I'll be
stronger I am trying to make use of your
work within that
project that would be a fine acceptable
use of my work for me i' be very happy
for that um one other thing I wanted to
add about that whole thing is um
it's another thing that struck me as I
was reading uh Plato
um and I wrote about this and I uh this
uh in a paper uh published in episteme U
what is it recovering Plato a platonic
virtue epistemology I haven't I haven't
read it yet James I've read a lot of
your stuff I got it I haven't read that
yet I'm sorry that that's okay
um was I was reading the the Mino once
it it you know the
two part two passages in the Mino struck
me one where Mino says you know Socrates
offers a definition that he would accept
a virtue and Mino says well that's
that's stupid sres he said what would
you say if somebody said you know he
said shape is uh that which follows
color and he said well that's stupid
Socrates what would you say if someone
do says they don't understand what shape
is anymore than they understand you know
color is anymore than shape and he says
well if they're a disputatious debater I
will say I've given my answer and it's
up to you to refute it but if they are
friends as we are then I have
to which says okay
there's this is where I came up with my
idea of virtue epistemology the kind of
character we are affects whether we can
we can learn or not and then you get the
aggression where he's talking to the
slave boy and you know showing that he
you know already knows how to square a
square
um or double a square and he gets to the
Slate boy with the point where he says
well I don't know Socrates I don't know
how to go and Socrates turns to Meo and
says have we harmed the slave boy no
we've benefited the slave boy because
now he's prepared to learn yeah because
he's admitted he doesn't know humility
is is essential to to our ability to
acquire wisdom
and this is something I'm seeing a lot
in our society now and I it really
troubling a lack of humility a lack of
willingness to listen to the other side
yeah um and I agree so
much we can't get anywhere we're just
going to go further and further into our
own little solipsistic you know box if
we do that and that is what I think you
know platina said is matter um I think
it's individualism the the further we
become a self independent of everything
else the less we
become human and uh and uh so that's
part of the problem I see I
agree the westle humility i i i i yeah
I've spoken repeatedly about the deep
relationship between humility and wisdom
and the love of wisdom and uh between
humility and um addressing some of the
deep profound biases that drive our
self-deceptive behavior um I you have a
staunch uh companion in and I like you I
I I I I I I believe in a virtue
epistemology and a virtue ethics in a
deep way I um I I take seriously issues
like the demarcation problem you can't
really when you look at the products you
can't really distinguish science from
pseudoscience you have to look at the
produc users and are they are they
engaging in good faith or and I'm using
this term in Frankford sense or are they
bullshitting right right and and and
that's that's what you pay attention to
that's what you look at um and so uh I'm
in complete agreement with you about
that and and and I do think and this
goes back to the point I was making
earlier um what we're talking about here
isn't Arcane because that notion of a
radically autonomous think of these
words autonomy and authenticity right uh
and
waiting
discussion right and that I agree with
you they have
become pathological in our society there
there's a there's a proper way in which
they enter into you know there's a there
should be a proper tonos between
individuation and
participation uh because of course we
don't want totalitarian collectivities
or something like that either but where
with with where the way the West is go
going um it's it's become pathological I
agree we've lost the
dialogical and and I will make a strong
claim now here I know you're more modest
in your claims but I've made a lot of
argument in you know some even some
Publications I think the degree to which
we lose the dialogical we actually lose
the rational in a profound profound way
and when we lose yeah and I think that I
think that Dooms us um in a in a very
important way James What's the title of
the second book substance ontology and
the crisis of reason
that goes so much with what we just said
that's beautiful that's beautiful um
it's already on Amazon surprisingly that
surprised me pardon me it's already uh
you can see it on Amazon you can't buy
it yet can you pre-order it I think you
can pre-order it but you're gonna send
me a copy you said I will send you a
copy I'm looking forward to it James I
really want to get it don't tell anybody
but you can probably download it from
library Genesis
you can get this book from library
Genesis right well maybe so um save
$100 well at least the price has come
down you know uh and uh and I recommend
getting the book it's a beautiful book I
recommend very very strongly reading
this book
um James is is a really important
thinker a and um uh we all need to raise
James's profile uh he's going to be
modest and I'm going to embarrass him by
saying this uh but uh James should he
does not have an academic position that
suits his talent and his devotion and
his character and he should have that
and we need to raise his profile I'm
doing everything I can within the
academic world and I will continue to do
so but anything anybody can do in order
to uh to make make James more well known
make have people read his book talk
about it let's get more and more people
talking with James talking about James's
work um as you can also see by his
demeanor and how he shows up in this
conversation he's a he's a good Soul um
is somebody we should have no problem
getting behind and I would like to do
whatever I can to make uh James more
prominent so that we can increase the
chances of him coming to belong where he
belongs um and so I ask anybody if they
know anything if they can do
anything virtuously of course um that uh
they uh they they let me know or they
reach out to James um James I want to
now take this opportunity to one one
more time uh promote this book um and
say it's it is it is a important book
really important book um and uh to say
say that you and I of course are going
to keep in touch uh but I hope you and I
could also have another public
discussion like this at some point
certainly just let me know when we work
it out I'd like to give the people I'm
talking to the opportunity to have the
last word is there any parting thoughts
you'd like to leave our listeners with
oh no I think I've said everything all
right thank you so much my friend this
has been a great pleasure thank you John
me too thank you for watching this video
we're going to continue the practice of
releasing free videos like this on
YouTube a little less frequently I'm
trying to rein in how thinly I have been
spreading myself I need to do this maybe
some of you have seen the reasons that
I've made public on videos released on
behalf of the transition to the El turn
format many of you would like to follow
up this in more detail in
depth you will find links to
those following videos that are for
patrons only and the links to that will
be found in the notes to this video
thank you very much take good care
