the New York Times calls him arguably
the chief ideologist of the Silicon
Valley Elite mark andreon on uncommon
knowledge
now welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm
Peter Robinson after growing up in New
Lisbon Wisconsin which has a population
today of
2523 Mark and and Reon majored in
computer science at the University of
Illinois and then moved West in 1993 Mr
andreon co-founded Netscape which made
available the first widely used browser
almost instantly making him a major
figure here in Silicon Valley and he has
remained a major figure ever since in
2009 Mr andreon and his investing
colleague Ben Horowitz launched the
Venture Capital firm andreon Horowitz
which today has more than $40 billion
under management here it stands for Mr
andrees participates in the Hoover
institution's emerging technology review
since the election last November Mr
andreson has been spending only half his
time here in Silicon Valley spending the
other half at Mara Lago where he has
been advising Donald Trump and his
friends Elon Musk and VC ramaswami mark
andreon thank you for joining me thank
you Peter it's great to be here okay
Mark let's begin by taking a brief look
at a video
it's morning again in America oh there
we go and under the leadership of
President reagen our country is prouder
and stronger and
better why would we ever want to return
to where we were less than four short
years
ago makes the hair on the back of your
net go up it's still powerful is it was
that 8 is that 8 that's 84 that's the
re-election campaign so the 1970
a decade of economic stagnation the
erosion of our position in the Cold War
the national humiliations of Vietnam and
Watergate then Reagan is elected and by
1984 the economy has begun to expand we
begun to rebuild our military there had
been a rebirth of patriotism and that
video although it may look sappy to us
today rang true enough to the American
people that they gave Reagan 49 out of
50 states when they reelected him in
1984 serious question a national renewal
can we do it again I I mean I see no
reason why we can't we have to want to
you know we had I was you know I was a
kid when when you know when that I I was
13 when that came out so I only had a
vague awareness of what was going on but
um uh but um we certainly can I mean
look we have the preconditions for for
all of it we have you know we have the
people we have the we have everything we
have the people we have the resources we
have the geographic security we have I
mean we have all of these capabilities I
mean it's actually amazing if you look
right now we are the major Western
economy that's growing right so like the
UK and Germany and Canada they've
stopped growing and they're probably
shrinking right um and so like we've not
withstanding all of our many issues
we've continued to grow we continue to
be the beacon of capitalism and
Enterprise and Entrepreneurship the
smartest people in the world definitely
100% still want to come here you know
we're now leading the world in AI like
you know and then energy like we I mean
we have you know it's this running joke
it's like every time there's like one of
these Doom you know headlines of you
know the you know the us is going to run
out of you know some rare Earth mineral
and with him or something it's like you
know the joke is like some farmer in
North Dakota stumbles over like a new2
trillion dollar deposit in his backyard
like we have apparently unlimited
natural resources like there there's no
like we have you know overwhelmingly the
dominant you know military machine in
the world like for all of our issues we
have all the preconditions for a okay
you know Golden Age a golden age all
right we'll come back to that in the
meantime you have some explaining to do
the presidential candidates Mark andreon
has supported this is all public I did a
little research on you Mark I mean you
may have tried to tidy things up you
being you I doubt that you have but this
is still very much on the record hold on
I got to hack Wikipedia goe Bill Clinton
yes Al Gore yes John krey Barack Obama
yep Hillary Clinton yep and Donald Trump
brief detour to Mitt Romney brief detour
to M Romney all right 2012 but yes yeah
but that that trajectory exactly from
from actually I mean I I I sort of
entered you know business in '94 but I I
knew I knew Bill Clinton and Al Gore
quite well and supported them in ' 96
and then G as you said Gore in 200 and
all the way up to Hillary and 16 okay so
from a very loyal Democrat to a MAA
Republican how come what happened yeah
so things changed um so the way I
describe it you changed or things CH so
I wonder know what what in your thinking
changed and what what I mean there are
plenty of people who say I didn't leave
the Democratic party the Democratic
party left meet Ronald Reagan used to
say that so how does the environment and
thinking both of them com would you
please by the way it is amazing how many
members of the key Trump team are former
Democrats right Donald Trump is a former
Democrat uh Bobby Kennedy you go right
down the list Telsa gabard you know
there's a lot of these people um so
there there's a broad-based phenomenon
um but anyway we'll talk about that so
so the way I describe it is look I I
came up in the 90s um um you know I grew
up in in the midwest I you know I have
you know sort of very firm kind of
understanding memory of what it's like
to you know kind of grow up in a you
know sort of the polar opposite
environment of California right but I
but I moved to California I became a
full-blown you know California fully
fully assimilated adapted um but the way
I would describe it is it was just sort
of assumed that if you were in Silicon
Valley in Hightech in the 90s it was
just assumed Clinton Gore Heyday is just
assume that there was what I what I now
call the deal with the capital D and
nobody ever said it out loud but it was
just assumed and the deal was you can be
a high-tech entrepreneur you can build
all this amazing technology you can
build a successful company you can
create lots of jobs the technology makes
the world a better place it's great you
take the company public you make a lot
of money at some point you take the
money and you you donate it to
philanthropy um and and right and and
that's the the total Arc and then when
you die in your obituary it's like he
was an entrepreneur and a philanthropist
and all of his you know the sil Silicon
Valley circle of life circle of life and
it's just like it's great you get is a
great deal because it's like you get to
do what you want you get all the
material benefits of you know you get
all the professional satisfaction out of
executing in your field you get all the
material satisfaction out of out of
financial success and then you get all
the psychic moral satisfaction out of
and the government leaves you alone you
you have more than enough scope to do
what you need to do as an entrepreneur
yeah well and that and also you know as
you may recall the Clinton Gore
Administration was extremely
enthusiastic about high-tech yes um and
so I have a thousand stories from those
days but one is I was actually one of my
one of my little little claims to fame I
was the um I was the third wheel in the
first presidential webcast uh so Bill
Clinton and I did the first uh
presidential webcast um a presidential
internet Town Hall I think in 1996 um
and you know it was like a big deal in
those days to do that he he could not
and he called me afterwards and he was
like just like completely thrilled by
the whole thing it was so fantastic and
of course El Gore literally you know El
Gore literally you know he got a lot of
flack later for for for saying that he
invent the internet well so but this is
the thing is he never actually so here
I'll defend elgu's honor he never said
he invented the Internet he said he he
he he took the lead in the senate in
helping to create the internet which is
actually true um he he was the SP
Creator sponsor of the legislation in
the 80s they created what was known as
the NSF net um National Science
Foundation Network which became the
internet that that that is the internet
backbone and that and I and then also
the national supercomputer centers which
and I bring it up because that's how I
was able to do the work that I did which
is by the time I showed up at Illinois
we have the national supercomputer
Center and the nsfnet backbone that that
he had it was very important to your
work that those things already existed
yeah they had to those were the
preconditions for everything everything
that followed and so Al Gore like you
know I think deserves tremendous credit
for for what he did but the point is he
was super enthusiastic about it and has
always been a giant supporter of
Technology right and so these people
just thought that it was just absolutely
fantastic and then you know Democrats
all the way through the 2000s you know
as as a Democratic party started to
clearly move left Obama was still
generally a big supporter of tech and
American Business and you know he liked
what we were doing and then if you may
remember in 2012 I remember in 2012 2012
at the time Obama's re-election it was
the headlines were all this was the
first internet election first social
media election um and it was literally
the headlines literally were social
media saves democracy um because social
media is what caused Obama to be able to
raise so much money online and to be
able to beat you know the evil fascist
nazi Mitt Romney right and so literally
the the Press was like glowing in
support of social media Facebook was
great for democracy the whole thing by
the way the Arab Spring also happened at
the same time and again Universal
positive press coverage so up until your
point you you remind me of something I
knew somebody who was a very close
friend of Mitt Romney and who was an
investor out here in Silicon Valley and
Romney said the Obama operation is
killing us on Tech and in particular
particular campaign Tech apparently the
Obama people had it all sorted out so
that they could give volunteers a piece
of software on their smartphones they
could go door too and ask five questions
and they would know whether that person
was already supporting Obama so you
don't spend more money on him or
committed to the repu to Romney so you
don't spend money on or a maybe in which
you want resources at and the Romney
people had nothing like that and my
buddy's job was to come out here to
Silicon Valley and recruit Engineers to
build something for Romney and Engineers
wouldn't work for the Republican right
it was so uncool yeah 100% okay yes no
question so you have no you're not
remotely surprised by that story well
this goes back this goes back to so the
the the the old the long Arc here is
Silicon Valley there was a big
Republican contingent in Silicon Valley
in the chip era right 50s 6070s and
there so so by the time I got here there
were these guys who were mostly retired
at that point who were you know kind of
the David Packard worked for Richard
nickon as Deputy defense secretary I
recall so these guys were were already
in their 70s and 80s I you know I met
some of them but I didn't you know I
didn't know a lot of them you know this
is sort of the transition of Silicon
Valley from chips to software was kind
of that that handoff right by the time I
got here basically everybody below the
age of 50 was Democrat right which you
know sort of foreshadowed the future of
you know the state right U as the state
was going through his Transitions and so
um yeah so so basically like and and
basically everybody I knew bought into
the deal like like essentially everybody
I knew did this and by the way it's like
it's a tremendously hey thing to to buy
into to to to become part of because
it's just like it's amazing you're like
this incredibly lionized Tech founder
you're getting invited to the White
House everybody loves you the pre by the
way the Press loves you it's all great
the philanthropy they love you for that
like the whole thing it's just like this
a and you get to you Davos and Aspen and
you get to get rich and have your your
vanity flatter it's amazing and the by
the way and the government is supporting
you right and if you have a problem and
there's like a problem in a foreign
country and like you know coming at you
on something or there's some crazy tax
or something the US government will
actually go to bad for you or if you
know there's some trade weird trade War
thing or whatever your stuff gets SE to
some Port the you know state department
will step in and so the government's
like on the side of American Business
and you know and this was the trade you
know in retrospect this was the trade
that the Democrats made in the 90s right
to to to to become Pro business you know
this this is sort of a reflection of how
Clinton brought the Democratic party
back right from the craziness of the 60s
and 70s was to get them in a point where
they were not fighting literally
fighting capitalism right right every
day and so so it it it worked great the
meshing was great and the meshing
basically worked great up until 2012 and
then basically start basically was after
Obama's re-election really what I picked
up my experience was starting in 2013 is
when things really started to
unravel okay and so how do you pick it
up you in 2013 well as I said you've
been a major figure in Silicon Valley
famous man wealthy man since the 90s how
do you pick it up in 2013 you're
investing and you discover your
entrepreneurs are starting to run into
difficulties they didn't used to run
into there's a something more vague than
that there's a Vibe what describe how
what it felt like what are you picking
up in 2013 so in retrospect I was on the
front end of picking up the I didn't
understand what was happening but I was
on the front end of picking up the
change I felt it and the reason I felt
it is because I was so involved in the
consumer internet companies of that era
and in particular the social media
companies um and so I was on the
Facebook board I was a angel investor in
Twitter angel investor in LinkedIn you
know I was involved in all all these you
know basically all of these companies
all these new social media companies um
you know and I was super CL you know I
Knew YouTube inside out and you know so
I I I sort of knew how all these things
operated I knew all the people and I was
in the room for a lot of the
conversations and basically it was in
2013 is is is really like when the
employees started to activate um and so
you started to get basically this
employee activist movement like that and
that was a big thing and of course in
retrospect I know what happened which is
you had a generation of radicalized
college kids sort of from you know
basically so basically if you if you
back up further it was basically some
combination of like 911 the Patriot Act
and then the Iraq War and then um and
then the global financial crisis and
then occupied Wall Street whatever
happened during that sort of 10-year
period radicalized the college kids
before they moved into industry but then
they showed up and they were starting to
populate these companies in 2012 2013
2014 and then they then activated a lot
of their older contemporaries in those
companies the older older cohort members
who wanted to be cool and with it and
and and so and that and we know this we
know this started with the kids then it
started with the kids and the and the
and the the very specific thing that
happened with the social media companies
is that was the beginning of the whole
thing with hate speech and
misinformation um and so that was the
whole thing because because up until
then it was the internet is a wild west
we love it because it's a wild west it
makes all these things possible it's
fantastic it's great it's working it's
Pro democracy it's Pro free speech you
know the state department the Obama
State Department had this like giant
push to expand Free Speech right all
through the rest of the world right at
the same time that they discovered it
would be a really good idea to censor
American speech right on on social media
right so so there there was this amazing
you remember net neutrality yes this big
push from the left to make sure that big
companies couldn't censor internet
speech so there were years and years and
years of anybody who was on the side of
censoring internet speech was against
neutrality and was the Antichrist and
then it literally that flipped and
became anybody who wasn't Pro internet
censorship was the Antichrist and net
neutrality vanished as an issue the two
issues that have vanished completely
from the political stage are net
neutrality um and money in
politics they're just gone as like
mainstream leftwing issues they're just
you know it's money in politics is after
Hillary outspent Donald Trump 3 to one
and lost like that was it for the
anti-money and politics issue so these
you know there's there's this term in
Hollywood retcon where you do
retroactive continuity you go back and
you sort of change a story so that it's
all consistent later and so so so so
there was the Free Speech rcon there was
the net neutrality rcon there was the
money and politics rcon anyway so this
all kicked off in in in 2013 um I was in
the room at some of these companies for
the original discussions on Define hate
speech Define misinformation you know of
course assurances were you know
everybody was like completely confident
that these were very you know
straightforward easy things to Define
and of course they wouldn't you know
began a long slide towards political
censorship you know which is precisely
what happened but like but but but this
is really important that that slide
started in 2013 that started before
Trump that started way before the the
primary process that started way before
the general election it really kicked
off then got it got it so what did you
make of trump first time around like
every so this is the thing is you I'm
reading the New York Times I'm watching
MSNBC like I'm like anybody else like in
my in my class in station and I'm just
like absolutely horrified and like oh my
God that man is an outrage what about
the Norms right like you know the whole
thing and and you like I said I
supported Hillary in in in 2016 and you
know my my and frankly my thought at
that point was traditional awful is
better than radical awful um so like you
know when push comes to shove and look
like you know and Hillary you know look
like Bill Clinton I thought had been
great and may like I said and for Tech
he'd been super enthusiastic and so I'm
like you know how presumably his wife is
you know and then yeah and then
basically you know did you know I you
know relatively quick well not
relatively quick it took a few years but
you know certainly by 2018 2019 I was
starting to you know really wonder what
was going on because things started to
get really weird as you know um all
through Tech and then you know basically
after 2020 in the last four years have
been completely insane um and if I had
not already figured out which way was up
by 2018 2019 certainly the last four
years did it you had enough yeah okay
yeah um let's jump to the
present Doge the department of
government efficiency your buddies Elon
Musk and vivec ramaswami are heading it
and you yourself are participating as
you've called yourself an unpaid intern
yes correct yes you may go get me a
glass of water at some point yes let's
see again let's start with a very brief
video and this is a video that Elon Musk
retweeted it turn to my surprise it
turns out to be a couple of minutes of
an old interview I did with Milton
fredman yes so here we go 14 is a lot
for television so I want to just go
right down the list quickly and have you
give me a thumbs up or thumbs down
cabinet agencies dep of Agriculture my
abish gone Department of Commerce
abolish gone Department of Defense keep
keep it from 14 to departments down to
Bas fundamental functions what are its
fundamental functions a pre uh a
preserve the peace defend the country
all right provide a mechanism whereby
individuals can adjudicate their
disputes that's the J justice department
Department protect individuals from
being coerced by other individuals the
police function right and now this is
both the central government and the
state and local governments the police
function is primarily local and Central
right and those are the fundamental
functions of government in my opinion
okay so as I said Elon there I sat with
Milton Friedman in the 1990s and asked
him to go through the Cabinet
departments and he whittel them down
from 14 to 4 and a half and Elon Musk
retweeted that Under The Heading the
Doge agenda okay now I'd like to ask
about the Doge agenda but let me let you
in a little secret when Ronald Reagan
ran in
1979 he called for the abolition of the
dep Department of Education which by the
way only got up and running in 1979 so
it's not as if this thing was some
storied inheritance from the glory to
past in American his no nothing it was a
brand new federal
bureaucracy and when Ronald Reagan took
office Ed me who is the person who told
me the story went up to Capitol Hill and
en Ed one Republican senator after
another who said you can't do
that in just a year they had already
figured out how to use that cabinet
department to give benefits to their
constituents and now they wanted to
protect it not eliminate it all of which
is to
say what do you boys think you can
actually get done at Doge High Spirits
huge intelligence is about to smack into
practical politics yeah
so and as you may know you you probably
also know there was a Clinton Gore
initiative called Reinventing government
um that was also very do you remember
this remember
this there was a famous moment where El
Gore went on David Letterman uh when he
was the top late night talk show host
and he went on with one of these you
know famous he went on with the $600
shatterproof you know Pentagon ashtray
which they call Ash receivers tobacco
desk type but this is a quality item
yeah right you know the $3 Ash TR that
cost 600 bucks and it's it's
shatterproof so you can operate in
military zones and of course he went on
there with his safety glasses and Hammer
and proceeded it to shatter on
Letterman's desk right and say you know
you know you know the game is up and
we're going to go cutle this and then of
course you know didn't happen well give
a little credit they you know the budget
did balance you know they did get to
balance budget at some they got into
Surplus for a brief period so maybe some
stuff happened you know Reagan did some
stuff although I correct me if I'm wrong
I think the government was bigger when
Reagan left office uh well I can tell
you a little bit about that so Reagan as
you know this is one of the things that
we're going to come to here and talking
about Doge there is the discretionary
budget that is the the the bit that the
Congress gets to vote on every single
year the Pentagon is a big part of that
Reagan was able to hold and and these
days the discretionary budget is a
little under onethird of the entire
federal budget yeah so overwhelmingly
it's it's welfare programs Medicare
Social Security is the big one Reagan
was able to hold the discretionary
budget to about 1% growth over eight
years which in real terms was a a minor
cut right but that was huffing and
puffing and constant labor and what he
could never get control of was the
non-discretionary budget which of course
had been legislated in years past and
grew according to neither he nor
Congress had any control over that which
is going to be a problem for your boys
okay so so so there's so there's so
there's that there was also I can
remember this because I wrote speeches
for it NE there was also a government
Commission on waste Fraud and Abuse
Peter Grace Jay Peter Grace a very
distinguished very lovely man very
distinguished New York Banker of a kind
that this generation is gone just like
David Packard belong to an earlier era
and of course he hired people and they
went around and discovered all kinds of
absurdities that the federal government
was paying for there was some sort of
national program for beekeepers or
something
right but it only was waste Fraud and
Abuse if you looked at it the way Mr
Grace looked at it which was as a
businessman and a citizen if you looked
at it the way a politician running for
reelection looked at it right it wasn't
waste fraud or abuse it was very
effective in buying votes right and so
that stuff went almost nowhere as well
so so what you boys are up to now has
been attempted although I must say not
with quite this level of bravado and not
with Elon and not with Elon not with
Elon so so I start by saying I'm not I'm
not a spokesperson for the Doge so I'm
not I'm not going to I'm not going to
repr I'm just give you I'm just G to
give you my my My Views Elon Musk and
vvec are both very capable of speaking
let them speak for do so um yeah so look
I number one is yeah people have taken
swings at this in the past that's
certainly true the factors you described
are certainly true having said that
there there are some differences and so
one is um a whole bunch of things to
talk about but one is um there's sort of
three the way to think about it is
there's like three threads here there's
there's there's there's um there's head
count um there's spend and those are
related but but but different um uh
separate separate threads um and then
there's regulations um and then and then
there's an intertwining of the three of
them that has become Salient as a result
of the recent Supreme Court decisions on
um executive Authority and on the the
So-Cal Chevron Defence right so there's
been a set of Supreme Court decisions L
um in which the power of the um
executive branch to basically have
agencies that promulgate their own
Regulatory regimes and then staff and
spend against those regulatory regimes
without you know basically being
expressly authorized by Congress to do
that like the Supreme Court you know
basically just made that decision that
that that that now is something uh that
can be used to turn these things off an
argument I am so I'm I I wasn't I
haven't in all the Press I haven't yet
noticed that Doge was paying attention
to the end of Chevron Defence yes
correct that you guys have coton on to
that and intend to make use of it yeah
that decisions get made by Congress and
the president of the United States and
not by federal agencies that's huge
congratulations in fact let's end the
show right now so so to start with by
the way give vac a lot of credit on this
and
so talked about this publicly and
there's some excellent there's by the
way there's some excellent legal
Scholars who are around the who who are
contributing to this so so so like an
argument like and I think it's a very
serious argument an argument is if there
is an agency that is either either
itself should not exist which we'll come
back to in a second because or or
there's activities at the agency that
should not be happening or there's
regulations that the agency is enforcing
there is a I think very strong argument
to be made that it is actually necessary
for the executive branch to stop doing
those things in order to come into
compliance with the Supreme Court
rulings oh excellent right oh excellent
which is the oppos excellent which is
the opposite veilance of what everybody
assumes which is you're making you're
making some radical productive changes
like no we're doing what we we're doing
what we're literally required to do you
just flipped the burden of evidence
burden of proof of proof and of course
you know the the Chevron these Supreme
Court decisions have had no effect like
that up until now but that's of course
because this last Administration has
said no desire at all righted a new
Supreme Court yeah exactly and so um and
so U but you know but this
Administration has the opportunity to do
this differently um Pop Quiz Peter uh
how many federal agencies are there too
many
yes 127 is some figure I read some no
it's at least it's like in the range of
like 450 to 500 are you serious the
there is a claim going around there now
15 Cabinet departments I look that up
after doing seeing this well we now have
this we have this new innovation I don't
know when it came out in in the last
decades the so the concept of an
independent agency oh
yes and like I've read the Constitution
independent of everything including the
Constitution of the United States it's
outrageous I've read the Constitution
and there is no provision in there for
an independent agency by the way you
know there are there are federal there
are executive branch agencies that have
their own internal courts yes they have
their own judges I've read the
Constitution that's now we're in there
correct right um and so U there there's
a rumor going around I don't know if
it's true there's a rumor going around
that nobody actually knows the number of
federal agencies that there's no actual
individual person who actually knows the
answer one is because there's just so
many of them and there's like there's
new ones created every year but the
other is we have all these fuzzy things
now you know the cfpv is like the
canonical example right now we have
these sort of cfpv is the consumer what
Consumer Finance protection board
established by Senator Elizabeth Warren
it's sort of considered Warren's agency
yeah exactly and it it is nominal I
don't know the exact legal terminology
but it's nominally an independent agency
under the supervision of the Federal
Reserve um right she tried she wrote the
legislation spefic specifically so that
no president of the United States could
fire the director of the CF whatever
it's called cfbp which is
unconstitutional on the face of it on
the face of it unambiguously it's still
a unit of that that that I don't know if
that happened I don't know the exact
state of that but it's a unit of the
Federal Reserve the the
constitutionality of Federal Reserve has
always been a very interesting question
correct um the ability for the president
you're good I'm really okay these are
I'm not saying these are easy answers
but these are these are important
questions right right just just asking
the questions gives you a long way way
yes exactly and so you you have all of
the and you know this like you have all
you know this these are the same issues
that come up when people talk about like
special prosecutors and all all these
things which is just like all right it's
you know it may be a good idea in theory
it's literally not in the Constitution
what are we doing right the Constitution
is very clear the president's the chief
executive you know the exe chief law
officer of the United States that there
is no provision in there so anyway so so
so there are all of these agencies and
components of the government that have
just sprawled out Bas basically a friend
of mine uh Curtis Yin has has this great
line he says we we are living under the
the uh 80-year evolution of FDR's
personal
monarchy but without FDR right and so
because FDR of course is the guy you
know with the New Deal and so he create
you know he turned the federal
government from this you know basically
this small overlay thing into this giant
sprawling bureaucracy and then it
basically has continued to expand and
morph and mutate under its own power um
and anyway so we we do seem to have a
supreme court that wants to you know
kind of pull this back in so there's so
anyway so yes there's an opportunity to
do this um the Doge team has I think
very clever ideas on all three of the
threads that I described on spend on
head count and on um uh and on
regulation I'll just give you one
example head count um you know so the
federal well here's another pop quiz is
how many people work for the federal
government ah how many people work for
the federal government so as I recall
the Pentagon is uniform force of about
two million two million and another
million and a half civilians and then
the federal government actually the the
headcount hasn't expanded that much for
20 or 30 years as I recall it's about
two and a half or three million in
Washington DC civilian uh bureaucrats is
that right how many contractors oh no
okay unknown unknowable unknown
unknowable they're estimates that are
very high I won't I won't Wing numbers
off at the fly but there the estimates
the numbers are much higher um U so um
uh yeah so so anyway so so then just
sort of fun fact which is like what's
the occupancy rate of federal buildings
in Washington DC right now by people
working in the office uh something like
25% is very it's like 25% on average
lower than San Francisco it yes it's
basically that what DC federal building
complex is basically a ghost town um the
the security agencies are are still
full-time the other agencies are not um
in the extreme cases you have certain
agencies that are all the way down to a
day a month um and there were there were
this is true they were collected bar in
some of the agents this is the other
thing is in some of the agencies
employees are unionized at the federal
level um and there were collective
bargaining agreements struck in some of
these agencies where they literally um
during covid got the right to never come
back to work and and and and one of the
ones that I'm aware of the agency I know
well they literally come back to work a
day a month and so and so what the
employees do is they come back a day a
month but they pair the days um and so
they come back for two days every two
months wow and so and it's just like you
ask any CEO in Corporate America like
how is this whole thing going what are
your employees doing you know when they
and you know every CEO will tell you
like I are these people like what on
Earth is happening are these people
working and so so does does the
president of the United States have a
legal authority to order people back to
work does it count to be an employee of
the federal government if you're not in
the office um and so so that so so
there's all this is just there's a ton
of threads like that that they're going
to all this is beautiful really truly
beautiful however doge is an advisory
commission true I believe this is the
way the president has set it up is an
advisory commission it has its Sunset
date yes it ends on July it goes out of
business on July 4th 2026 that's right
I'm very happy I I like sunsetting
anything to do with the federal
government but where do you and Elon and
Vic get the authority to make anybody do
anything including Congress to pass
enabling legislation including the
president to write executive
orders or given what little background I
have in Washington what I immediately
before you can get John th the leader of
the majority leader in the Senate to
introduce legislation he'll have
political people looking at all the
political ramif and there's going to be
some Senators oh I don't know that you
stepped on the toes of my constituent
here and the politics is going to start
at you guys right right so um I'll give
you one more how do you get stuff
actually done can I give you one more
first
question so I forget the exact term but
there's a legal term so the the the
Constitution authorizes you know says
Congress authorizes money for the
executive branch to spend there's a I
forget with recision is it recision
there's a there's a legal term that
basically um means that um the executive
branch is also not allowed to spend less
than Congress
appropriates true true which what I have
a recommendation which is that you look
at the 1974 legislation that removed
from Richard Nixon or it removed because
of Richard Nixon the abilities the the
ability of the president which at that
point had been traditionally accepted to
impound funds that's impoundment
impoundment impoundment we want more
impoundment we want to get back to
impoundment correct right empow
empowerment yes empowerment I forget
which way it goes but empowerment is the
concept that the president con the
president legally is required to spend
the money that's appropriated the
president is not allowed to save money
the president is not allowed to spend
less money than Congress has
appropriated once again if you read the
Constitution it doesn't say that right
this has been an issue of significant
cons constitutional debate over over the
last four you literally sense that
happened and there have been you know
Wikipedia there's lots of arguments back
and forth on this right I don't know if
this is the kind of thing that the
Supreme Court would look at might might
be a good idea right so but the
president of the United States I mean we
you don't have to be a genius in
political science to construct the
argument which is that there's only one
man or woman one person who faces the
entire country in an election and
therefore can be said to represent a
national as opposed to all these little
parochial interests a national interest
in an overall ceiling on the federal
budget and that is the president of the
United States correct yeah so that's the
answer that okay so that's the answer
and the answer and by the way to be
clear I'm not I'm an unpaid intern yes
yes yes but we're having fun Mark
details El running it and then it itself
is not set getting set up as a perent
agency you're exactly it doesn't have
the authority to execute and everything
we're talking about but the white the
white house does the executive branch
does and the president does and so it
will will be it will be as it should be
it as it should be it will be a decision
of the president on what he wants to do
with these recommendations um you know
the the people being staffed into the
positions um you know so the new head of
OMB is is very you know has talk
publicly about being very aligned with
this the new head of OPM is actually a
partner of ours is going in there he's
very aligned with this and so they they
will the the executive branch will have
the execution capability to be able to
do this but it it's at as the
president's Defence and you know we
we'll see what happens but from what you
have seen on your many visits to maral
Lago this has the personal interest in
support of the president elect of the
United States yeah he he said so
repeatedly he was asked the other day
and you know he constantly he always
gets asked like you know do you still
support Elon and he's he's you know at
least you know so far 100% of the time
you know he's fully supportive um and so
he's yeah he's he's green L this I mean
look Elon has been living at Mor Lago
right you know like so so you know so
they're they're doing this and so look
it's I've full defen to the president
he'll he'll do what he wants this is
there let me give you one more one more
thing on this though and this goes to
what's happening more broadly in the
environment and this is this is one of
the reasons why you have all this Panic
now about the Des censorship of the
internet um is that you'll recall so I'm
sure the grace commission tried to
explain to the public what was happening
with federal spending I know El Gore
tried to he went a letterman and tried
to articulate it you know Ross perau at
one point was trying to do it with with
the flip charts and all these things but
there there's all oh we had a senator
prox me out of Wisconsin for a long time
yes of course had the Golden Fleece
award and he would come out every year
with like the crazy spending things but
it was always like when prox me used to
do it it was always like oh it's just
like two minutes once a year on you know
NBC News um of course what does Elon
have and what does VC have and what do
the rest of us have now is we we now
have the ability to actually actually
ventilate this information in public
right we have the ability to actually
show and demonstrate this and actually
expose this to the public view on both
sides number one here's all the stupid
stuff like here's all the stuff that
clearly just like you're being taken for
a ride on right and then the and then
the other side is by the way you know
with corresponding Cuts here's here's
the money that's being saved that's
going back you know into the into the
taxpayer pocket and so there's a you PR
PR is the old it's beyond PR it's not PR
anymore because PR kind of implies
you're going through the Press those
days are over this is going to be direct
interaction with the public Mark we've
just been through a decade now in which
we were told again and again and again
that Donald John Trump represents a
danger to democracy
yes you are describing a renewal Ren
democracy yes 100% clearly all right
100% okay I just wanted to check I just
wanted to check yes and so and this this
will be the key this will I mean I just
as an observer I say this will
ultimately be the key it's the key
ultimately is going to be the direct
relationship with the president with
with the people like that is ultimately
going to be the key and if the people
are on board of the president you know
this if the people are on board of the
president the president has tremendous
power that gives the president the
ability to get a lot of what he wants
done through Congress if the president
doesn't have the support of the people
Congress can roll him arbitrarily and so
as you know Reagan knew this by the way
FDR knew knew this like all the good
presidents knew this Trump 100% knows
this and and you know he does this every
day and he's GNA if you can bring the
country with you you can go anywhere
that's right um 18 months ago you
published a 5,000-word essay called the
Techno Optimist Manifesto let me quote
you we are told that technology takes
our jobs reduces our wages increases
inequality and is ever on the verge of
ruining everything but our civilization
was built on technology technology is
the glory of human ambition and
achievement the spearhead of progress
and the realization of our potential it
is time once again to raise the
technology
flag
okay apart from anything else there are
not a lot of people in Silicon Valley
who write as well as that there we go um
can I I'd like to ask how we raise the
technology flag with regard to several
specific issues but first I just want to
Circle back to the president- elect he's
78 years
old he grew up in an old-fashioned
burough of New York
Queens he made his start in his career
in bricks and mortar this is a man who
made his money by pouring concrete does
he understand
technology does he does he does he feel
it the way you feel it or in would be
good enough if he simply said there's
something important here I maybe not
quite the right generation or quite the
right background to get it but I'll let
Andre and musk handle it for me yeah so
where are we with this I say the
following my my analysis would be he is
world class on real estate and on
Communications um and those are sort of
his foundational skills and those are
you know he's world class on both which
is like probably the first person in the
world to be world world class in both of
those things right um the the real
estate industry is not historically
known for its great
communicators here you've got somebody
who who does both both of those things
incredibly well um uh he as a
consequence of his knowledge of real
estate and by the way his also
involvement in the communications
industry where he was you know a one of
the huge winners of the of the last 20
years with with what he did on you know
with what The Apprentice which is this
you know a very large business um he
very very deeply understands business
and you know as you know one of the
questions always you know in Washington
is like wow there's a lot of lawyers
running around and wow there are very
few people here who have actually held a
job in the private sector and there are
very few people here who have ever
actually run a company or responsible to
investors or had customers right um and
so he he is also a you know one of the
most successful business people you know
of of our time so you know I would say
those are like three very powerful
skills okay and then I think what you
learn especially when you're good for
sure when you're good at real estate and
when you're generally good at business
SE is I I think you learn how to do you
know what we call systems thinking like
you you you you have to I mean you know
these large real I mean my my you know
my my father-in-law was you know was
sort of a a trump you know kind of
generational peer in real estate John
araga John araga and like John like when
John put up one of these towers or one
of these campuses or when when Trump put
up you know one of these giant hotels or
whatever like these are large scale
systems projects like you know there's
many many dimensions there's many things
that can go wrong there's a lot of
things that have to line up there's huge
management complexity to it by the way
there is technology change because
you've got all these things coming at
you and Soler and you know all these all
these all these new things coming in and
all these requirements um and so um and
you got to like manage these one of the
things these guys my father-in-law
always told me and Trump clearly was the
same way is you got to manage these
things hands on because they they can
always go sideways and any given day you
know you're sitting there Bleeding Out
money if people aren't doing the right
thing um and so they're they're they're
good he's very good I think world class
at thinking things through
systematically and I um we were talking
before about there's this video going
around uh today of him talking about the
water situation in California yes yes on
on Joe Rogan uh like what was that six
months ago or whatever I said why don't
you have no water because the water
isn't allowed to flow down and at the
time you know one of those classic Trump
things at the time everybody's like why
is he going on and on about the water
situation in California and then of
course in the last 3 days as as we talk
you know La is Bur down and if you
listen to what he talked about with the
water situation in California it's like
yeah that's all correct like he is
exactly 100% correct he did the same
thing by the way if you remember in the
first term when he diagnosed the German
energy situation yes to the face of the
German diplomatic core at the United
Nations you people are going to become
dependent on Russia and that will be a
disaster for you and it has been and it
has been and his if you go back and you
just you if you forget who did it or if
you just read the transcript and you
read it you're just like wow that was a
really good f it was a extremely precise
and accurate at five and very preent 5
minute analysis of this system's problem
which is where's the energy coming from
how is it going what's going to happen
here what happens if you turn off
nuclear same thing in California what
happens the water and this and that and
you know the whole thing um and so he's
like really good at wrapping his his
head around these things I would say at
energy he this is the other thing is
he's now obviously been president for
four years and so he he learned about
things to enormous depth and so he I I I
you know like I'm not an energy guy but
my energy conversation with him he's
extremely sophisticated the energy
people I know know that he's
sophisticated so he wraps his head
around these things I think very quickly
and easily and so I I don't you know I
don't expect of him that he's going to
be coding you know large language models
in his SP time but I think he very very
he's extremely capable of being able to
understand these things and I think
actually does quite well okay so let's
go you mentioned energy several times
there let's go to raising the Techno
technology flag on energy nuclear energy
quarter of a century ago there were 104
nuclear plants operating in the United
States today there are just 94 and the
average age of a nuclear plant in the
United States stes is 42 years yeah how
does the Techno Optimist respond to that
fact set so this is the great tragedy of
the domestic policies of the Nixon
Administration right so of the Nixon
administ Administration so Richard Nixon
when you know Richard Nixon saw the
energy crisis coming and you know it
developed in in in his second term
started you started getting underway um
and he announced something he called
project Independence um and he said this
is ridiculous we can't be running on
fossil fuels from the Middle East this
is crazy it's entangling us and all this
you know crazy foreign stuff like we
need to stop you know we're we're the
United States can power ourselves and so
on which he was correct yes of course
he's completely correct he declared he
declared project Independence project
Independence was we're going to build a
thousand new nuclear power plants in the
United States by the year 2000 um and go
completely independent so we're going to
again we're going to cut the entire grid
over to nuclear production electrical
consumption by the way coraly electric
cars and so and and by the way green
like coraly no more carbon emissions
right we're going to have thousand
nuclear plants no carbon emissions
completely green nuclear plants put out
water um with a you know small amount of
easily contained waste um but we're
going to build those and you know and we
were building nuclear power plants you
know as you know in the in the 50s 6070s
but by the 70s we started to have these
new technologies like computers where
you could see a way to build much more
efficient and much safer plants right
and so so so we had so so he announced
that and then he created the
Environmental Protection Agency and he
created the nuclear Regulatory
Commission uh which shut down the which
would shut down a project which had it
gone forward we've changed everything
yes and they they those agencies
prevented prevented project independence
from happening okay so can I I think
this is a brilliant stroke and that is
because it occurred to me my own little
head in the middle of the night one
night I was tossing a turning I thought
hey wait a minute and here's the hey
wait a
minute the first nuclear submarine was
commissioned in 1955
right which means that the United States
of America which has nuclear powered
vessels of all kinds has been building
and operating small nuclear reactors for
six and seven decades right and has the
systems down so well that these things
can be operated by
19-year-old kids who haven't even gone
to high finished their High School
degree and the technology is owned by
the American taxpayers yes why aren't we
using this where are they so as you know
and by the way the military is exempt
from the nuclear Regulatory Commission
right right so they just do it they a
huge opportunity there and as you know
literally what they do is they take
19-year-old kids and they train them on
how to be nuclear Engineers yes and then
they send them out on six-month whatever
underwater operating yes and there as
far as I'm aware there's never been a
nuclear Incident That's my understanding
yeah yeah um the other amazing thing
about that by the way it was pre-
Dei of course like just imagine how
amazing it is given everything we know
today that you could actually do this
without the enormous benefits of Dei
imagine what you could do with thei now
you're being now you're being
subverse quite possibly anyway so the
more serious part uh in those days as
you know they they also because they
could they knew they could do them in
subs and so therefore they just assumed
that they would also do them for
airplanes right they nuclear power
airplanes um that I did not you remember
you remember the Tom Swift novels that I
remember yes I'm reading them with my
nine-year-old and it's the very first
Tom Swift there's there's multiple
generation Tom Swift is Tom Swift boy
inventor these novels basically for for
kids they were like the whatever Harry
Potter of the of the time or something
but there's this this great series from
the 50s with the second generation Tom
Swift and and they're they're great and
it's like you know Tom Swift invents you
know this and that you know they they he
invents all these things and you get to
and then his adventures based on them
and so they're very exciting exciting
books but the very first book is Tom
Swift and His flying lab and of course
the flying lab is a Triple Decker 747
you know thing with uh this vertical
takeoff and Landing powered by its own
nuclear power plant I see and you just
assumed of course of course of course
you put a nuclear because and if you put
by the way a nuclear a nuclear plant in
a plane of course you could have a you
could have a 747 that takes off
vertically and and and by the way they
in the in in the book they literally
take the thing up to like 30,000 feet
and they just park it and they just hang
in midair and hover for three hours and
have lunch which you can do which you
can do you have limited power and so we
yes this is it and by the way this
technology is for people concerned about
carbon emissions this technology is the
Silver Bullet it is like we are we so
can so am I is is the general feeling my
general feeling
correct that if we unleash technology we
use the free market we use we we use the
government what the government has
already discovered in intelligent that
there are all kinds of problems we
already know how to solve we totally
know how to do this and to your point
most of the plants most of the nuclear
plants that we have today are now 30 40
50 60 years old we know how to build
much better versions of of course like
we we know how to build much more
sophisticated versions of this and by
the way so do the Japanese and others
and so the new plants would be much
better than the old plants they would be
much safer we know we know exactly how
to we know exact we know exactly how to
do this my personal my my my devious
plan my my devious plan is we should re
re we should reincarnate project
Independence we should bu able thousand
new civilian plants we should do the
Nixon plan cut everything over but
here's here's my way to get it done
politically which is we give Charles
Koke the contract um and the reason is
because it accomplishes everybody's
goals um he would do it you'd better
give us two sentences on who Charles
Koke is Charles Koke people know the
Coke brothers was always a misnomer I
mean there were brothers but really it
was when people think about the Coke
brothers The Genius of the family and is
the guy who ran Coke still runs um co co
C Coke Industries which is one of the
largest companies in the country one of
the largest priv companies in the world
it stands out in American Business
history as I recall if I think I think I
have this correct that uh Charles K and
his brothers inherited a modest
successful but modest company from their
father and built it into a company which
last time I checked had revenues of well
I don't know whether it was revenues or
Market it's a company that's worth a
hundred billion dollars I believe that
that's correct as of a few years ago and
did it without ever borrowing a penny
they did it in entirely on reinvesting
profits and they reinvest by by Doctrine
they re under under Charles's leadership
they reinvest 90% of profits every year
okay so why is he going to be interested
in nuclear by the way I don't know what
it's worth but I suspect it's much it's
bigger than that I'm it's very I think
it's very large very successful if to go
public but um but yeah look I mean
Charles is one of and he Charles so
number one Charles is one of the genius
businessmen industrialists of our time
um he also became of course a major
force in politics he he and the coch
brothers got tarred with this you know
they're fascist Nazis even though as you
probably know Charles is a Libertarian
he's a Libertarian free market guy he's
a melee he a melee basically right have
sort of identical Milton fredman he's
you know he's he's a Libertarian I've
interviewed him on this program yeah
yeah and by the way also just a
wonderful human being you know real
really you know warm and genuine
incredibly open uh wonderful guy um but
um so my idea is you give him the
contract to do it because number one
he'd do a great job because it's one of
the best one of the best Industrials in
the world and then two is so and he
would win because Coke Industries would
you know be building rebuilding the
power system for the US and then the
Democrats would win because they make
Charles Co care about climate change and
and and not just that but actually solve
it all right and so everybody would get
both what they most hate and most want
um now when I have Flo this idea in
Washington up until now um I haven't
gotten a lot of takers but you know
maybe it's time to okay to Brak it up
again Mark I'm going to try to extend
this theme of problems we already know
how to solve it if the Techno optimists
are permitted to address the problem and
that is now this is a flyer I don't know
that I'm right uh that's the Border oh
yeah during the Biden Administration
custom Services recorded 11 million
encounters leasing about 2.5 million
into the country to await processing the
government also admits admits some 2
million got aways so that makes by the
government's own admission at least 4
and a half million illegal entries into
the United States during the four years
of the Biden Administration okay on top
of which I note that as far as I can
tell Donald Trump in his first term only
Built 80 original miles of border wall
he refurbished wall and and streng but
but set all that
aside don't we have ground sensors
drones we can put up we can of course it
lies within the Ken of the United States
of America to control its own border
using the technology that we already
Poss am I wrong about this well let me
tell the story of this company called
andrel andril andil which you've
invested in which we've invested in okay
so the founder of Ander is this Super
Genius real life Tony Stark kind of
character Howard the Howard he was of
our time real life iron man name um Nam
Palmer lucky Palmer lucky um who's this
like super genius from from Orange
County um and he and we knew him really
well because he was the founder of um of
oculus which the VR company that then
metabot we were in investors in that and
so he's this is you know he's got two
two giant wins in a row in a row here um
um and basically he used the money from
from Oculus to basically start start
andr with a bunch of his Partners um and
the um and and they they launched the
company in uh right when the when the
Trump stuff in 2016 reached like white
hot criticality and everybody was going
like completely bananas um you know
Palmer shows up and he's like oh I know
how to solve the Border problem we do
basically sensor we do basically mesh
mesh networks with sensor Towers on the
on on the border and then with drones
you know doing oversight and then we do
what's called Sensor Fusion where you
have all these different disperse
sensors and then you bring them get
together on a single screen and then and
then you can tag individual people and
you can watch them come across and you
can use it for if there's a problem you
can miss end in the the the the
Personnel to solve them yeah exactly or
or by the way you can send in a drone
right Dr and and you know and look like
the border for anybody who works in
border we I'll tell you is look like
there's there's one thing which is
border enforcement and there's a lot of
questions you do with that but the other
is like people get in real Trouble On
the Border yes and they're like they're
dying they're
dying starvation and
like and so forth and so with a drone
you can find somebody who's in trouble
and help them right and bring them water
like and bring them water or by the way
the other problem is child you know
child trafficking and so it's like you
know how about let's get eyes on a
potential child trafficking you know if
there's like two adults and 20 kids okay
let's get eyes on that so that we're
ready you know so we can go get the kids
right and so there so obviously you want
to know what's happening but but this
literally was like this was like right
in the teeth of the build the wall kind
of moment and so so so Palmer Palmer com
comes in and pitches us and goes through
the whole thing and literally it's just
like oh my God this is like the genius
of all time we have to invest in this
company and his business plan is to use
technology to hunt Mexicans on the
southern Border in 2016 and we're just
like oh God like you know we just like
basically have a heart attack and and to
our to our discredit we Flinch and we
don't we don't make the investment um
andrel goes on uh and actually it's
interesting Andre was actually not very
successful in that under Trump because
it turns out Trump being a real estate
developer guy he actually wants wants
wants a wall and by the way still does
and you know and I think this time he's
by the way this time he'll get it
because now he knows how to do it but
you know as you know he ran into a lot
of roadblocks uh in in the first term
still built quite a bit but but but hit
roadblocks anyway so um so so so so
Palmer's like all right fine like
whatever whatever and so he what he
started doing is he took that technology
and he used it to start building
defensive systems for the military um
and so for example you have you have you
know a military base in the middle of
nowhere in Afghanistan or whatever and
like you know you have all these
potential threats coming at you and you
have the exact same problem you have
perimeter security problem and so they
they started deploying censor networks
and infusion Sensor Fusion and drones
and all these things to be able to
defend military bases and then the most
amazing one of the most amazing things
I've ever seen happened um uh which is
um and and Palmer was like a in the
valley was like a pariah right he was
like excoriated he was like constantly
being smeared and slandered for being a
horrible fascist nazi like being like
the worst person imaginable like all
this stuff
um and then this s incredibly and he
couldn't get invited industry
conferences and people just said all
these horrible things um the day Putin
invaded
Ukraine the political veillance went 180
degrees in a day and Palmer became a
hero of every liberal in Silicon Valley
um because now andril is going to Def
like there's two things that we know
there's two things every good American
liberal knows we absolutely must not
defend the American southern border and
we absolutely must defend the Ukrainian
border yes yes we must the ho UK border
right um and so and and you know and and
andril in that time had become a very
successful company and by the way had
was doing increasingly sophisticated
defensive military systems and by the
way now is actually doing offensive
military systems it's actually up up to
an including like full full weapon
systems um and so it it became it be all
of a sudden that technology became super
relevant to um to the Ukraine situation
as you know the Ukrainian Battlefield
has been a revolution in military
technology with the Drone stuff and and
you know and so like all all of Palmer's
theories are coming true Ukrainian kids
operating drones shut down the Russian
Navy in the black City it is an
astonishing achievement okay and they
take out these these you know these main
battle tanks which brings me to if I may
yeah just again your feel for it if I'm
still with the with the with the uh the
techno techno Optimist Manifesto this
notion of raising the technology flag
another problem we may not have it it's
larger it's more emot
but in this administ is Donald Trump is
doge is somebody saying get me a Palmer
lucky as deputy secretary of defense we
have to or here again this is Robinson's
Little way of thinking of it extremely
Elementary but it goes like this the
Chinese outnumber us and they always
will the Chinese have a big enough
economy to spend what they want to on
defense now and by many counts they've
already got more surface vessels than we
have they're working on submarines on
and on it goes our only sustainable
advantage over the Chinese our only
sustainable Advantage is going to be
technological in
and so we have to have a pentagon that
knows how to move quickly on Innovation
and somehow we're over there is able to
overcome the cultural divide between
straight laced Colonels who run the
requisition programs and the Palmer lues
of the world who walk who build their
companies wearing Hawaiian shirts and
Converse sneakers but we we ought to be
able to do that yeah so you may know the
guy going in is deputy secretary of
defense so number two who's like the
Chief Operating Officer for the Pentagon
is Steve I don't know oh so Steve feberg
was the longtime head of curus Capital
Management so he's one of the world's
leading private he's already on this
he's already on he's already on this
he's already on this and then he he ran
actually the this is the most good news
I've had at this table in a long he's
great he's great so this is probably I
think he is I mean look and they've had
Capo Ash Carter was who passed away was
a friend of mine they've had good people
in there but like I think I think Steve
is probably the best person in that role
since actually David Packard who was who
was in that role I believe um and and
and Steve Steve is like an incredible
operator and very aware of these things
and very steeped in this world um and he
ran the presidential intelligence
Advisory Board in the first Trump term
and is kind of fully integrated in um
and there's and then I'll just tell you
like without you know nameing names of
people haven't been announced but people
a lot of very smart people are putting
up their hands and going in excellent
and by the way the to your point like
this is a great example like the issues
are just starting right so the Ukrainian
Battlefield is a revolution by the way
there's also like all kinds of you know
unfortunately unfortunately Ukraine
being the tragedy that it is people are
learning a lot the nature of war is
changing unfortunately the same thing's
happening with Israel and and and Gaza
you know there's there's you know a lot
is being learned this is what happened
or some I can't remember who some famous
General said war war is a test to see
who can learn faster so the mil the
military so the military it's military
is one of these amazing things where in
peace time they're training and they're
preparing and they have all these
theories but they're not being tested
they don't have
customers there's no like there's no
Mark to Market in PE time you don't know
when you know unfortunately is when you
go to war and and that's when
all the learning happens and so there's
there's learning happening there uh
learning happening in in Ukraine there's
learning happening in Israel and Gaza
and then you know if something kicks off
with China there will be very rapid
learning very fast um I I would just
pose to you a a a challenge into into
the system is like it for example it's
not clear sitting here today with what
we know it's not clear that like surface
Naval vessels are actually used corre
right because like somebody has to
figure this out exactly and like
aircraft carriers are open like there's
a bunch you know we there are entire
military doctrines of not just us but
many other players that I asked someone
I probably shouldn't name because he
doesn't I don't know whether this was in
confidence I asked a former Admiral the
other
day if shooting begins over Taiwan how
close can American aircraft carriers get
and he said American aircraft carriers
must stay 1,000 miles away from any
hostile activity the Chinese have
already pushed the surface perimeter out
A Thousand Miles anyway to your point
you hypersonics hypersonics are coming
and then drones are coming exactly and
we're the just say we're at the very
this is why it's very important that
these people be good to your point um
the Drone thing is just at the very
beginning because like the Ukraine stuff
it's primar there's a lot of hobest
drones and there's these low-end drones
but like the drones are going to get
very sophisticated um and and they're
and they're and they're going to get
manufactured in much higher quantities
and so every time you every time you see
a drone today just think of that think
of that actually being a thousand drones
right and and then you have all you know
so there's going to be this massive
right so what is like what does a even a
naval Destroyer do against a th incoming
drones that are all armed with bombs big
enough to like blow a hole in the side
of it uh you mentioned Ukraine Ukraine I
think has been weaponizing jet skis jet
jet skis I think that was part of the
attack they did on the Russian surface
Fleet um was uh they turned they turned
commercial jet skis into into drone
bombs okay um and and so so so there's
all and you know it's long conversation
we had about you know there's all kinds
of ways to to win here but like these
questions all have to be looked at the
the the entire system needs to get
adapted being a democracy we have
trouble getting in front of these things
which which which brings me to I have a
few sort of last questions for you mark
sure um and for the first couple let me
play Devil's Advocate you Elon VC David
Sachs you guys are all acting from the
highest motives but I'm playing devil's
advocate here you're moving very fast
you're really moving fast those federal
workers whose jobs we want to eliminate
they all have mortgage payments they all
have
families um all of this
technology there were winners and losers
I mean I'm perfectly open to the
argument that overtime technology
creates jobs but when Uber came along
taxi drivers lost their jobs and now
self-driving vehicles are the next wave
and Uber drivers are going to be in
trouble okay
so all that said here's another brief
video and this also comes from the
interview I did all those years ago with
Milton Freedman but listen to Milton
fredman okay Milton
fredman if you are made dictator for one
day the next day the American govern no
no I don't want to be made dictator I
don't believe in dictators okay I
believe we want to bring about change by
the by the agreement for the citizens I
don't I don't believe in arbitrary let
me put it this way then persuade if we
can't persuade the public that it's
desirable to do these things we have no
right to impose them even if we we had
the power to do it if we cannot persuade
our fellow citizens to support changes
we have no right to make those
changes are you and Elon and VC and
David Sachs are the Doge
boys down with the political program of
engaging in
Persuasion and bringing your fellow
citizens with you day by day by day as
all of this goes forward so I want to
check myself out of this a little bit
you're an unpaid intern I know I
appreciate I appreciate you keep keep
trying to wrote me in a position of
formal Authority and power here but
again I want to stress both parts of
that unpaid in intern all right um uh so
I I'm not I'm not signing up for what
you're saying myself um I I will say
look I I think Elon is a world-class
Communicator obviously VC is a
worldclass communicator obviously Trump
is maybe the best Communicator of our
time um and so they'll you know they'll
they'll do I'm highly confident that the
three of them in whatever combination
whatever form that they decide they're
going to be able to do it um can I just
come back to your
techology CH unemployment this the thing
so so it's you probably know this
economists there is actually a way to
measure the pace of Technology change in
the economy um there's a way to measure
it and put a number on it um and with
related to everything both the positives
and negatives of Technology change
including job replacement and it's Paul
rers productivity growth Paul did a lot
of work around this but the basic
economic concept concept is productivity
growth all right and productivity growth
productivity growth is a measure it's a
it's the it's the quantitative measure
of of Technology change it it a few
other things that lump in but
fundamentally it's about technology
change and really what it is is it's a
metric for um how quickly an economy
year-over-year is able to produce more
output with less input right and then
you can you can go e either way on that
but fundament fundamentally that's
that's the lever and if technology can't
just the thought experiment if
technology can't be used to produce more
output with less input like what's the
point right if it's not good at like
bringing down jobs bring bringing down
costs and and increasing like you know
free spending power and increasing
demand in the economy then what's the
point right it's just then it's just a
game or something right and so so
productivity growth is the metric that
captures the actual impact and and
productivity growth therefore is the
metric that cap captures for example the
downstream impact on employment either
for for good or for bad right another
Pop Quiz um have we been live if you
look at the sweep of American History um
and sort of C history of capitalism
history Western capitalism have in the
last 50 years we've been living in an
era of high productivity growth which is
to say an area of furious technological
change and Future Shock and oh my God
look at all these amazing things and
what an impact they're having or have
we've been living in an area actually of
historically low productivity growth
with very little progress our friend pet
teal has persuaded me that it's the
ladder it's the ladder well it's for
sure it's for sure the ladder because
it's in the number you can see it in the
number it's demonstrable it's
demonstrable and so and and specifically
what happened is basically between
there's a long backstory here but
basically between in recent history
between call it 1920 and 1970 that that
50-year Arc productivity growth
throughout the economy moved much faster
was two or three times higher and then
basically starting around the time I was
born right around 1971 um basically it
it it took a permanent downshift and it
never recovered and it it it wobbles a
little bit during sessions it tis up a
little bit because people get more
efficient but it's basically been it's
been it's been generationally low now
for for for two generations um and so so
the whole game yeah excuse me this this
comes to a question I was about to ask
when Ronald Reagan again of that morning
again in America when Ronald Reagan took
office federal debt the total federal
debt as a proportion of GDP was about
32% right
today 26% right the whole game yeah is
going to be getting productivity growth
up correct you have to well so you have
exactly so you have to get productivity
growth up because that's where economic
growth comes from productivity growth is
what causes economic growth the reason
productivity growth causes economic
growth is because if you can generate
more with less then you can take things
today that cost $100 and then you can
get them in set for $90 $80 $70 $60 and
then the consumer or the business has
additional spending power that they can
use to buy new things that is the
mechanism of economic growth like that
is the actual mechanism for why
economies grow or or or or whether they
don't grow if productivity growth goes
to zero there is no growth that that
that that there is no economic growth if
productivity growth is high you will
have lots of job Transformations you
will have lots of jobs being created and
destroyed but you will have a growing
economy and you will you will have
basically an economic Heyday in which
there's opportunity everywhere and
people will look at it and and you see
you know there have been times like this
the mid90s had a little bit of this the
mid you remember like when there's a
surge of economic growth everybody like
gets really cheerful that's as a
consequence of productivity that morning
again in America what happened was that
by 1983 the stock market started to
recover and by 84 the economy itself is
starting to grow and grow really briskly
I think 8 84 85 the number was up to 6%
for something like eight months
rightful felt it that's right and so if
you care about the country and if you
care about the people of the country
what you want is growth you want
economic growth in order to get economic
growth you need productivity growth
things are going to change but you're
going to have the growth such that
people are optimistic and see lots of
opportunity for themselves and for their
children the enemy is not
technology-driven unemployment the enemy
is no growth the enemy is no growth the
enemy is to end up where the UK and
Germany and Canada have worked
themselves into which is no growth
because what happens and then you think
about the translation from economics to
politics what happens in start ripping
themselves AP ripping their countries a
part zero some politics if you have zero
some economics with no growth you have
to have zero some politics because the
only way for anybody to get anything is
to take it away from somebody else in a
high growth environment you have
positive some economics which means you
have positive some politics you have a
sense of possibility and opportunity
right and Awakening and growth and
excitement right and people are like wow
this is fantastic and I can't believe
all the opportunities and I can't
believe how fast my state living is
advancing and I can't believe the jobs
that are opening up to my kids and so if
we got this is where this the The
Narrative on this goes so sideways if we
got what people think is the apocalyptic
nightmare of Rapid technological change
which is to say rapid productivity
growth we would have a boom economy like
you've never seen and we would have
people be the happiest they've ever been
in their entire lives like that is
precisely what we should be going for
and by the way anybody who's listened to
this who's concerned about either
leftwing populism or right-wing
populism this is the answer right this
is the this is how you defang populism
the way you defang populism as as you
grow okay so so I'm going to repeat the
question that I asked at the very
beginning but this time a little more
seriously as I said a moment ago when
Reagan took office and worked those
changes federal debt was only 26% of GDP
and now it's 100 122% I correct myself
excuse me I think it was 32% now it's
122% in 1980 our adversary was the
Soviet Union and the Soviet Union was
bad and dangerous it had nuclear weapons
but its economy was essentially
negligible throughout the entire Cold
War I looked this up the other day
throughout almost the entire Cold War
the number of Soviets who studied in the
United States was just
50,000
China there are 250,000 students Chinese
Nationals studying in this country right
now your friend Elon Musk sold 650,000
Teslas in China last year
a single Factory it's almost it's really
a city a single Factory produced almost
all of the 218 million if I recall
iPhones that Apple sold around the world
last
year we can't live without China right
in some way people will attack me for
putting it that baldly but this is going
to be a trick yeah in some ways it's
more formidable than the Soviet Union
was so I put it to you we are in some
way ways in worse shape more polarized
as a country the federal government has
metastasized as you said we're deeper in
debt we're facing a more formidable
opponent in
China do you really believe we can pull
it off is there a chance for a national
renewal well let me say first both of
those problems are even worse than you
presented so as you're probably aware
the national debt is growing at a pace
of a trillion dollars per 100
days um and so this is one of the things
of the you know this has been this this
problem has been building for a while
but you know these last four years like
all whatever Governors were there before
just like got completely taken off and
so we've been spending money like it's
going out of fashion so you know
trillion dollars every hundred days yeah
Thomas Thomas Massie who's like you know
one of the only libertarian members of
Congress has he's an MIT engineer um
really brilliant guy and he he made
himself a lapel Debt Clock counter right
and so when you talk to when you talk to
Thomas it's worrying the increase in the
national debt um and his last time I
talked to him he said he needss to
re-engineer it um because uh we're at
whatever 37 trillion and we're adding
you know another trillion every 100 days
and the pace of adding because of the
compounding the pace of adding is
accelerating so it's going to be 90 days
80 days 70 days and so he say interest
payments now exceed the Pentagon budget
correct exactly and there there's no
there's no upper bound on where they can
go and of course you're this is the
classic cycle you can get into which is
you know the more that compounds the
higher rates rise the more you're
starving the real economy right um and
and then you know and then you get in
this Cascade where you know there's you
know as as as various economies discover
repeatedly in the world and our we've
discovered in the past you know you you
can get in these spirals that are really
bad on interest rates and inflation um
so so Thomas's challenge for I think
over over the holidays was to
re-engineer this clock to add another
digit um so that it's going to keep
working when it hits 100 trillion so so
like that train is like moving and you
know we could have a long conversation
about the legislative process has really
broken down with these giant omnus you
know kind of bills that get dumped on
people's desk you know the the day
before they're supposed to leave 1500
pages you know with 12 hours to read and
process um you know that that you have
to vote on or literally you know you're
you're you know they tell you you're you
know killing sick children and all this
stuff um and so like this is like a very
big speaking of the Doge this is like a
very big problem right um and then look
the the the the the China thing the
China thing that that the problem is
compounding and I'll just tell you where
where where I'm worried right now where
the problem is compounding so you
mentioned like the the the the sort of
iPhone iPhone assembly and that's a big
deal um but basically um there have been
uh there's three industries that sort of
follow phones um that are kicking in
right now one is drones um and in a sort
of in a bizarre turn of events the
Chinese basically own the global drone
Market all for all all basically the
consumer drones all the all the cheap
drones which by the way numerically then
are the drones that all the militaries
also use in overwhelming numbers and
something over 90% of all drones used by
the US military made in China and and
and and and the thing is it's not just a
company it's could you get to the Cherry
part please no no it's it gets worse it
gets worse it gets worse it gets worse
before it gets better so so the the
Drone thing is not just a company it's
an entire ecosystem so it's it's all of
the componentry we have a drone company
that's been trying to compete with this
the Chinese company number one the Biden
FAA has been trying to kill us this
entire time um trying to do all kinds of
things to make sure American drone
companies can't succeed as part of their
war on Tech this something I we it's
like literally just another in the long
list of ways that they've been just
trying to absolutely kill us um but two
is China has figured this out and so the
US has been sanctioning AI chips going
to China China is now sanctioning they
sanctioned our drone company for the
battery because the battery is made in
China right um and so so so they they
have like significant leverage not just
for the drones but for the entire supply
chain they have cards to play they have
cards to play by the way the Drone
supply chain is very analogous to the um
car supply chain it's a lot of the same
kinds a self-driving electric car is
very similar to a drone or to a for that
matter to an iPhone it's a it's an
electrical mechanical device but it's a
lot of the same kind of Battery
Technology chip technology sensor
technology so they now have an entire
they now have they now have their
version of what the Germans used to have
which is the the sort of the thousands
of of mid-market companies that make all
the parts that go into a car but the
German ecosystem is still making them
for old internal combustion cars the
Chinese ecosystem is making them for
electric cars and self-driving cars and
of course that means the the the the the
new Chinese cars that are coming out are
really good and they have a giant
advantage on cost and and they're they
are starting to bring to Market cars
that are equivalent in quality to
Western cars at a third or a fourth of
price so that's coming um and then the
the big one that follows um phones
drones and cars logically is robots um
and so we are we are on the verge of the
actual robotics Revolution that we've
all seen in science fic science fiction
science fiction stories forever having
and the Chinese are ahead of us there
100% now now now we have now we we have
the leading but this this is important
we have the leading software like we
have the leading R&amp;D like we we have the
we have the smartest I'm convinced we
have like the smartest robotics AI
people we have a bunch of companies we
still have the best people we have the
best people specifically for the design
of the systems but we don't have
anything resembling the manufacturing
capability at all including and again
it's not just whether a company can
build a robot it's whether you have the
thousands of companies that make all the
components that go into robots an
example um there you know you you've
seen these videos of the of the um
Boston Dynamics robot dog and you can
you know they're they're not a very
aggressive company going to Market those
are like $50,000 products you can go buy
one uh China has an equivalent product
that by the way looks extremely similar
and and and um behaves extremely similar
and has among its capabilities it can
climb stairs um it can do back flips uh
it can stand on its H legs um it can
climb you know and ascend inclines um
you can put wheels on it it can shoot at
like 30 m hour it can lock the wheels
and climb stairs with The Wheels On by
the way it also is hooked into a large
language model so it talks to you um in
a very nice you know very very plumy
voice it will teach you quantum physics
you know full voice control um price
point
$1,500 right now cheer me up cheer me up
so so this is all coming but so so so so
so Step One is Clarity right and then by
the way everything we've just been
talking about is also Upstream from from
from all the military applications right
because it's that same supply chain that
then goes into everything we talked
about in the military and so like I just
say this is like a very fundamental
thing that we have to confront and
having this very fragmented approach
where we on Tuesdays hate the domestic
American Technology industry and are
trying to kill it and on Thursdays think
we're going to somehow develop some sort
of competitive response to China on cars
or on you know weapons in the future
like we we have had there has been no
coherence another one of my favorite
questions to ask in Washington is okay
what's the whole of government strategy
on
technology of course zero What's the
whole government strategy on China you
know zero
right turns out the president matters
yes and so we yes this is precisely why
this all matters so much like this has
to be directly confronted we and our
companies are enthusiastic at signing up
to solve these problems we need we need
a government that wants to work with us
in this Donald John Trump is alive to
all of this he yes yeah 100% no question
and he is and then his people are and
they they yes this stuff they understand
mark would you close our conversation by
reading this excerpt from your essay the
Techno Optimist Manifesto love to uh we
believe in the romance of Technology of
Industry the
romance uh the Aros of the Train the car
the electric light the skyscraper the
microchip the neural network the rocket
the split atom we believe in adventure
undertaking the hero's journey rebelling
against the status quo mapping Uncharted
Territory conquering dragons and
bringing home the spoils for our
community um we believe that we have
been and will always be the masters of
tech technology not Mastered by
technology this is really key point
today victim mentality is a curse in
every domain of life including in our
relationship with technology both
unnecessary and self-defeating we are
not victims we are conquerors We Believe
America and her allies should be strong
and not weak economic cultural and
military strength flow from
technological strength a technologically
strong America is a Force for good in a
dangerous world we believe in greatness
Mark Andre thank you very much Peter a
pleasure for the Hoover institution in
Fox Nation I'm Peter Robinson thank you
for joining us
