hi welcome back to the channel today we
are going to look at Philip kik's novel
Martian time slip we're going to do this
the usual way so don't forget to check
the description box of this video for
time stamps and additional resources
before we dive in uh Happy New Year
everyone and I want to take a moment to
sincerely thank you all for your support
both returning viewers and new
subscribers the recent growth of this
channel has been noticeable and I'm
grateful for your engagement and
enthusiasm for these book discussions
Martian time slip was first published in
1964 during what is often considered the
peak of Dick's most creatively ambitious
period it was a string of novels that he
produced that year alongside the three
Stigmata of Paul eldrid and Dr Blood
Money dick wrote Martian time slip
during a period of intense productivity
but also personal instability by then he
was in the his third marriage to Anne
Williams
Rubenstein with whom he had a daughter
Laura the novel reflects some of Dick's
recurring obsessions including societal
collapse mental illness and the effects
of capitalism on both individuals and
the the environment set on a colonized
Mars it explores the themes of
ecological destruction and alienation
while weaving in speculative ideas about
time and Consciousness Dick's own
struggles with mental health and his
interest in existential Psychiatry
deeply informed the portrayal of
characters like Manfred Steiner a young
boy with autism whose unique perception
of reality disrupts those around
him Martian time slip takes readers to a
future where humans have colonized Mars
carving out a fragile existence on the
dry and desolate Planet governed by
bureaucratic entities and riddled with
societal inequalities the Martian
settlements reflect many of contemporary
Earth's unresolved tensions
the story centers on Jack Bolan a
repairman grappling with his past
struggles with skitsophrenia and Manfred
Steiner a young boy with autism as Jack
becomes entangled in the schemes of Arie
cot a character that serves as a f foil
for narcissism and Ro
capitalism his health begins to
deteriorate Mars itself is as much as
characteriz the humans inhabiting it its
harsh environment amplifies the tensions
among settlers the book is packed with
misogynistic sexist racist and even
fascist dialogues and statements which
makes it hard to digest at times the
native Martian population serve as a
haunting reminder of colonial
exploitation and the cost of progress
the colony's economic dealings
particularly in real estate and water
supply illustrate a system governed by
class divisions and political power
plays colonialization of Mars is
portrayed as an extension of Humanity's
desire to dominate and exploit with
settlers attempting to Terror form the
planet to replicate Earth's environment
and
Customs issues of a profiteering racial
ethnic tension and institutional
corruption are woven throughout the
novel dick mors is a dry and hostile
landscape its natural resources already
exhausted by human activity the canal
system managed by the United Nations
serves as a Lifeline for Martian
settlements symbolizing both the
Ingenuity of human engineering and and
the inequities of a capitalist
Society access to water a vital resource
is stratified favoring the wealthy and
perpetuating social
inequalities a dynamic reinforced by the
bureaucratic inefficiencies of the UN
the planet's
desertification parallels the pollution
and overpopulation driving migration
from Earth to Mars as the narrative
unfolds Mars's transform
becomes an allegory for Humanity's
shortsightedness Settler's efforts to
reshape morals to suit their needs
replicate the same mistakes that
rendered Earth uninhabitable
perpetuating a cycle of ecological
destruction The Narrative also critiques
the social structures that underpin
colonization Mars's Society is dominated
by capitalist greed and hierarchical
power dynamics with entities like land
speculators exploiting the environment
for personal gain marginalized groups
such as the natives face systemic
oppression akin to the treatment of
indigenous populations on Earth
relegating them to servitude and
exclusion institutions like education
systems reinforce these structures
teaching settlers children to adapt to
their constrained roles within the
colony rather than challenging its
inequities the geopolitical
undercurrents of Earth's conflicts also
manifest on Mars the role of Israel in
the novel exemplifies the Persistence of
Earth's nationalistic and territorial
disputes as a significant player in the
colonization effort Israel's presence
highlights the extension of geopolitical
tensions to Mars and illustrates how
Humanity's expansion does not Escape but
rather amplifies pre-existing
conflicts this incorporation of Earth's
political rivalries underscores the
novel's critique of colonization as an
exercise in replicating terrestrial
power structures rather than forging a
genuinely new societal paradigm
the chamber in which kindly dad sat
consisted of one end of a living room
with fireplace couch coffee table
curtain picture window and an easy chair
which kindy dad himself sat a newspaper
open on his his
lap several children sat attentively on
the couch as Jack Bolan and the master
circuit entered they were listening to
the expostulations of the teaching
machine and did not seem aware that
anyone had come in the master circuit
dismissed the children and then she
started to leave
too I'm not sure what you want me to do
Jack said put it through its cycle it
seems to me that it repeats portions of
the cycle or stay stuck in any case too
much time is consumed it should return
to its starting stage in about 3
hours a door opened for the master
circuit and she was gone he was alone
with his kindly dad and he was not glad
of
it hi kindly dad he said without
enthusiasm setting down his tool case he
began unscrewing the back plate of the
teacher kindly dad said in said in a
warm sympathetic voice what's your name
young
fellow my name Jack said as he
unfastened the plate and laid it down
beside him is Jack Bolan and I'm a
kindly Dad too just like you kindly dad
my boy is 10 years old so don't call me
young fellow
okay again he was trembling hard and
sweating oh kindly dad said I see
what do you see Jack said and discovered
that he was almost shouting look he said
go through your godamn cycle okay if it
makes it easier for you go ahead and
pretend I'm a little boy I just want to
get this done and get out of here he
said to himself with as little trouble
as possible he could feel the swelling
complicated emotions inside of him three
hours he thought
dismally kindly dad said little Jack it
seems to me you've got a mighty heavy
weight on your chest today am I
right today and every day Jack clicked
on his trouble light and sha it up into
the works of the
teacher the mechanism seemed to be
moving along its cyle properly so
far maybe I can help you kindly dad said
often it helps if older more experienced
person can sort of listen in on your
troubles can sort of share them and make
them light
okay Jack agreed sitting back on his
home just I'll play along I'm stuck here
for 3 hours anyhow you want me to go all
the way back to to the beginning to the
episode back on earth when I worked for
Corona Corporation and had the
occlusion start wherever you like kindly
dad said graciously do you know what
schizophrenia is kindly dad I believe
I've got a pretty good idea of Jackie
kind cyad said well cyad it's the most
mysterious malady in all medicine that's
what it is and it shows up in one out of
every six people which is a lot of
people yes that certainly is kindy Dad
said at one time Jack said as he watched
the Machinery moving I had what they
call situational polymorphous
schizophrenia simplex and kindly Dad it
was rough
I just bet it was kindly dad said now I
know what you're supposed to be for Jack
said I know your purpose kind of that
we're a Long Way from Home millions of
miles away our connection with our
civilization back home is ten years and
a lot of folks are Mighty scared kindly
that because with each passing year that
link gets weaker so this public school
was set up toe present present a fixed
mil to the children born here an
earthlike environment for instance this
fireplace we don't have fireplaces here
on Mars we Heat by small atomic
furnaces that picture window with all
the glass sandstorms would make it
opaque in fact there's not one thing
about you that's derived from our actual
World here do you know what a bleakman
is kindly that
can't say I do little Jackie what is a
bleakman it's one of those indigenous
races on mors you know you're on Mars
don't you kindly dad
nodded schizophrenia Jack said is one of
the most pressing problems human
civilization has ever faced frankly
kindly dad I immigrated to mors because
of my skitzophrenic episode when I was
22 and worked for Corona Corporation I
was cracking up I had to move out of a
complex Urban environment and into a
simpler one A Primitive Frontier
environment with more freedom the
pressure was too great for me it was
immigrate or go
mad that Co-op building can you imagine
a thing going down level after level and
up like a skyscraper with enough people
living there for them to have their own
Supermarket I went mad standing in line
the bookstore everybody else kindly died
every single person in that bookstore
and in that Supermarket all of them
lived in the same building I did it was
a society that won building and today
it's small by comparison with some that
have been built what do you say to
that my my kindly dad said shaking his
head now here's what I think Jack said I
think this public school and you
teaching machines are going to rear
another generation of
schizophrenics the descendants of people
like me who are making a fine adaption
to this new planet you're going to split
the psyches of these children because
you're teaching them to expect an
environment which doesn't exist for them
it doesn't even exist back on earth now
it's
obsolete ask that Whitlock teacher if
intelligence doesn't have to be
practical to be true intelligence I
heard it say so it has to be a tool for
adaptation right kindly Dad yes little
Jackie it has to
be what you ought to be teaching Jack
said is how do we yes little Jackie
kindly D interrupted him it has to be
and as it said this a gear tooth slipped
in the glare of Jack's trouble light and
the phase of the cycle repeated itself
you're stuck Jack said you've got a warn
gear tooth yes little Jackie kindly dad
said it has to be you're right Jack said
it does have to be everything wears out
eventually nothing is permanent change
is the one constant of life right kind
of Dad yes little Jackie kindly dad said
it has to be shutting off the machine at
its power supply Jack began to
disassemble its main shaft Preparatory
to removing the worn gear
in Martian time lip Philip Kik melt
speculative fiction with incisive social
critique costing autism and
schizophrenia as gateways to Alternative
experiences of time and reality rather
than merely conditions to be fixed from
challenging mind 20th century
psychiatric labels to foreshadowing the
modern neurodiversity movement Dick's
portrayal of non neurotypical or
neurodiverse Minds invites reaches to
question the presumed boundaries of
normaly by weaving disruptions in time
seamlessly into the subjective
experiences of his characters dick
underscores the contingent nature of
reality itself and posits that those who
live outside conventional mental
Frameworks can in fact perceive the
deeper truths that remain concealed from
the
majority I'm going to dive into four
aspects of dicks treatment of
schizophrenia and autism
now thck aligns schizophrenia autism and
other non neurotypical states with a
deeper and often more authentic
perception of reality particularly in
Martian time slep where altered Minds
perceive disjointed or nonlinear time
Manfred Steiner's autism and Jack
bolan's schizophrenic episodes
illustrate this process by stripping
away the socially agreed upon sense of
chronological order in depicting
manfred's private inner World dick shows
how such a perspective can challenge
assumptions about linear cality and
objective reality the novel underscores
that to exist outside conventional Norms
of perception is not necessarily to be
disengaged from reality but rather to
experience a reality that is more
layered and multifaceted
although this quote highlights autism
specifically it also resonates with
Dick's broader theme individuals who
live outside society's common frame of
reference can in his view grasp truths
vealed by Collective
consensus autism and schizophrenia
become lenses for for an alternative
understanding of time and
environment book's portrait of autism
and schizophrenia situates both
conditions in mid 20th century medical
debates about mental deficiency versus
unique modes of
experience set on a frontier like
Martian Colony the novel reflects the
era's clinical discourse which often
pathologize non-conforming mental States
while oscillating between competing
labels this historical backdrop
underscores how society's definitions of
normality and the subsequent stigma
attached to deviations have shifted over
time
by outlining this lineat Frame di
highlights the fluidity of psychiatric
classifications and their social
ramifications viewed through a
historical lens autism and schizophrenia
in the novel reflect not only individual
cognitive differences but also the
broader cultural forces shaping what is
defined as
deviant in many ways Martian time slip
prefigures later debates on
neurodiversity by depicting Manfred
Steiner's autism and Jack bowan
schizophrenia not merely as pathologies
but as States revealing New Dimensions
of time and proc ception rather than
simply portraying these diagnosis as
unfortunate deficits di complicates The
Narrative manfred's inability to
communicate conventionally stands
alongside his extraordinary temporal
shifts which hint at entire Realms of
experience that neurotypical individuals
might never perceive
although this line reflects a dismissive
societal attitude towards autism things
wi such attitudes
into in the context of man's ultimate
importance to the unfolding plot Martian
time slip invites readers to re-evaluate
assumptions about utility communication
and human worth the novel thus becomes a
impression voice anticipating later
neurodiversity perspectives which
recognize autistic and schizophrenic
individuals as possessing valuable if
unconventional
insights throughout the novel
disruptions in time literal Time Slips
are utilized as a metaphor for these
subjective realities experienced by
individuals with autism or
schizophrenia this structural device
underscores the impossibility of a
single objective
reality both Manfred and Jack navigate
temporal disjunctions that reveal how
personal cognition shapes the fabric of
one's
experiences in seeing these slips
primarily Through The Eyes of characters
deemed mentally ill dick challenges the
standard hierarchy of whose reality is
valid such a statement refle a wi spread
social tragedies of the time one that
acquainted autism with parental fault or
deficiency yet Dick's narrative subverts
this Prejudice this so-call deficit is
bound up with expanded temporal
awareness for both Manford and Jack the
line between disordered perception and
revelatory vision becomes blurred
suggesting that any single standard of
sanity and by extension any need
chronology of time may be untenable
in Martian time slip Philip K dick
delivers a work of speculative fiction
that discusses mental illness social
structures and the nature of time itself
by blending these elements with the
backdrop of a Martian Colony he
highlights Humanity's enduring flaws our
exploitation of resources the
marginalization of those who think
differently and our tendency to
replicate the Ral conflicts wherever we
might
venture the novel's treatment of autism
and
schizophrenia stands out not just for it
Impressions but for its empathy dick
doesn't reduce these conditions to
pathologies instead he elevates them as
alternative ways of perceiving reality
at its core Martian time slip is a story
of survival both physical and ex
existential set against the Stark beauty
of a desolate Martian
landscape as always I hope this review
deepens your appreciation for Dick's
work and Sparks curiosity about the
broader themes it explores we will stick
with dick PA intended for a little
longer I gifted myself to the UN
teleported
man Radio free albo and
stigma for Christmas so expect these
reviews to drop throughout January thank
you for joining me today and I'll see
you in the next one bye-bye
n n
