hello and welcome back to unheard I'm
Florence Reed today I'm joined by Matias
desmat he is a professor of psychology
at the University of gent in Belgium and
the author of the psychology of
totalitarianism he is a world expert in
a condition that he calls Mass formation
psychosis which he observed during the
pandemic years it's a legacy that if we
don't learn from we are surely doomed to
repeat so Professor desmat is someone
I've wanted to speak to for a long time
he joins us now live from Belgium matius
desmat welcome to heard well thank you
for having me y take us back to the
beginning how did you first become
fascinated by her mentality it's not
something that we find many academics
delving into very often while I was
writing my PhD the so-called replication
crisis started in the Sciences which
showed which revealed this crisis
revealed that for instance in the
medical Sciences up to
85% of the papers of the academic papers
cannot be reproduced meaning that they
are completely worthless uh from a
scientific point of view even a child
could see that most research for
instance in Psychology but also in
medical Sciences in economies and so on
was in most respects completely absurd
and could never lead to Reliable results
and that was the first time in my life
when I started to be fascinated by that
question how it was possible that highly
intelligent people could buy into all
kinds of research methods research
narratives which were utterly absurd why
is it that these
University academics were unable to
notice that the replication crisis was
happening yes that that's that's a very
good question of course because uh this
this strange phenomenon that that uh an
entire group of Highly Educated people
such as the academic Community can all
buy into absurd narratives has been
observed much earlier like in the 19
Century gusta La describ it already
gusta La describe already that Highly
Educated people even more than people
who have a much lower degree fall prey
to a kind of group think which gusta
laon call already Mass formation or
crown formation and and the reason why
well we don't know absolutely sure but
probably it has to do with the fact that
Highly Educated people have a very large
desire to conform for social conformism
they try to they try to
uh match the social Ideal Image as much
as possible and that is exactly why they
uh continue the education system so long
so that's probably one reason uh another
reason might be that our educational
system actually doesn't learn to think
people for themselves it learns to think
them all in the same way like and our
educational system from looked upon it
from a certain perspective is an
indoctrination system it's a kind of IND
indoctrination which prepares people for
propaganda that is used later in society
it makes them vulnerable for propaganda
and uh so I noticed that for the first
time after doing my PhD started to be
fascinated by mass psychology Mass
formation and uh the associated
phenomenon of the emergence of topal
Italian states and then the corona
crisis started my spontaneous reaction
was to start to study the statistics a
little bit in the first week of the
crisis because I was trained to do so so
I focused on I started to to study the
statistics and immediately from the
first week of the crisis onwards I
published this paper titled the fear of
the virus is more dangerous than the
virus itself in which I warn Society try
to warn them that the mortality rates of
the virus the official statistics
dramatically overrated the mortality
rates of the virus published I published
this this paper
and uh uh almost everyone knew it in
Belgium and Holland I think that paper
but it didn't make a it didn't make a
difference and strangely enough like
three or four months later it was proven
beyond the shade of a doubt that
actually me and several other skeptical
statisticians had been right that the
initial statistics had been dramatically
overring the dangerousness of the virus
let's just pause there for a moment
because of course now given what we know
it's much more generally understood that
there is a a vast gap between the
hypothetical catastrophic models of
covid Destruction and the reality of the
deadliness of the disease I think many
people who previously would have been
skeptical of that now accept that but at
the time when you were publishing that
article that would have been quite a
dangerous thing to say what was the
response from your colleagues and from
The Wider Community when you wrote that
it was it was terle it was like there
was so much mudslinging people trying to
smear my reputation like during the
first weeks of the crisis I think that I
was the first one in Belgium to speak
out in a critical way at least the first
Professor or at least the first in the
media and I I I remember that in a few
days I was like Public Enemy Number One
in Belgium and and nevertheless I had
the feeling like okay my training did
prepare me very well for this moment and
if I don't do it who will do it so I
decided to continue to speak out and
then after a few months in May 2020 I
decided to change my strategy because at
that moment it was proven beyond the
shade of doubt that the mortality rates
and it had been wrong like for instance
the initial statistical models predicted
that in a small country such as Sweden
60,000 people would die if the country
didn't go into lockdown by the end of
May 2020 and by the end of May 2020 only
6,000 people died in Sweden and even
more convincing was the fact that the
people who buil the initial models
actually admitted in a hearing before
the House of Commons that their initial
statistics had been dramatically
overring the virus so it was clear at
that moment and even that didn't make a
difference society and the media the
mainstream media continued as as the
initial statistics have been right and
that was the moment where I decided to
focus on the psychological processes
where I decided to try to show people
why an entire Society could go along
with a narrative that was utterly absurd
and that was much more successful than
trying to show people in a statistical
way what had been wrong so this is a
question many of us had during the
Pandemic those of us who have a more
skeptical nature I suppose is why is it
that people are happy to live under a
lie why is it that many people seem not
just willing but actually kind of
exuberant to embrace a narrative that is
quite patently untrue especially people
who otherwise have been skeptical
questioning people of their lives what
is it about a moment of crisis like that
that really encourages people into uh a
herd mentality to understand that to
understand why people p fall prud this
her mentality group think or as I call
it Mass formation process you need to
understand two things you need to
understand how throughout the last 200
years an elite emerged which used more
and more accessibly propaganda so that's
one thing but there is a second process
besides propaganda which is also
extremely important namely through
throughout the last 200 years so the
population became more vulnerable less
resilient for propaganda and the reason
was that the population started to feel
more and more lonely and that in its
turn was a consequence of the
rationalist fuel man in the vault so I
won't explain why the rationalist fuel
man in the world this materialist Fuel
Man in the VA let to loneliness but just
assume that it is the case so we could
see the last 200 years that more and
more people start to feel lonely and
just before the corona crisis loneliness
picked like up to 60% of the people
worldwide reported to feel lonely and
only connect to other people through the
internet and the UK to Rea May appointed
a minister of loneliness because she a
knowledged how many people felt lonely
and then the United States the US
sergeon general reported that there was
a loneliness epidemic so and that's
crucial as soon as people feel lonely
they will start to be confronted with
lack of meaning making okay they will
and you see that for instance in the
fact that uh before the corona crisis up
to 60% of the people reported uh that
they that that they considered their own
job to be a so-called job a job
without any meaning or purpose
and once they are once people feel
lonely and once they feel that their
life makes no meaning they will
typically be conf conf fronted with what
I call in my book freely floating
anxiety frustration and aggression that
means their mental system will be
saturated with a kind of anxiety
frustration and aggression they cannot
connect to a mental representation and
then many people feel like that and the
number of people feeling like that
increased Time After Time throughout the
last 200 years when many people feel
like that and the entire Society is
saturated with this free floating
anxiety something very typical might
happen if under these
conditions someone distributes a
narrative through the mass media
indicating an object of
anxiety and providing a strategy to deal
with that object of anxiety for
instance lockdowns to deal with a
dangerous virus if someone provides a
narrative indicating an object of
anxiety and a strategy to deal with the
object of anxiety all this freely floing
anxiety might at once connect to the
object of
anxiety because that's something our
psychological system does in a
spontaneous way because in that way
without knowing it we feel in control
again because if we are anxious without
knowing what we feel anxious for we feel
completely out of control and we are
always looking for narratives which
indicate an object of anxiety and
provide a strategy to deel object of
anxiety so that's the first step of the
formation of a mass of a mass formation
of the formation of a her you could say
and
then a second step happens which is even
more
important in the Second
Step because so many people at the same
time participate in the strategy to deal
with the object of anxiety people have
the feeling that they fight a collective
heroic battle with the object of anxiety
the collective battle with the virus and
people feel as if they escape their
loneliness which was their initial
problem so and that's why you you could
see during the corona crisis all these
nurses and doctors uh dancing together
and and people clapping their hands uh
this that that that is just a result of
a this strange enthusiasm people feel if
they have been feeling lonely for a long
time if they have been feeling that
their life was without purpose for a
long time and they suddenly have the
feeling that they are connected again
and have the feeling that their life has
a new purpose so that is what actually
happens in the formation of a mass this
is quite counterintuitive though in a
way because many people might argue that
oh this is just Downstream from a kind
of natural herd mentality that seems to
abound in culture and people just go
along with the group but actually what
you're suggesting is that it's born of
hyper individualization that it's the
isolation of the individual that leads
them to the point where they are
mentally weak from the level of
loneliness that they suffer because of
that isolation and that it's in fact an
attempt to individualize people that has
caused them to get to the point where
they hook on to any crisis that would
allow them to join a collective is is
that kind of correct where I'm at
exactly so you have uh you know the
ancient masses were different from the
modern masses the modern masses were uh
or so-called lonely masses that's
something that was described by jacu for
instance in his book on propaganda and
these modern masses these lonely masses
meaning masses who are formed not by
people who meet in person or physically
but by people who are all sitting
isolated in their own living rooms being
infused by Propaganda and narratives and
mental representations through the mass
media well these lonely masses emerge
exactly at the moment of extreme
individualism first you have extreme
individualism and then suddenly people
laps into the opposite like extreme
collectivism that's what a mass
formation is and that's how a
totalitarian state emerges a
totalitarian state as Han AR said is a
diabolic effect between masses who use
relentlessly propaganda to manipulate
the population and the part of the
population usually 20 to 30% who blindly
goes along with the prop propanda so
exactly that's what happens in in a
mation first extreme individualism and
isolation then extreme collectivism you
say 25 to 30% there people might be
surprised by how low that number is it
feels like an extraordinarily small
amount of population tell us more about
that how is that possible that a small
amount of society could then cause this
radical change the largest group in
society usually dominate society and
what is so characteristic of
totalitarianism is that it is dominated
by a relatively small 20 to 30% Group
which which has a which which has a very
extreme cohesion which all things the
same has the same ideal images is in the
grip of the same propaganda and then 60
to 65% of the people sometimes even more
get so scared of this group they know
that there is something wrong with this
narrative but they just prefer to remain
silent and then there is an even smaller
group who actually chooses to speak out
uh and then that group is just crucial
that group usually is between 1 and 10%
somewhere in between and this group is
just crucial because if if you want to
know what you can do against Mass
formation and emerging totalitarianism
then you really have to understand the
mechanism even beyond what I explained
like one of the crucial things is that
the manformation as I said seem to
liberate people liberate people from
their loneliness and it seems to
liberate them from their loneliness
because in the reality it makes them
even more lonely because a mass is a
group a very typical kind of group it is
a group that is formed not because
people connect to each other but because
people all connect to the same
Collective ideal meaning that or the
same Collective narrative the same
Collective ideology meaning that
like after a
while a manformation sucks away all the
love all the energy between people and
it injects it all in the bond between
the individual and the collective so the
bonds between individuals become weaker
and weaker and the bond between the
individual and the collective becom
stronger and stronger and after a while
you can see that even the strongest
bonds between individuals such as the
bond between a child and its mother
become weaker than the bond between the
individual and the state or the
collective this is the famous kind of
Soviet example every time again everyone
starts to report everyone mothers report
their children to the states children
report their mothers to the state you
can find this conversation on the
internet of me with an Iranian woman who
lived in Iran during the revolution in
the revolution in 1979 and she describes
there how as a member of the upper
Clause of Iran she had to witness
how people were hung on Friday evening
and one evening she saw a mother who
reported her son to the state and this
mother went on the scaffold hung the
news around the neck of of her son and
when he died she received the she was
very proud to receive a medal of uh for
being a heroin for what she did that is
a dramatic end stage of a mation where
all the love between people is sucked
away and all injected in the Bon with
the collective so once you understand
that you understand something very
important Mass
formation is mass
hypnosis and in the end stage of the
hypnosis people become so convinced of
the hypnotizing narrative that they are
willing to eliminate everyone who
doesn't go along with that narrative but
the hypnosis is produced by the voice of
the of a hypnotist namely the
propagandist and if there is no one else
who speaks out during a mass formation
then the mass hypnosis will almost
always go to the last stage where people
start to be so much in the grip of the
mass formation that they are willing to
kill and eliminate everyone so that
means that this small group of people
who are willing to speak out absolutely
should do it gusta Leon described that
already in the 19th century he said this
small group of people will never be
capable of waking up the masses usually
not but that doesn't mean that their
words have no effect if they continue to
speak out they will constantly disturb
the hypnosis and prevent it from going
to the last stage and make sure that the
masses do not arrive at the ultimate
stage where they start to be convinced
that they have to eliminate everyone so
it's just crucial no matter from what
perspective You observe the phenomenon
of mass information and emerging
totalitarianism continue to speak out
that's what history has shown is time
and time again if the people who did not
go wrong with the system stop to speak
out the cruelty start and there are
examples I assume through history where
there has been an earlier intervention
we we don't only see kind of the full
formation of mass psychosis we have
sometimes seen these early forms and
early Rumblings and then they have died
down I mean I actually would argue that
Co might have been one of those examples
of a situation that did seem to plateau
and then fall off given the lives that
we're all leading now that could have
been very different had some people had
their way tell me about those previous
examples where actually individuals or a
rejection of that kind of mass mentality
did in some way change the course of
history Al there were many examples
there were many examples like actually
uh in the in the beginning of the 21st
of the 20th century totalitarianism
started in many places around the world
and and and the reason why it developed
into a fully fledged totalitarian system
system in Germany and Russia probably
was because there very clearly the
resistants prefer to stop to speak out
and there were in many other places BR
and there were many other emerging
totalitarian systems but
there the reason probably was that there
the resistance didn't make the choice to
to to stop the speak out and there the
emerging totalitarianism mitigated and
in most places almost disappeared and
now in the corona crisis we probably
have seem the same like like for
instance a few months ago uh the wh
declared the medical emergency situation
because of the monkey pox and nobody
really bought into the narrative and
they they after a few days uh they
declared the emergency situation over so
the same people who actually Champion or
or want to create a globalist
technocratic surveillance
totalitarianism including a top down
imposed medical policy the same people
of course will use every opportunity
they have to try to impose the same
system as as during the corona crisis
and uh but we see that in like with the
monkey PO Box it just didn't work and I
also I believe that it it has a lot to
do with the fact that there are many
people maybe it's a small percentage but
still many people who decided and you
are who are very determined to continue
to speak out so what we have to do is to
continue to speak out in a very quiet
way not claiming that we are the only
ones who know the truth no but just
saying like Okay to me this doesn't feel
good and I will I don't say that uh you
are wrong and I am right but I just say
that I will live up to the edical duty
every human human being has to try to
articulate what he feels inside that's
the point ironically almost the co
pandemic might have acted as like a
psychological vaccine for upcoming
pandemics where we've just seen it with
empo where the suggestion is that we
should be entering into the same level
of Hysteria and the necessary lockdowns
and all of the things that went along
with Co but you have more people who
seem immune to that herd mentality now
is that actually an optimistic sign is
that something we should feel happy
about that because we averted a
totalitarian
Health state that we've managed to now
put ourselves in a better position for
the coming decades when new threats of
totalitarianism and crackdowns come down
the line yes definitely I'm very
optimistic about that you know I'm
realistic in the short run I believe
that in the coming years we will go
through difficult times like there is
not only the enox narrative or the
corona narrative there is also the
Ukraine narrative the Middle East
narrative and so on which actually are
also heavily propagandized narratives
which in their way also might lead us
into a totalitarian system but I agree
with you that during the corona crisis
so many people started to become aware
that there is so much manipulation that
these globalist institutions uh in a
certain way can go can go quite mad and
that we don't have to try to find an
alternative that mankind will have to
look for an alternative for a different
way of a human living together than this
this technocratic way and um I'm I'm in
the long run I'm I'm very optimistic I
really believe I hear the same
everywhere everywhere I travel so much
almost every week I go abroad to give
lectures and talks and everywh I noticed
that there are so many people who start
to become aware for instance of
the value of Truth and sincerity for the
human being like so many people start to
be aware in this society which is sick
of propaganda and manipulation and lies
so many people start to become aware
that we have to try to re-appreciate and
to ReDiscover what it means for a human
being to speak the truth my intuition
tells me that we are going through a
metaphysical Revolution right now and
that this metaphysical Revolution
essentially boils down to this what we
see is a kind of a process in which a
propagandized Mass a mass a crowd in the
grip of propaganda is going through a
kind of a battle or struggle or a
confrontation with a group of people who
are united by sincerity and Truth speech
or at least I see how this group of
people who is trying to resonate with
sincerity who is trying to find out what
truth is that this group of people
slowly emerging in society and it's very
simple the era of totalitarianism which
started in the beginning of the 19th
century the beginning of the 20th
century the era of totalitarianism will
be over as soon as this group United by
sincere speech will be energetically
stronger than the propagandized mass so
that's what we have to ReDiscover alt
together what does it mean for a human
being to speak in a sincere way this
situation though could be very easily
politically manipulated I mean just in
the last few days I've watched Donald
Trump sit in front of journalists from
Bloomberg and the Wall Street Journal
and tell them to their face that they
are marketeers of fake news and that
they are spreading lies to a massive
Applause from an audience who are
exactly in the position that you
describe people who have felt that they
have come out of some state of psychosis
and have entered into the light of the
truth and someone like Donald Trump is
right there to collect them when they
emerge is that something that concerns
you are you positive about the idea of
these large political figures who are
using the kind of descriptions of an
idea of totalitarianism Mass psychosis
to further their own political aims or
is that something that actually holds
risk for it Us in the long-term future
both are true these people these
politicians can be part of the solution
and they can be part of a new problem
let's say that that it the fact that you
do not fall prey to one man mation does
not mean that you cannot fall prey to a
different mation and the we I I observed
that in the during the corona crisis as
well I think like there were a certain
percentage of the people who didn't buy
into the karuna narrative but who
sometimes bought into other narratives
which also led to the emergence of a
mass a group of people where everyone
had to have the same opinion who all had
the same object of anxiety and Donald
Trump might not fall prey to the
mainstream Mass foration but he might
give rise to a new mation that's
perfectly possible and I don't say he
will do that I don't say that he might
nobody knows how Donald Trump would
evolve and there is a certain risk
associated with with with Donald Trump
but every human being is risky and
nobody knows exactly what he or she will
do when he wears the ring of power so I
would say let's hope that Donald Trump
evolves in a good direction but nothing
uh we have no guarantee that it will be
the case of course are you still
practicing psychoanalysis is that
something you still have time for in
your busy schedule yes yeah when you're
sitting in a room with a a patient do
you notice things about their psychology
there in a world that reflects what
you're describing here in in the kind of
outside structures yes definitely since
the corona crisis you can see how uh
this loneliness disconnectedness between
people the dividedness in society leaves
its traces and so at at idual level as
well the prevalence of anxiety and
depression I think has increased with 25
or 30% in society since the corona
crisis and what I can see is that now
most people who come to my practice are
people who are skeptical about the
corona narrative and people who are not
skeptical about the corona narrative uh
often do not come anymore and I think
that's very sad because we should not
allow a narrative to to divide us we
should just accept Okay uh you go along
with this narrative I go along with a
different narrative or or I or at least
we should try to be as open as possible
for for opinions and I I think it's sad
as that as a therapist I attract people
not all of them absolutely not identify
with with with the same narrative you
become an echo chamber yourself after
working so hard to help other people
exit their Echo Chambers it's it's a
it's a a tough gig but tell me more then
about that kind of empathy we could have
for the other because I think it's very
tempting for anyone who's spoken out
during one of these times of Crisis and
feels themselves to have paid the price
for speaking out that you want to damn
those who were part of the herd can
actually that vision of this as more of
a state of hypnosis herd mentality give
us a bit more empathy and Grace to those
who have taken part in What might be in
the case of Corona virus you know some
quite antisocial behavior in the case of
as you mentioned the Iranian regime
absolutely horrendous crimes how can we
think about those people in a more
gracious way when we understand really
what's going on in the psychology behind
it the theory on mation can help people
to uh consider the other people who did
go along who did buy to the narrative uh
uh to be human beings at least many
people told me that when they learned
about my theory that for the first time
they could understand that their family
members for instance reacted in the way
they did so I I think it can be helpful
to understand the mechanism of mation we
should also be aware that actually
falling pre to mation is something that
just can happen we might also fall PR to
certain manformation to certain grouping
to certain H mentalities I think we all
do from time to time of course it's
clear some people are more vulnerable
for it than other people and some people
are really capable of going to the last
stage of the mation where they start to
where they really start to dehumanize
everyone who doesn't go along with them
so and then we have something very
important here like in a mass
formation or in an emerging totalitarian
system what happens is that people lose
all ethical awareness they lose all
ethical awareness and they are
dehumanizing so the only resistance
against totalitarianism is to do exactly
the opposite that is something that
Solin for instance describes in a very
evocative way in his book The gulak
archipelago where he describes how he
lived in the gulock under Stalin for 15
years I think uh and what he describes
is the following the only resistance
against Mass information and
totalitarianism against this radical
dehumanization of society is to stay
loyal to ethical principles and to
humanity yourself so that means that you
do not react in the same way if people
treat you in an inhumane way if people
don't want to listen to you anymore if
people believe you are crazy if people
believe that you are a danger for
society if people believe that you
should be excommunicated then you have
to react at least that is what I believe
in exactly the opposite way you have to
say oh okay maybe you don't want to
listen to me but I will try to listen to
you and for me you are still a human
being it's perfectly human to become
inhumane strangely enough so that's the
point we should always while the world
dehumanizes the only remedy is to be the
one who stays loyal to ethical
principles him or herself that's what
soulin describes in such a beautiful way
that's what the people like Levi
described after being in the
concentration camps in Nazi Germany
that's exactly what they describe what
gives a human being the strength to
survive this what gives a human being
the strength to go through this
what gives the people the human being
the capacity to do something about all
this is to stay loyal to ethical
principles in the first place the the
ethical principle that every human being
has the duty to articulate the words
that seem sincere and honest at that
moment so that's the point that saying
the only we will never be able to
predict what will happen in the years to
come there is a very good chance that
Society lapses into extreme chaos where
nothing is predictable
anymore initially the system will try to
use the chaos to
impose a surveillance uh Society that's
clear but even that will never be able
to control the chaos because Society has
a complex dynamical system and and and
the characteristic of a system that goes
into a chaotic phase a complex dynamical
system is that it is incontrollable even
the smallest difference in a system can
make the system manifest in a completely
different way so there is a very good
chance that they that we are heading for
chaos extreme chaos and the only thing
that will be capable of being a guiding
principle a Guiding Light in this chaos
is ethical principles we should not
worry too much about rationally
understanding what will happen it is I
think it's good that we try to R we
understand what happens but it's not
that what will bring the solution it's
not that what will give us a certain
stability as a human being the only
thing that will give us a certain
stability as a human being is just this
no matter what happens we will be the
people we will just stay loyal to
ethical principles all the rationalists
who have spent all of their lives
working to dismantle religion as a form
of mass formation psychosis the idea of
the Christian faith the church being an
example of her mentality have they done
more harm than good then because the
destruction of those religious
communities must have some part to play
in The increased loneliness and lack of
community that we are now seeing that
has led us into the state we're in or do
you think that actually that is a noble
aim in itself and that wherever someone
seeks out um herd mentality they they
ought to fight it yeah that's it's a
complicated question you ask there
because the problem of totalitarianism
started when the religious Fuel Man in
the vault was replaced by the
rationalist fuel man in the vault so you
can clearly see that uh Mass formations
existed also when the religious f man in
the world was dominant let's say before
the 18 18th century the mass formations
became much stronger after uh uh the
collapse of the religious F man in the
world they lasted so long and so many
people fell prey to it that uh the mass
formations could give rise to this new
kind of state in the beginning of the
20th century this new kind of state
which was called a tarian state
so there is a certain relationship
between the collapse of the religious
human man in the world and the emerg of
the problem of uh uh Mass formation and
and
totalitarianism uh at the same time
returning to institutionalized religion
wouldn't be a real solution to the
problem because institutionalized
religion uh definitely in our times
combined with the kind of Technology we
have the kind of mass media we have
would probably also give rise to mass
foration so I believe rather that what
we have to redes discover is the seminal
the original religious experience which
actually strangely enough is quite
similar to the
original scientific experience someone
like Albert Einstein said in the in the
preface of a book of Max plun he said
many people think that science is born
from rational thinking but that's not
true adult he said science is born from
a certain
capacity to resonate with the phenomenon
you investigate and he he used the
German
term feeling one science is born from a
capacity to feel one to feel
emphatically connected with what you
investigate and in in a speech for a
certain American University he said and
this feeling is identical to a a cosmic
religious feeling so
actually both religion and science all
the mystical
Traditions
emerge from a feeling of humity an
awareness that we are identical that we
are all part of the same Universal Soul
all religious all religious principles
which say that you shouldn't do
something to someone else that you don't
want to be done to yourself for instance
they actually all emerge from this
awareness from this feeling of unity and
it's that original experience that
original seminal religious and
scientific experience which we should
ReDiscover and which we should make the
center of a new way or a new way a new
way of living together and someone who
wrote a wonderful book about that was
someone we all know Al Huxley who wrote
This Book Brave New World in which he
showed one of the most important
thinkers about totalitarianism but what
few people know is that he wrote a
second book a second book much later on
in his life which was titled the doors
of perception and in that other book he
talks about exactly this experience this
experience of unity and I believe that
like in this way Alo shle tried to
provide an alternative for the
totalitarian paradig like all
totalitarian thinkers all totalitarian
leaders actually believe that they will
bring their people to a new rational
technological Paradise Hitler thought so
Stalin thought so and now ideologues
like you no Harari thing the same human
being will merge with technology and a
new technological Paradise will open
where people don't die anymore where
they don't suffer anymore and so on so
on where there is no war anymore that's
the total tent Paradise Han AR said
there is only one problem with the
totalitarian paradise and it is that in
the end it looks so suspiciously L like
hell she said and that's the point I
believe that Al those Huxley tried to
offer a real alternative for a
totalitarian Paradise a paradise that
emerges quite to the contrary of the
totalitarian Paradise exactly at the
moment we stop thinking right Al and we
can start to resonate again we can start
to know the world around us and a
resonating way in an ellic way what is
it like to be a scientist who rejects
rationality that must be a strange
position to be in all major scientists
did so all major scientists articulated
this idea that in the end the essence of
life can never be grasped in a rational
way that's just crucial of course we
have to think rational as rational as
possible I love to think rational but
rational understanding is not our
destiny if you really walk the path of
rationality in a faithful way until the
end you will reach a point where you
transcend rational thinking and where
you move to a new way of knowing a way
of knowing that is much more feeling in
nature that gets in touch with the
object it tries to know that resonates
with the object it tries to know Samir
culture was very well aware of that the
entire rational training to become a
marshal artists
artist was finished not before you left
all rational rationally learned
techniques behind and moved to a new way
of practicing the martial arts an
intuitive way a way of practicing the
martial arts starting from the sixth
sent of the warrior so when the
scientists have shown is actually the
same we need to walk the path of
rationality as far as possible but our
destiny the ultimate understanding is
not rational in nature my final question
for you before I let you go mat are
there any common traits of the people
the individuals or the groups who
successfully thwart Mass formation
psychosis from the 19th century onwards
when Mass formation was studied in uh in
a more or less systematic way this
question has been asked and almost every
talk and every lecture and every
Workshop I give this question has
repeated like what uh characterizes the
people who do not fall prey to mass
foration you
know my first answer would be nobody
knows because throughout the last two
centuries nobody was really capable of
specifying certain characteristics that
all people share that do not fall prey
to my affirmations in the end I do
believe that there is something these
people share that you know everyone
sometimes Falls PR to mation but there
are certain characteristics that can
make you wake up from every Mass
information time and time again and this
the most the most fundamental
characteristic definitely I believe is a
certain loyalty to sincerity and Truth
as a human being we can always choose
between two ways of finding a certain
strength and a certain stability most
people will always try to find a certain
strength a certain stability in the
world of appearances that means that
most people will do their utmost best to
look a little bit like that Ideal Image
the other wants them to embody they will
do their utmost best to live up to all
kinds of social rules uh which other
people impose to them just because they
want to
feel what the other wants them to be
okay that's one way to find a certain
stability and then there is a second way
to find a certain stability which is
exactly the opposite what also gives you
a certain stability is to do exactly the
opposite to try to be as sincere as
possible to try to articulate these
things that people usually hide behind
this world of appearances that people
usually don't want to show to other
people and that's sincere speech sincere
speech is a kind of speech sincere words
or this kind of words which reveal
something that you usually behind hide
behind your outer fake Ideal Image that
kind of speech is a kind of speech that
literally if you speak starting from
that which you hide behind your outdoor
Ideal Image your speech literally
penetrates
through the veil of appearances it
penetrates through it it makes a a hole
in your ego and through that hole you
start to resonate again with the world
around you you start to to feel really
connected with the world around you and
it is this resonating feeling this
feeling of being real of of existing as
a soul it's that feeling that also gives
a certain stability and so it's this
Choice as a human being we always have
the choice either we try to find our
strength and stability in the world of
appearances or we try to find it in the
real world and to decide decisive act
the decisive Act is the act of speech if
we choose to speak sincerely we will
always lose something in the world of
appearances but we will win something in
the real world and in the beginning
speaking sincerely all these demands
that you want to go through this phase
of anxiety and uncertainty because when
you speak sincerely you always lose
something and the fake world
you always have the feeling like that
people might stop liking you or
something because you do not match the
ideal image anymore and that's the risk
we have to take we have to be willing to
lose something maybe even everything in
the world of appearances in order to win
the only thing that really matters in
only to win who we really are in order
to really become someone in the real
world Matas I'm sure we could talk for
for hours more but I'm afraid we have to
end thank you it's been a real pleasure
to have you on today yeah thank you for
having me on floor was a special to talk
you that was Professor Matia desmat of
the University of gent an expert in
totalitarianism and mass formation
psychosis the condition that he has
coined which led us to our pandemic
lives but also perhaps have taught us
about what it means to be a resistor of
her mentality the lessons we learned
from covid and that era might be carried
forward into years to come and he has a
bit of optimism for us there that
actually the robustness of the
psychology of a group who have gone
under the spell of mass formation
psychosis and broken out of it might be
stronger than it was before thanks to
him for coming on to you for watching
this was unheard
