hey quick question um in this clip is
Tucker Carlson making a statement of
fact remember the facts of the story
these are Undisputed two women
approached Donald Trump and threatened
to ruin his career and humiliate his
family if he doesn't give them money now
that sounds like a classic case of
extortion if this sounds familiar it's
because those two women that he's
talking about are stormmy Daniels and
Karen McDougall whose names you may
recognize from recent news when the
question of hush Money Paid to Daniels
led to 34 felony convictions for Donald
Trump guilty on all 34 counts of
falsifying his business records hiding
how he reimbursed his former fixer for
paying off a porn star before the
election Tucker doesn't buy the
mainstream media version though so he
enlightens us remember these facts of
the story were unded he told us what
these women did this wasn't hush money
they approached Donald Trump and
threatened to ruin his care doesn't that
sound like a classic case of extortion
except Tucker didn't claim any of that
at least not according to to a federal
district judge who said that his lawyers
persuasively argued that this was
non-literal commentary and that he
wasn't stating actual facts remember the
facts of the story these are Undisputed
this was the decision in 2020 is
McDougall V Fox News Network that we
shouldn't believe Tucker Carlson when he
speaks this generated a bunch of
headlines at the time article after
article holding this up like some kind
of Smoking Gun saying hey even Fox News
thinks that they lie but in the carnal
pleasure of making fun of Tucker Carlson
in 2020 I think all these headlines
missed the real story the real shocking
thing to me is that Tucker Carlson could
literally claim he was stating
Undisputed facts and when he was called
out for defamation the law had his back
in fact a whole host of people have his
back from the advertisers that funded
this program to the producers that
greenlit this piece to the court that
signed off on this as legally protected
speech we have a media ecosystem that
not only produces misinformation it's
designed for it I want to talk to you
today about the things that media
literacy can't fix after all no matter
how literate you are you can't read
facts that aren't
there in the summer of 2021 my friend
and I were stopped at a gas station in
Arizona by a man named Larry who asked
if he could interview US for his YouTube
channel my friend didn't notice the
don't tread on me style t-shirt he was
wearing and so cheerly agreed on our
behalf to do the interview I however
suspected that Larry had asked us in
particular because we were two young
people wearing masks in an otherwise
maskless part of the country at this
time two young libs that he could own on
camera curiosity got the better of me
though so we talked with Larry and he
recorded Larry told us that we were
potentially foolish to have taken the
vaccine that it could be dangerous I
pointed out that vaccination rates
correlated with less covid by County at
the time demonstrating their efficacy to
me but Larry waved those numbers Away by
just saying oh no no no no no no those
numbers are made up you know to control
you I could tell you about more details
of the conversation here but the whole
thing basically went like that where
Larry's fears became problems that
Society needed to answer for and even
when the answer was relatively clear
that didn't mean that he accepted it
this moment stands out in my memory
whenever I think about misinformation
because in that conversation with Larry
it felt like I was talking to the
personification of misinformation
someone who distrusted all available
evidence and believed what he wanted to
I think we all know a Larry in one form
or another misinformation became
something of a household concern around
2016 with the Trump campaign you are
fake news and brexit I think the people
in this country have had enough of
experts with uh organizations from
acronyms mutating during covid looks
like by April you know in theory when it
gets a little warmer it miraculously
goes away hope that's true and
eventually just kind of existing in
every conflict now they're eating the
pets of the people that live there I
think that a lot of people are
uncomfortable with what misinformation
does both to people and Society for good
reasons so Solutions have been something
of a Hot Topic in the last decade and
the most popular answer by far is media
literacy media literacy has been
championed by Educators activists video
essayists and random people online who
claim to care about the truth the
prevailing discussion centers media
literacy as an antidote for a posttruth
world sure the rich and Powerful may
tell lies lies to everybody but if they
don't believe them then who cares the
National Association for media literacy
education or namely defines media
literacy as the ability to access
analyze evaluate create and act using
all forms of communication my friend Zoe
who you'll see throughout this video
recently made a video of her own on this
topic where she stress tested this
definition in various ways the Zoe bake
is that media literacy
is having intellectual humil
and curiosity for or about I'm not sure
which proposition to use here so it's
it's having intellectual curiosity and
intellectual humility for the things
that you are consuming acknowledging
that your perspective is not the only
one that there is a multitude perhaps
even like an infinite amount of
perspectives that one can have in Media
or have about media and curiosity
meaning wanting to actually figure out
what those different perspectives are
and so that's why I think those two
things are like necessary I'm just going
to accept the definition from namely for
the purposes of this video mostly
because I read a lot of work from them
and definitions aren't my main focus
right now as long as we have a working
one that is broadly agreed upon oh also
I'm I'm almost exclusively talking about
news and informational media literacy in
this video so if you came here to see me
dunk on random Attack on Titan takes
sorry wrong video the popular
understanding of media literacy that you
might find on Twitter or YouTube is
pretty optimistic and I think that
that's for good enough reason but the
popular conception often leaves out a
lot of the actual history media literacy
didn't simply spring into existence in
2016 when we realized that people don't
trust the news in 2009 writing for the
first volume of nam's Journal of media
literacy education Scholars Renee Hobbs
and Amy Jensen describe the complex
evolving history of media literacy
education as a highly contextualized
activity that takes many forms it's easy
to see media literacy as an extension of
the practice of rhetoric developed
during theth Century BC to teach the art
of politics through the development of
oratory and critical thinking it's also
possible to see its roots in the
emergence of film as a tool for teaching
and learning particularly in the
development of language critical
analysis and literacy skills they also
recognize that the field is incredibly
diverse and in its opinion on the
purpose of media literacy often
described through the tension between
protection and empowerment two opposing
or sometimes complimentary goals that
media literacy education can work
towards early 20th Century Media
literacy study arose from the analysis
of propaganda wondering if education
could protect readers from undue
influence more recent conceptions have
focused on Civic engagement and
empowering students with the technical
ability to participate in an
increasingly complex communication
invironment the history that leads up to
Modern media literacy is Broad and
far-reaching drawing from many
disciplines like technology
communication studies media studies
education political science rhetoric and
the broader Humanities it's a real Beast
of a subdiscipline which kind of drove
Zoe and I both insane this summer not to
like make it a maybe a bigger deal than
it is but it sort of like affects
everything media is one could argue like
all things all things are Media or at
least all things are Communication in
some form my mind is currently dominated
by confusion I I I I think that this
topic is yeah it is it is a quite a a
quagmire from the late '90s up into the
2010s however the field had begun to
focus on what I'll refer to in this
video as an educational approach to
media literacy governed by that
definition from namely I read just a
minute ago in this conception media
literacy is something that we can teach
people a kind of modern critical
thinking toolkit to clarify this a
little further I think it's helpful to
look at Hobs and Jensen's analysis of
nam's core principles which help them to
define media literacy not just by what
it is but also by what it isn't though
they don't want to excuse media makers
of their broader responsibilities to
society they also are clear to point out
that media literacy is not a place for
media bashing or a leftist ideological
perspective on media systems instead
they view their role as teaching
students how they can arrive at informed
decisions that are most consistent with
their own values more on this later this
educational approach is the media
literacy that I grew up with and based
on my viewer demographics if uh you got
any media literacy education when you
were growing up it probably looked like
this too you probably had an emphasis on
Research skills and finding trusted
sources for me me once a semester we
would have one English or history class
where we'd go down to the library and be
told that Wikipedia is bad actually the
focus is on students thinking critically
about media they consume rather than
being critical of media and though I'm
teeing us up for a criticism of this in
a second tier it's not because I hate it
or because I think it's ineffective even
I respect Renee Hops and the other
Scholars whose work I have cited in this
video a lot and it's clear to me that
media literacy education has made
massive advances in the last 30 years
proving that when done right this stuff
really works in one study in 2017 over
2,000 youth ages 15 to 27 were shown a
sample of evidence-based social media
posts mixed in with posts with
misinformation the study found that
those with media literacy education were
better at identifying misinformation and
at avoiding ideological bias and it
seems that this effect wasn't just a
product of education but media literacy
education specifically they found in the
same study that other educ ation like
prior political knowledge didn't have
the same protective effect as media
literacy education contrary to
Conventional wisdom this study also
indicates that political knowledge is an
insufficient support for accurate
judgments of partisan claims in contrast
to these findings regarding political
knowledge we were heartened that media
literacy learning experiences that aim
to promote accurate Judgment of Truth
claims appear to be helpful individuals
who reported high levels of media
literacy learning opportunities were
considerably more likely to rate
evidence-based posts as accurate than to
rate posts containing misinformation as
accurate even when both posts aligned
with their prior policy perspectives and
similar Studies have shown that news
media literacy can help adults to
identify conspiracy theories another
study from that same year of 400 adults
found that greater knowledge about the
news media predicted a lower likelihood
of conspiracy theory endorsement even
for conspiracy theories that aligned
with their political ideology there are
many such studies that show this type of
efficacy for media literacy that when
it's done right it helps people believe
lies less often which is really great
and most impressively to me when it
doesn't work the field seems genuinely
interested in understanding why and
finding a way to make it function better
in their discussion of a study by
Weinberg and mcrw Monica Bulger and
Patrick Davidson point out that not all
media literacy education is created
equally the study compared how PhD
historians professional fact Checkers
and Stanford University undergraduates
evaluated online social and political
information they found that while
historians and students used Trust
metrics that could easily be gamed or
manipulated EG look of a website domain
names logos professional fact Checkers
would leave the website to quickly
research its validity not all media
literacy skills are created equally sure
some are still more likely to lead you
to get tricked than others but that
doesn't mean we should throw out the
whole field just because we found some
problems current gaps could in fact be
addressed by Consulting disciplines that
have already had to confront truth as an
existential problem like fact Checkers
and Librarians you're watching a video
essay right now so I'm going to go out
on a limb and say that you probably find
this exciting or at the very least
encouraging cool or mildly interesting
we're living right now at the start of a
potential golden age for understanding
how media impact us both personally and
socially and part of what makes that
excitement so palpable is that there are
massive online communities of people who
eat this up and care about getting
the details right as a YouTuber I am
doing media literacy and when people
watch my videos and respond to them they
are are performing media literacy to
some extent or another there's a very
good chance that you care about media
literacy because in the last half decade
you've seen some of the greatest hits of
online misinformation debunking we have
pieces correcting historical
inaccuracies drawing attention to online
propaganda and a veritable subgenre of
Prager youu takedowns there is
potentially the largest energy behind
media literacy there ever has been in
history but with this excitement there's
a bit of a double-edged sword that we
have to be aware of and that's actually
why I'm making this video when Larry
approached us at that gas station in
2021 I sincerely believed that I was
going to have what it takes to convince
him that the things he believed were
incorrect that he had fallen for
misinformation I thought that I was
going to be well equipped enough to
refute all of his points I'd seen enough
misinformation debunking surely I could
lead him to the light but that isn't
what happened because you see for every
second that Larry and I spoke to each
other there were dozens of hour hours of
content behind what each of us were
saying an entire media reality filled
with factoids arguments and talking
points that were bouncing around in each
of our heads it is very unlikely that in
the span of that one conversation I was
ever going to outweigh the entirety of
Larry's media diet I had it all wrong
and there's a chance that you might too
media literacy is good but I don't think
that it can be the thing that saves us
from misinformation at least not on its
own when so much human interaction is
dictated by media we can't just teach
people to read that media critically and
call it a day and say that
misinformation is solved at some point
we have to ask some uncomfortable
questions about what they're watching
how it got to them and who made it at
some point we can't just ask about media
as an incidental component of education
at some point we have to talk about it
as if it is reality itself we have to
think of media not just as an object but
as an environment a year and a half
after claiming that Karen McDougall had
extorted Donald Trump Tucker Carlson
went on to become the most watched host
on cable news between June 8th and June
14th 2020 he was averaging an audience
of 4 million with 680,000 of those in
the coveted 25 to 54 demographic several
advertisers were boycotting him at the
time over his statements on the black
lives matter protests this may be a lot
of things this moment we're living
through but it is definitely not about
black lives and remember that when they
come for you and at this rate they will
but but Fox claims that all national
advertising dollars and ads were moved
to other programs on the network with no
net loss of AD dollars their quarterly
report supports this claim as well with
a nearly $700 million year-over-year
increase in television yes Tucker
Carlson generated plenty of bad press
for Fox in 2020 but this didn't make him
a liability he was a massive asset in
the month that Karen mcdougall's lawsuit
was dismissed he averaged 4.6 million
viewers once again the most watched host
in cable news and briefly before that
the most watched host in cable news ever
Karen mcdougall's lawsuit was dismissed
by US District Judge Mary K visoso who 9
months earlier had been appointed to
that position by Donald Trump she
dismissed the suit because McDougall had
not offered a plausible interpretation
that the statements Mr Carlson made when
read in context are statements of fact
additionally since Karen McDougall was a
public figure she had to provide a
plausible inference of actual malice in
what Tucker Carlson had said I want to
point out briefly so I don't get a bunch
of law Bros in the chat that I don't
think McDougall was ever going to win
this suit even if it had gone in front
of a more sympathetic judge because of
the stringent standards applied to
defamation suits but still how is Tucker
Carlson saying remember the facts of the
story these are Undisputed not a
statement of fact well according to
visoso it's because earlier in this
segment he said that he was parting the
opinions of Michael Cohen for the sake
of argument now assuming honesty isn't
usually a wise idea with Michael Cohen
but for the sake of argument for the
sake of argument let let's do it in this
case everything he says is true why is
what Cohen is alleging a criminal
offense remember the facts of the story
these are Undisputed since he had
claimed earlier in the piece he was
going to review something for the sake
of argument a reasonable riewer should
obviously not confuse this for a
statement of fact right but in normal
human speech if someone says that
they're saying something for the sake of
argument but then interrupts themsel and
says remember the facts of the story
these are Undisputed wouldn't you expect
that the next thing that they say is
true my point here I guess is that the
legal standard by which we assess what
lies are allowed and which lies are not
doesn't map perfectly on to the way that
people actually speak because For the
record what Tucker Carlson said isn't
true to public knowledge McDougall never
approached Trump her story was purchased
by the national Inquirer because its
owner David pecker was a friend of
Donald Trump's and wanted to keep it
from going public a tactic known as
catch and kill so here we have a media
system that buries stories for its
political allies when those stories come
to light anyway it attempts to discredit
them with misleading statements when
those misleading statements get
challenged for legal harm they hire top
lawyers with their record-breaking ad
Revenue those lawyers arguments are then
assessed on a stringent legal standard
by a sympathetic judge Who was appointed
by a political Ally and when that judge
clears the air the oppositional press
Snidely remarks that a guy who has way
more reach than any of them ever will
admits that he lies sometimes as if
that's a Victory and the
antidote to all of this the way to stop
the rich and Powerful from spreading
lies is supposed to be media
literacy let's start this next section
by playing around of my favorite game
it's called has anything like this ever
happened before spoiler alert the answer
is almost always yes in 1922 political
columnist Walter Litman wrote a book
called public opinion uh here's a quote
it is interesting to note that the
general reader of a newspaper has no
standing in law if he thinks he's being
misled by the news it is only the
aggrieved party who can sue for slander
or Lial and he has to prove a material
injury to himself the law embodies the
tradition that General news is not a
matter of common concern Litman was
troubled by the way that the French and
American governments had edited and
censored various Communications during
World War I and he wrote public opinion
to attempt to impart how fragile public
opinion truly is and how powerful the
media can be in shaping it even in 1922
his comment on defamation laws isn't
some call for all lying to be illegal or
something rather he wants readers to
notice that some lies are legal and some
lies aren't the choice as to which lies
we have laws against and which lies we
don't is just that a choice we create
our media ecosystem through active
decision-making inspired by this I want
to balance the educational approach to
media literacy we discussed in part one
with what I'll call an ecological
approach Lance straight of the media
ecology Association defines media
ecology as the study of media as media
that's a little unclear though so um he
uses a metaphor of a Billiards game to
elaborate on what he means by that when
someone asks us what happens in a game
of Billiards we're likely to talk about
the turns that the players took the
movement of the balls on the table their
collisions with each other who won the
game details of the actual game itself
we could consider this the content of a
game of Billiards but a media ecologist
may ask you instead to focus on the
table that the games are played on the
table has a certain shape and the
pockets are in a certain location and
these details inform the rules and what
turns the players might take and in what
order in this way the structure of the
table changes the content of every game
of Billiards we can apply the same type
of thinking to Media to great effect a
television program for example has words
images and sounds that appear from the
speakers and on your screen that are the
content which we can analyze all we want
but we shouldn't become so focused with
what's on the screen that we forget that
the screen is there all together or that
someone owns the rights to the airwaves
the cameras that recorded the show and
the contracts with the performers
television is a medium and its structure
changes the content of every television
program but you might ask why do I care
about all of this esoteric when
it comes to media literacy well I'd
argue that being able to understand the
medium as opposed to content is probably
the most important medium media literacy
skill you can develop but if you're
anything like me the media literacy
education that you grew up with was very
heavy on content analysis and not so
heavy on medium analysis we're taught to
verify claims review sources research
the authenticity of a piece's author
which are all great ways for telling if
content is trustworthy but what do we do
if a medium is designed in such a way
that it incentivizes misinformation at a
rate we could never account for with
education this problem has been noticed
by many before me I am far from the
first to realize this as early as 1950
for example theorists Max horkheimer and
Theodora dorno were noting that the film
and radio industries were incredibly
dependent on investment from large
corporations and Banks and that as a
consequence of this they began to
reflect the political interests of their
investors the dependence of the most
powerful Broadcasting Company on the
electrical industry or of film on the
banks characterizes the whole sphere the
individual sectors of which are
themselves economically intertwined the
Relentless Unity of the culture industry
Bears witness to the emergent Unity of
politics in 1987 Nome Chomsky and Edward
S Herman took this a little bit further
with their book manufacturing consent
the political economy of the mass media
which was a collection of case studies
of the type of influence adorno and
horkheimer were talking about they laid
out a five filter propaganda model to
describe the continuous alignment of
news media with the United States
government and its corporate allies in
one particularly telling example they
note how a public Media Station was
incentivized to no longer criticize
large corporations public television
station WN lost its corporate funding
from Gulf and Western in 1985 after the
station showed the documentary hungry
for profit which contains material
critical of multinational corporate
activities in the third world the London
Economist says that most people believe
that WN would not make the same mistake
again and modern writers and journalists
have expanded on this idea yet again
describing how large tech companies have
taken this type of control over the
media and put it in fewer hands than
ever before several pieces have noted
the influence that one man Joel Kaplan
has had at meta as their VP of global
public policy he's lobbied against more
accurate human moderation he's invited
conservative figures to meet with top
Facebook officials and even gone so far
as to say that the site shouldn't remove
disinformation because it would
disproportionately affect conservatives
when control over information is so
concentrated that one man can change
what billions of people see and hear
it's really hard for me to believe that
education is going to stop that type of
influence in all of these examples the
medium sprays out misinformation faster
than we could ever hope to educate
people to spot it to make it clear this
is why I've been foaming at the mouth
about Tucker Carlson in this video at
one point I think he epitomized
misinformation for a lot of people but
he is not the last and he won't be the
worst to do so Tucker is a temporary
avatar for a Timeless issue not an
aberration of the system but part of its
design modern media literacy Scholars
have been aware of this for a while I
don't want to pretend like I'm pointing
it out to them for the first time but
they do all seem to have some question
marks as to what to actually do about it
or what it means for media literacy
earlier I quoted this 2018 piece by
Monica buer and Patrick Davidson um
they're actually a little bit
groundbreaking in this regard as they're
willing to literally come out and say
that they don't think media literacy is
sufficient to solve the problems of
misinformation later that same year the
Journal of media literacy education had
a special edition focused on fake news
misinformation and democracy and the
guest editors in an introductory piece
called explicitly for a media ecology
approach to the problem they note that
we must explore how New Media
Technologies create new possibilities
for social and political engagement
while affecting existing media Dynamics
in both positive and negative ways in a
media ecology approach then we can't
just say that the problem is the media
or sensationalism and we can't just say
that the solution is education or
telling the truth rather we need to
focus on the specific featur of the
various media that we use to communicate
and try to understand how they create or
encourage misinformation Zoe helped me
with an introductory example of this by
noting how the Ecology of YouTube May
influence more decisions about your
favorite video essays than you once
thought I definitely do care about the
algorithm as much as I hate that I have
to um but you know I do and that's just
the reality of being a content creator
that you you need the spice you need
something that people are going to get
like upset with you need you know the
like bright colors and just very like
appealing things uh on your thumbnail I
have made a market change in how I do my
intros to my videos where I used to
write like a writer instead of writing
like a YouTuber and now I've learned how
to write like a YouTuber where I get to
the point as quickly as possible uh the
way that I sort of like organize my
arguments is very intentional there's
also just the more
like we you know we live in a world
things where um I have to do like ad
Integrations in videos and I don't like
that I have to do it but I do and I have
to think about where I put mid roll at
so yeah I mean it's frustrating but you
got to do what you got to do I suppose
you kind of talked about every part of a
video there yeah the title the thumbnail
the the intro the uh the ads the way you
thund it the all of this stuff for a lot
of people like that are consumers of
video essays there's a way that you make
it very seamless you make it very like
this is the show and this is the product
and I have written it and it is for you
but at every moment there's like a
negotiation a balancing act that you're
playing with the platform and the
algorithm and um would that be a fair
way to characterize it yeah it is a it
is a negotiation I want to be really
clear with this that I'm not saying that
this means all video essayists are
untrustworthy or that they're lying to
you again I think many of them are
critical to Modern media literacy but
when we're sharing all of this work on a
platform owned by Google we have to try
really hard to remember that content
analysis alone may not be sufficient the
best example I found of this in the
academic literature came from James
Cohen in a piece on ecosystems Co notes
that interactive individualized
algorithmically driven media like the
internet can pose unique problems for
misinformation and polarization as a
case study he analyzes the story of
Dylan rof to show how unlike previous
generations of Technology the internet
can track your behavior and feed it back
to you through things like cookies on
the websites you visit content warning
here for white supremacy Mass violence
and death in the Southern Poverty Law
Center's investigation into Dylan ru's
heinous hate crime of murdering nine
African-American citizens in a historic
black church in Charleston South
Carolina in 2015 the PLC discovered
traces of his radicalization through
Google search results in his Manifesto
roof writes that he was prompted to type
in the words black on white crime into
Google and I have never been the same
since that day simply clicking on the
link permanently altered his media
environment as soon as the site loaded
the malicious sites cookies were
downloaded on roof's hard drive the next
time Dylan rof made a Google search in a
similar category it used his previous
search history to inform his results as
rof sought out information to confirm
his biases the search results customized
displaying a unique media feed for roof
that persisted across various digital
platforms this type of analysis is
critical not just because it's sobering
but because it reminds us of the
influence of the medium if we want to
understand how the internet has uniquely
radicalized the public and spread
misinformation we can't just look at
individual pieces of content no amount
of Prager UD debunkings can fix the
internet's designed proclivity for
misinformation what I'm advocating for
here then is solutions that fit the
medium and in the modern day that would
look like uh well actually what would
that look
like we can't rely solely on education
to fix the problem of misinformation we
also have to look at our current media
ecology and advocate for things that
would make it better before I talk about
that though I want to make one final
note on media literacy education in this
video I've been mildly critical of media
literacy education but I want to make
clear that this really isn't a takedown
I continue to think that the teachers
and advocates who push for media
literacy education are doing something
incredibly valuable I think we
ultimately want the same thing but are
talking about two different ways of
getting at it that need to be able to
complement each other and work together
an educational approach and an
ecological approach and I also don't
think it's quite as simple as me saying
that their solution is individualistic
and mine is systemic there are plenty of
ways to make systemic changes to
education for example the national
policy post for media literacy education
in classrooms which you can learn more
about from the group media literacy now
who has a map documenting where media
literacy education exists in the United
States and at what level but education
can't fix everything on its own
misinformation can't just be another
problem that we ask teachers to solve
for us and given the scale of the modern
media's influence over all of us I think
we must analyze the Technologies
regulations and business models that
create our media environment one thing I
couldn't ignore when reviewing
educational materials then was that a
lot of them entirely avoid describing
media ecology or being critical of media
systems I touched on this earlier but I
want to talk now about why I think
that's actually doing a bit of a
disservice to Learners and as an example
to make this clear I want to talk about
this resource that namely has shared for
parents teaching them how to talk about
media with their kids it takes an
educational approach through and through
focused on guided inquiry to help
students come to their own conclusions
they suggest that parents should ask
questions and encourage their kids to
think about the media products they're
consuming but why not also actively
Purge skepticism about media products
that are untrustworthy take this example
where a father and his son have a
conversation about ads the son really
wants a new toy but the dad asks
questions until his son realizes that
ads sometimes make things look cooler
than they actually are it's educational
best practice at its best you know
guided inquiry that helps the kid come
to their own conclusion that's all well
and good but what if your son isn't
capable of coming to this skeptical
literate conclusion on his own why not
say at some point hey hey by the way
advertisers exist and they want your
money they want to sell you things I
think we do a disservice when we don't
come out and say that certain media are
not designed with our best interests in
mind sometimes we must make our view on
ecology explicit even if it feels like
telling people what to think as opposed
to how to think this is a point that Zoe
and I went back and forth on a lot when
talking about these educational and
ecological approaches and their
differences if you are going to pursue
media literacy directly it is easier to
do that on an individual level but I
think that there are some systemic
problems that if you pursue them for the
sake of helping to fix issues with media
literacy I don't think that's a very
good reason to do them but I think that
if you fix them for other reasons like
fixing the education system because it's
dehumanizing to students or you know
fixing the regulations on media
Industries because
they need them I think that that's a
good thing like I think that we there
are systemic things that we should fix
because they need fixed um not
necessarily as a like media literacy
solution even though it would help fix
some issues with media literacy sort of
Downstream what do you think about
teaching people about the operations of
media Industries doing some of this
critical media literacy education in the
educational context in this more
concrete way yeah that's definitely
something that I think we need more of
because there is a lot of talk of like
we need need more like media literacy
classes and it's like yeah but like what
are you actually teaching them how would
those media literacy classes be any
different than say an English class um
because I and I think that that is what
you're getting at is like the first
approach which is the just asking them
to asking your your children or your
students to ask questions that's a very
English teacher like that's the English
class approach to interacting with media
whereas I think that critical media
literacy angle
is what would make that media literacy
class actually important and relevant on
its own is that like systemic view of
things but even changing our education
like this wouldn't be a true ecological
solution ecological Solutions require us
to use technology or regulations to
change the structure of a medium to
prevent it from repeating the harms that
we know it's made before my favorite
version of this advocacy comes from zanb
Tui who in a 2022 piece argued for a
right to General data privacy in the as
a means to combat misinformation here's
a quote perhaps a starting point would
be to make it harder and less lucrative
to lie to huge audiences rather than
pursuing legally dubious and inadvisable
efforts to ban speech or Define and
Target misinformation regulations should
Target the incentives for and the speed
with which lies can be spread Amplified
and monetized one part of the solution
might be to Target Reckless data
surveillance online by greatly limiting
how much data can be collected how long
it can be retained what it can be used
for and how it can be traded among other
benefits this could make chasing
engagement less attractive as a business
model I like this type of Regulation
because it specifically targets one of
the novel harms of Internet media in
this case massive data targeting if
something like this were enacted it
could change our media environment for
the better without having to pass a
thousand rules about what you can and
can't say online if data were less
plentiful then online advertising would
be less attractive for advertisers this
would divert some amount of advertising
money back into local media which would
bolster that and diversify the media
that we consume it would also change the
media we see by changing our social
media feeds keeping us from being
targeted by malicious actors or just
normal advertisers a data privacy
regulation would in my opinion be the
Holy Grail of ecological solutions for
misinformation but I also want to
recognize that this type of Regulation
is probably entirely unpassable in the
United States I've talked before on this
channel about how tech companies are
kind of perfectly designed for the
modern regulatory apparatus and there's
no chance in hell that something like
this would get passed there simply way
too much money on the line so we
probably need to focus on protecting
each other more than hoping that someone
else will come and save us one
historical example I found of this came
from a really excellent J store blog
piece by Alexandra Samuel it documents
the history of the first journalistic
ethics codes in the United States as an
effective means of curtailing
misinformation which was a huge problem
in the era of yellow journalism the
codes made formal definitions for things
like advertisements opinion pieces and
news and requir their signatories to
Cease the publication of false
quotations and interviews there's even
evidence that this reduced
misinformation at the time in the form
of false Publications we're right now
finding ourselves in a similar shift
that was happening at the end of the
19th century where new ad money is
flooding in and supporting a generation
of writers that previously couldn't have
done what they do the era of edutainment
has brought some great writers and
Educators forward but as their audiences
grow and more and more people rely on
them for information they have an
increased responsibility to produce that
information responsibly an Ethics code
for a new medium ratified by content
creators and internet Publishers might
be a step in the right direction so
these would both be really helpful
solutions that recognize ecology that
recognize the shift in the media
landscape but we also have to be careful
that just because something sounds like
it recognizes ecology doesn't mean that
it's actually a good ecological solution
there are lots of things that use the
language of ecological Solutions when
they are in fact just bad for example
fighting misinformation can often get
Dangerously close to censorship I'm
generally not one to believe that the
elites are going to 1984 my Brave New
World or something but I don't like
regulations like kosa the proposed kids
online safety act kosa claims to protect
children by giving State Attorneys
General a mandate to prevent and
mitigate the harms of social media
platforms but this is not the type of
Regulation we should be going after to
fight misinformation it gives too much
power to too few people to control
speech codifying the problem I'm
describing here not fixing it I am not
content to replace Mark Zuckerberg with
the United States government and call it
a day and I'm really especially not
excited to do it when one of the bill
sponsors has referred to uh education on
racial discrimination as dangerous for
kids additionally I'm not convinced that
scolding people about what they watch is
an effective ecological solution either
on a recent episode of the search engine
podcast Vox founder Ezra Klein offers a
kind of vote with your eyeballs model of
media salvation you know with small
media Outlets closing and local
Publishers failing you know maybe we
should support small media outlets and
and watch local news in your mix there
should be local news if you're a news
consumer local new should exist
somewhere in
that at time of recording I literally
work in public media fundraising and
even I think that this is a copout those
things are important there's a link
below to donate to your local public
media station but offering that as a
theory of change is just obviously
insufficient when social media is many
orders of magnitude larger than all
local media combined not to mention that
voting with your eyeballs still just
keeps power among people who have money
people who can afford to support local
outlets and local news we have to be
careful then that the language of
ecological Solutions doesn't blind us to
obvious problems when we Tinker with the
Machinery of information the
consequences can be enormous so we have
to make changes very deliberately and
carefully ultimately the problem is
really complex and annoying we find
ourselves in something of a media forest
fire where misinformation Burns through
everything kindled by an unhealthy media
Med ecology fixing that will be hard to
say the least so it makes sense to me
that people turn to Solutions like media
literacy to save us but there are things
that media literacy can't fix okay so um
not to sound like a Communications major
or something but uh I ended up rereading
manufacturing consent for the first time
since College while I was writing this
video and I want to leave you with
something from it that really stood out
to me this time around in their section
titled conclusions Chomsky and Herman
say that we need to vigorously oppose
the steady commercial ization of the
publicly owned Airwaves this was
actually a really popular Progressive
idea in the 20th century that the
various frequencies that make up the
modern Miracle of mass communication are
a public good and that they should be
used for the benefit of the people
perhaps they should even have a say in
how those Airwaves are used what kind of
media is put on them and that the
continued commercialization of that
media was not good for people today
however very few people take up this
argument no one really takes the
suggestion that media is a public good
seriously it's seen as naive boring
moralizing you know what do you want a
bunch of Opera and kids shows on
TV I don't think we should go that far
but I do think we're currently living
through the logical consequences of what
happens when the airwaves are reserved
for dopamine and profit ultimately I
chose to focus on ecological Solutions
in this video because I think we forget
that things don't have to be this way
this whole world of media that we see
around us was all made by some dummy
like you or me and maybe if we want
to we could change
it hi um oh God hello welcome to the
conclusion of the video thank you for
watching uh I want to make a quick shout
out to zoy B for being in the video and
for going insane about media literacy
with me for several months and also just
being a good friend generally uh also a
quick shout out to everyone who's come
over from her Channel or from unlearning
economics recently glad to have you this
video was originally supposed to be kind
of a shorter one but then it ended up
taking me like 3 months which is true of
every video I've posted this year so
I've kind of come to the conclusion that
this is not a sustainable pattern and
that I need to change the way that I am
making these so keep an eye out for some
relatively large changes coming soon for
now though enjoy the fall I hope your
Summers were nice thanks for watching
goodbye
