so thank you and good evening from my
side my name is Bernard pad uh together
with Nick Shannon I'm kind of hold
holding together uh the center for
blight dialectics and this I'm very
grateful to unck that you have been
organizing um this meeting and over to
you and please make an introduction to
this
session thank you Bernard and um well
um um this session and uh hopefully a
few more to follow are going to be based
on uh authors work who have contributed
to the rout ledge International Handbook
of dialectical
thinking uh which I introduced uh a
little while ago uh and which is still
on on on schedule to be published uh
just towards the end of July I'll keep
you informed about that
um and so it's really with great
pleasure that um Michael mascolo or is
it mascolo I think it depends on which
part of the world you're in um he'll
correct us on on that uh has agreed to
talk about his
chapter uh today uh for for for many
reasons uh but first and foremost uh
it's applied dialectical
thinking uh which is what CAD is all
about uh so it's less theoretical and
more about
practice and secondly um because if the
world needs anything right now it's
about creating Common Ground between
polarized parties in the political
domain and that's exactly the subject of
Mike's chapter
today and and thirdly um I
just uh read this morning that students
at Oxford
University Mar Alma Marta uh have
started protesting about what's going on
between Israel and the Palestinians in
Gaza and this
conflict uh which is truly of horrendous
proportions now um just doesn't seem to
have an end to it
uh
horribly
and we need desperately in this world to
figure out how we can resolve these
conflicts peaceably without the huge
human
suffering and so if dialectical thinking
can offer us
anything um then I think Mike molo's
work is probably one huge step forward
and so I really commend this session to
everybody and uh hope that um you'll
you'll uh find something interesting and
useful in it that you can take forward
to your own
communities um so thank you very much uh
Michael for for being here today and uh
I think I should just hand over the
floor to
you sure thank you so much um I'm happy
happy to be here um I will make a very
short introduction because Nick just
said everything I would have wanted to
say um and by way of my introduction I
want to say that I'm just uh have been
delighted to be able to work with Nick
and Anastasia on this project on the
dialectical thinking handbook um I
couldn't have had better more
hardworking smart colleagues it's been
wonderful and I appreciate that very
much um yes uh uh the world is seems to
be um imploding in so many different
ways um as I was saying to to Bernard
beforehand uh Stephen Pinker says that
we're living in the best of times um
it's hard to disagree with a lot of what
he has to say poverty is down hunger is
down disease is down people are living
better than they ever have yet we have
such conflict it doesn't feel that way
and um it seems as though that things
are getting worse than better in so many
different ways so what can we do about
that so dialectical thinking is the
antidote to political
Dogma dialectical thinking is the
antidote to dogmatism Shannon Bap is one
of the people who is contributing to the
rootage handbook I he he said this in
his chapter and I just love this I think
this is so
important if there was ever an if only
you know we say if only this happened if
only people thought this way things
would be different uh that's such a
stupid way of thinking except I'm going
to say if only people thought
dialectically uh I cannot help but think
that we would not be more reflective
that we would be less we would be more
humble we would be able to to solve our
problems much easier uh because we're
not simply going to run rough shod over
our opponents so what Shannon has to say
here is so important to
me so dialectical
thinking we know this we start off with
a thesis and that thesis brings about an
antithesis and then that antithesis
splits under goes
differentiation as it accommodates as B
accommodates to a we get a splitting and
as a accommodates to B we get the
opposite we get more splitting and the
final synthesis comes after we destroy
in some sense A and B the off Haven of
development and we split those A's and
B's those contradictions and we put it
together into a higher order
synthesis this is dialectical thinking
this is the dialectic
process um and our conflict in the world
is usually based upon a versus B A is
better than b b is better than a I'm
going to try to show you who's got the
truth and I think this is our biggest
problem let's start with a study um so
you've got um these are American
participants in a study you've got
liberal participants and conservative
participants
and they are all read a policy statement
a political policy statement it's going
to be on
welfare and the welfare is a generous
welfare policy that's being discussed so
you have liberal participants and
conservative participants and you tell
them either that the policy is supported
by democrats the liberals or that the
policy is supported by conservatives the
Republicans you ask them to what extent
do you endorse this agreement
this statement well of course not
surprisingly uh when the Liberals hear
that the policy statement is supported
by democrats they endorse it very highly
strangely when the conservatives hear
that the generous liberal policy is
supported by Republicans they also
support it highly and quite interesting
this same exact statement when the
Liberals hear that it is supported by
Republicans they don't support it and
conversely when the conservatives hear
that the same policy is supported by
democrats they don't support it and it
turns out it doesn't matter whether or
not the policy statement is generous or
not if it's a stringent policy you get
the same exact
results now what does this
suggest it suggests that when we
identify with a valued ideology we are
for us and against them so often what we
hear is people saying oh those people on
the other side they don't listen to
reality they don't see the facts well
frankly the facts don't particularly
matter very much once ideology and an
emotional investment in ideology which
incidentally we can't avoid once we are
invested in an ideology we'll see things
through that ideology and we construct
the other as other rather than us how
can we become for each other rather
rather than just for US versus
them that's point one point
two in the west and in the United States
and much of what I'm going to be talking
about is coming from the states we have
an adversarial system of politics we
have adversarial politics there's a
whole bunch as we know of governments
that we can have we can have an
authoritarian government we can have a
hierarchical government such as in China
we can have a
monarchy and we can have
democracies of course democracy is the
worst form of
government except of course for all the
other governments that have been tried
from time to time and you'll recognize
that as the famous quote from Winston
Churchill democracy is slow democracy is
messy democracy has checks and balances
it's hard to get things
done yet it seems to be up until this
point at least the best form of
government for making Collective
decisions Collective decisions for
resolving conflict without resorting to
violence and how does it do it well it
does a very clever thing it seems to me
that democracy replaces war with
adversarial politics war is adversarial
but so is our politics so is our
Democratic politics we debate we have
two people on two different sides of a
debate they are adversaries they try to
prove each other wrong if you will they
try to win we have voting we have
elections we try to win elections and
then when we win elections we go into
Congress or what have you and we
deliberate and we debate and we debate
and we try to come up with Solutions and
all of which is the outcome of an
adversarial
process
now this has arguably worked for a long
period of time but it relies an
adversarial politics relies on something
that is not adversarial
adversarial politics relies on shared
political virtues an agonistic Common
Ground if you will and that common
political virtue ground are things like
this a shared Vis vision of the
nation faith in the Democratic process
the rule of law compromise respect for
the other transition of power a peaceful
transition of power from one
Administration to another the problem is
that these political classic traditional
virtues are being deeply strained and an
adversarial democracy I suggest splits
when the agonistic common ground is no
longer there to hold the two parties or
the multiple parties together in
constructive dialogue even of an
adversarial
sort and so we get what we started to
talk about before we see that there is
violence we strife and we're now seeing
it for example in uh colleges and
universities uh with young people uh
resisting and protesting against the
issues in the war in Gaza and so such
things so what should we
do one thing we could do is we could try
to restore traditional political virtues
we could say hey the past we've had
traditional political virtues they're
going away uh let's fix this by coming
back to an earlier time well let's take
a look at that earlier
time here's the first election in the
United States who this is Thomas
Jefferson and uh John Adams after um the
United States after we separated from
Nick I mean the UK um what do we have
here we have je Jefferson's accolades
referring to um uh Adams is That Hideous
hermitic
character the this is not a a respectful
statement we have Andrew Jackson and uh
Adams's son John John Quincy Adams
Jackson would refer to Adams as a pimp
and of course uh uh um Adams Returns the
favor by referring to the uh divorced uh
Jackson as a
polygamist we had in the United States
something called the Civil War which
some people might suggest has been
fighting and continuing to be fought
since that time and of course we have
the 1960s where many forms of authority
were disrupted and we had much violence
in the streets which is we see some
reminiscence of that now so if we try to
restore political virtues one of the
things we ought to do is to go back and
see that yes those political virtues did
in fact work it seems to me that there
was much bipartisanship but there was
also a lot of non- bipartisanship we
don't see the extraordinarily nasty ways
in which um the Democratic process has
moved uh over time perhaps the problem
is with the very structure of
adversarial politics itself and this is
something that I Came Upon uh when I was
thinking when I when I teach people how
to engage in Conflict Management and
political Conflict Management we start
usually by engaging in a debate and
showing how the political debate doesn't
work to solve problems and then what
happens is is I teach try to teach in
alternative ways that I'm I'm going to
be talking about in a few minutes Ben
it's based on dialectical thinking and
uh they work so much better but it takes
a long time to make the transition
between the adversarial process and the
more constructive dialectical dialogical
process why is that it occurred to me it
occurs to me that is because the very
way we think about politic politics
power is in an adversarial way we think
when we think politics we think
adversarial we think power we think
power struggle we think battle we think
War we think
winning and the opposite of that is very
different what if we were able to begin
to think of our political processes not
in terms of adversarial structures but
more in terms of collaborative or
dialectical processes things would look
different and I want to suggest how that
might
be so in the adversarial process what we
have here is a zero Z sum game so
there's an election and the election is
very much like the American game of
football not like the football the
soccer of of the of the UK and then what
we have here is we've got big men in uh
in in all dressed up in big men gear uh
with protectives and the goal is to get
that football to the other side and it's
a zero sum game because every advance I
make comes at your expense and every
advance I make comes at your expense and
every Advance you make comes at my
expense and every Advance you make comes
at my expense and at the end there's a
winner and a loser and at best you have
a tie or a compromise where nobody is
particularly happy that's a zero sum
game and so without shared political
virtues what we get is different sides
doing whatever they need to do to win we
get attacking and defending we get
polarization like we have
now we get Solutions political Solutions
that favor one party over the other
party what I'm going to be asking in a
few seconds is well what would it look
like if we didn't do that what would it
look like if we did not seek out
political soltion solutions that favor
one party over another party but that
seek to address the needs of both
parties the Apparently conflicting needs
of both parties what would that
deliberation process look like what
would the systemic Solutions look like
we misre represent and we dehumanize the
other without shared political virtues
because we just want to win and get what
we
want and we have political gridlock
which is certainly what we have in the
United States and I think Across the
Western
World can we do better perhaps democracy
isn't done evolving so often we think
that there are established uh systems
that we have now say capitalism say
democracy that this is it we did it it's
there it's done it's not going to get
any better this is what many
conservatives for example think when
they think of capitalism uh you don't
have to go to socialism to replace
capitalism you could simply say can
capitalism evolved can we do better and
the same I want to suggest is for
democracy maybe we're not done evolving
maybe we can have a more evolved
democracy and perhaps it might have
something to do with collaboration
rather than adversarial democracy how
about politics as a form of conflict
resolution how about politics as a form
of dialectical engagement we know a lot
about conflict resolution we know a lot
about development we know a lot about
how the ideas develop and emotions
develop Through The Clash of opposites
and how novel new ideas come from the
integration of opposites this ideology
is ripe it seems to me for understanding
how we can and should engage in in
Democratic decision-making
so I want to
suggest that if we can think about a
collaborative democracy what might it
look like well I want to suggest that
there's two basic phras phases two basic
modes of problem solving that we can
engage in uh when we are engaged in
political problem solving both partisan
problem solving and political problem
solving between countries
Etc and these two basic phases are
characterized by one trying to meet
Mutual needs needs of different parties
again we tend to think that I have my
position you have your position and
they're in Conflict what if we were to
look at the mutual needs behind those
conflicting positions and try to meet
the needs of each constituency what
would
happen second phase is reconciling
political ideologies political
ideologies are opposing Each Other Well
you got a and b both can't be true at
the same time of course dialectical
thinking holds that Pro premise into
some some dubious status well actually
no maybe two things can intention
develop be true at the same time in some
form and if we dismantle them come up
with something
better let's start with what the first
process might look like meet meeting
Mutual needs as a form of political
problem solving again this comes
straight out of the very basic Conflict
Management
processes so mutually beating needs
through collaborative problem solving
let's start what do you do you identify
the needs that motivate clashing
opposing political positions and you
find ways to meet stakeholder needs all
of them simultaneously to the best you
can maximum game looks like this now I
know that you people in Europe don't
tend to have this problem but we sure do
we are still debating the death penalty
we put people to death so we have one
person I want the death penalty we
another person killing is wrong these
are two political positions they're in
Conflict they're in conflict with each
other what do we do about this we can
debate back and forth and when we debate
back and forth it goes back and forth
and people do not they dig into their
Solutions when was the last time you
changed your mind in a political debate
it doesn't happen so what I'm going to
be talking about very soon is a study
that I performed with
six people over the a year and a half
period we trained those six people who
were from different political parties
some were liberals some were
conservatives some were Libertarians
some to supported Hillary Clinton some
supported Don Donald Trump we trained
them in both collaborative problem
solving and dialectical engagement the
two things I'm going to be talking about
two two modes of solving problems and we
discussed a series of issues we tried to
propose ways of solving a series of
problems one of them being the death
penalty and all talk about how that
happened in a few minutes so here's one
of them the death
penalty when they started off debating
the death penalty it went nowhere so
what does collaborative problem solving
say it says beneath each political
position lies an unmet human need there
is a human need a human reason why
people take the positions that they take
including the people that you and I
think are crazy and including the people
that the people we think are crazy think
is crazy namely
us what do you do you identify those
human needs that exist beneath the
political positions you seek out those
needs person a seeks out the need of the
other as well as him or herself person B
seeks out the need in of the other
including him or herself the woman wants
has a need for Redemption she wants to
see I'm suggesting here in this example
that uh people can change that we can
take care of people uh and preserve
their lives whereas let's say person one
wants the death penalty because he sees
this is the best way of maintaining
human safety nobody can commit the ACT
again if they're
dead take these needs and bring them to
the surface both of them and get rid of
the initial positions forget about them
we don't need them we're de about to
develop new ones in all likelihood we
take these initial needs we look at them
we take what was at one point
opposed clashing conflict and we are now
looking at the underlying needs which
may or may not be in Conflict we
identify novel ways suggestions
brainstorm ways of Meeting those needs
at the same time and then we try to
create a solution that meets both sets
of
needs an unforeseen solution that nobody
could think about beforehand because you
can't think about it without the other
person that's how you create create
Common Ground common ground is has to be
created it's not simply found we have
this notion Common Ground find to Common
Ground as if there's ground you're
standing over there and I'm standing
over there we'll find this ground that
already exists well it doesn't exist
until you make it you have to actually
create the common ground and to do that
you got to break some eggs you got to
change what you're
thinking now that's what collaborative
problem solving is about and I have to
say
that it requires something there's a
prerequisite to it and without apology I
say this without apology that instead of
arguing over positions will we go back
and forth between you and me what we
need
unapologetically is something akin to
empathy it can't be done without it we
need to reach inside of the other we
need to find a way to put our own anger
in Nation offense aside long enough to
see that our interlocutor is a person
and we need to try to understand what
are the human needs that motivate that
person if I am a Biden supporter that
means looking into the soul the soft
under Belly of the Trump
supporter that means if I'm a trump
supporter it means looking into the soft
underbelly of the Biden supporter or of
the progressive left it indeed means
looking into the soft underbelly of
China of Russia of Ukraine it means
looking into the soft underbelly of
Israel and even Gaza and even Hamas and
I do not apologize for saying that it
means connecting to the human human
needs of the other while acknowledging
that that human other may be engaging in
activity and taking positions that you
find not only disdainful but perhaps
even horrible we see that that other
person's position comes from some set of
human need and if we can find that need
and we can try to acknowledge that need
we know this that the other person might
just reciprocate and have compassion
because they feel the compassion from me
to
you it involves seeking the good in the
other even the other that we may regard
as somehow bad or even evil we seek the
good in that person there is a man named
he's one of my heroes his name is Daryl
Davis Davis is a black soul
singer and what he has done is he has
connected with white members of the Klux
Clan they have discussions they bond
over music and other types of things
then in in looking for the good in the
other person asking them questions being
genuinely curious about why it is that
they can hate him if they don't even
know him they come to see the KKK that
this is simply a human being that's in
across from them and they begin to
soften and change and Daryl Davis has
kluck's Clan robes in his closet of
people who have given up those robes he
didn't go out to try to convert them he
tried went out to try to understand them
this is something that is so hard for us
to do understandably
so so that's what collaborative problem
solving requires it's
hard and collaborative problem solving
in the way that I just talked about it
meeting Mutual needs finding novel ways
to meet
needs is good it brings us very far I
believe and I could show why that is the
case in a few seconds but it can only
bring us so far and the reason for that
is that the needs that generate the
human needs that generate political
positions and clashing political
positions are often ideologically driven
ideologically determined
collaborative problem solving of the
sort that I just talked about trying to
meet Mutual needs works best when you're
able to parse off the human needs from
the ideological concerns from the moral
concerns themselves that's possible it
can be done but it only goes so far at
some point you're going to rub up
against ideology because those
ideologies actually create the needs and
influence the needs that drive the
position so ideologies not only inform
and and create needs they actually
influence the very positions that
were're that we're that that people
debate over what do you do when you get
to that point I suggest that there's
something that we need to do to
reconcile ideologies I call it
dialectical engagement or ideological
engagement and it looks like
this you find the kernel of Truth in
each party's ideologies and you
construct novel partially shared
ideologies so here's two people they
have their ideologies those ideologies
inform and drive positions what you do
is seek Mutual kernels of Truth she's
going to ask maybe she has to squint a
lot maybe she has to ignore a lot maybe
she has to hold her nose but she can
find something in this person's ideology
that she can agree with because this
person is human and the same is true the
other way and what you can do is
construct partially shared beliefs not
fully shared they're going to be
fragmented but it's a
start and I say that this needs to be
done and can be done regardless of the
ideologies and I I believe
that so yes I say to you this is
possible yes this is possible let me
show you how so here's an example
capital punishment in the United States
the death penalty we have the death
penalty in many states and in other
states we don't what do we do about this
it's a big issue so one of the issues
that my group of six people were
discussing was capital punishment again
as I said to you we started off with a
debate and that debate did not go well
and then we engaged in these two spheres
of problem solving the first one meeting
Mutual needs through collaborative
problem solving now note what happens
the moment you shift from political
debate over Solutions
to problem solving anybody knows anybody
who knows anything about problem solving
knows that the most important step in
the problem solving process is the first
one representing the problem if the
problem is should we have the death
penalty or not it's over there's no
problem to be solved because that's not
the problem the problem is how do we
respond to heinous crime how do we
respond to heinous crime now second we
ask that question we can ask well what
are our needs what are the goals what
are the needs that we're trying to meet
and that's the first thing we asked what
are the needs that we're trying to meet
when someone commits a heinous crime
what are our needs and the group came up
with the
following there's a need for justice
Vengeance maybe
consequences there's a need to keep the
public
safe there's a need for
prevention there's a need to understand
the origins of heinous crime there's a
need for fairness in the criminal
justice system that if we're going to
try people it should be fair across race
socioeconomic status gender
Etc we need to address the pain of the
victims of perpetrators who have
committed heinous crimes these are the
problems the needs that need to be
addressed and again they come from a
reasking of the question now second you
got the needs out there now you've got
something to talk about now you've got
something that is not necessarily to
divide the people now we come up with
possible solutions how is it possible
for us to address all of these needs at
the same time is it possible and then
you brainstorm and over weeks and many
weeks of meeting two hours every once a
week this is what the group came up with
this is what everybody in the group was
able to agree upon here's some shared
solutions that came up and I won't go
into detail but you'll see immediately
that the agreement was massive
how do you keep the public safe there
was full agreement that imprisonment was
necessary life imprisonment perhaps
necessary that Rehabilitation was
necessary if
possible there was agreement that there
was a need for prevention there was
agreement that part of that prevention
has to do with socialization fostering
moral understanding in children teaching
children restorative justice everyone
agreed on this teach boys and men
self-control address conceptions of
masculinity
teach people how not to be victims note
these are some some things that could be
potentially disruptive could address
conceptions of masculinity I would
imagine some people being upset about
that toxic masculinity people might be
upset about that idea but once people
feel safe enough that their concerns are
going to be addressed a lot of that
drops away and people are able to agree
upon it prevention systematic changes in
society we need a national discussion of
values people agreed Early Child
education and family intervention health
care and Mental Health Services needed
to be
improved Economic
Development there was an agreement that
we have to understand origins of hus
crime through research and the funding
of research people
agreed that there was a need for
fairness in the criminal justice system
by creating Fair procedures addressing
race and social economic status in those
procedures reorganizing police values
note that that says reorganizing ing
police values not defund the police
training police and Community skills
having Partnerships with communities
treating prisoners as people eliminating
for-profit pris there was a need to find
ways to address the victim's families
pain through restorative justice making
amends having the perpetrators show self
transformation and even finding ways to
support grieving and forgiveness in
victim and then the big one Justice just
deserts consequences people agreed that
prison restorative justice and even some
form of public shaming was something
that they would
entertain now that's a system what you
have before you is a system and it's a
lot that's not nothing there's an awful
lot of things that people can agree upon
once they feel safe and once it is that
we focus on needs rather than debating
Solutions but then this Rings us right
up against ideology despite the fact
that this massive agreement is possible
it runs up against ideology there's
still disagreement there are still
people who are going to say I want
capital punishment I don't want capital
punishment what do we do with that well
let's get into the process of
ideological
engagement so here's Moren and Cliff two
people who are in the the group let's
look at their ideologies
Moren believes the unitary Universalist
principle of the inherent Dignity of all
persons she believes that that some
people have diminishing diminished
responsibility in Pre predisposing
conditions that make them liable to
commit crimes even heinous crimes she
believes that people are capable of R of
redemption she believes that capital
punishment does not always make victims
family's whole she believes that
Collective that criminal that Collective
punishment capital punishment makes us
Killers Cliff done by it some people are
evil they are irredeemable he says
heinous crime must seek some sort of
Justice or Revenge there's a need to
balance the moral
scales perpetrators should get their
just Resorts people must be held
responsible and victims need Justice and
projection death of the other will bring
closure to those people so what do we do
let's start with Cliff's first
ideological belief some people are evil
they're irredeemable we ask Moren Moren
understand Cliff let Cliff talk about
this is there anything in what Cliff has
to say that you can agree with is there
any kernel of Truth in there no matter
how much you have to squint here's a
dialectical process here is a
dialectical
conversation uh here is a conversation
where I'm going to Mark thesis
antithesis synthesis as to the best it
actually occurs you'll see the conflicts
and the resolutions as they move forward
and they're typically partial
so Cliff says some people are evil they
are
irredeemable Meen says this may be true
but it's very rare however if it's very
rare it conflicts with maren's belief in
the inherent Dignity of all people can't
be very rare and there be inherent
Dignity of all people or maybe even with
those people where for whom it's very R
they still have dignity but there's a
conflict
here Cliff says there are psychopaths
who kill without empathy and gives many
examples of this he was a police
officer hm
perpetrators there's inherent Dignity of
all people but I have to see that I find
it hard to find inherent dignity in a
psychopath who kills without empathy she
says so therefore she comes to a point
where she says okay there's inherent
dignity but almost all people now this
seems like a very small change but it's
a change but it's not such a small
change this is a religiously held belief
the inherent Dignity of all people look
at the direction of the change here this
surprised me I didn't expect this at all
that Moren would move in the direction
of of of of of embracing the sanctity of
life to suggesting that somehow that
maybe that might be not not all people
are worthy of dignity to be sure at this
point she's still rather unclear about
this but here's the dialectical
process let's go to another
example so she moves
from her position to inherent Dignity of
all people to inherent Dignity of almost
all people what about this one heinous
crime balance the moral
scales another dialectical process Cliff
we must avenge evil avenge evil that we
need to get revenge upon those who
create evil and think about it think
about all of the movies about revenge a
the cowboy uh is out there to get
revenge on the person who did this
horrible thing revenge is the way to way
to go Moren doesn't like
Revenge Revenge she says though there's
a belief I've heard of about revenge
it's not really Revenge she says that
when you seek revenge what you're really
doing is you're finding a way to make
the perpetrator experience how it feels
when you give Revenge you're not just
trying to punish the person she's saying
but you're you're showing the
perpetrator how it
feels ah Cliff isn't having it no it's
to avenge the
evil it's to balance the moral
scales um Morin begins to suggest no I
don't like this business about about
avenging Mor scales or Revenge how about
the concept of consequences can we agree
upon the concept of consequences that at
least there needs to be some form of
consequences Cliff agrees now is this a
remarkable transformation
it is a transformation cliff didn't
change his ideas about evil but he has
accepted both of them have moved closer
to each other and being able to address
the consequences the concept of
consequences rather than the
consequences of Revenge and Cliff
actually said at one point I don't mean
Revenge I don't mean Vengeance I mean
something else something has emerged
here now I can go through and I can give
you more examples perpetrators should
get their just resert desserts people
should be held responsible both were
able to agree yes we need justice but
consequences is a better concept than
revenge I'll give you just one more
example victims need Justice protection
death brings closure says Cliff here is
the exchange Ellie another person in the
group talked about how parole takes a
toll on the victim's family that people
who are published punished for Capital
given capital punishment they they don't
go to death for a long time they
sometimes get parole and then when the
parole issue comes about the victim's
family has to relive this process all
over again oh my God Moren says I
haven't attended enough to victim's
needs um and if I haven't attended to
the victim's needs that contrasts and
conflicts with my view of the inherent
Dignity of all people anti-death penalty
Advocates have not adequately addressed
the needs of victim's families change
has happened within
Moren and change happens in cliff as
well I'm not going to go into it I'll
just show you that it exists and that
there's all we can look at very
interesting developmental changes and
cliffs that come from the dialectical
process this leads to the following all
six people in this case were able to
agree on the
following all the things I told you
about before keeping the public safe
through those strategies prevention
through socialization and social change
understanding the origins of hus crime
fairness in the criminal justice system
adding the addressing the Pains of
victim's families and they were able to
construct partially shared beliefs on
the ideological aspects itself the
inherent Dignity of almost all PR people
some people have diminished capacity and
disposing conditions some people
perpetrators must be held responsible
subject to their capacities for control
there are a need for consequences for
heus Crime many but not all perpetrators
are capable of
redemption there's a need to address the
needs of victims families and capital
punishment only makes some victims whole
and not others
now we did not solve the problems of
capital punishment but that's not
nothing that is an enormous as far as
I'm concerned uh set of beliefs that
people agree upon and set of strategies
that people agree upon we never get to
these in an adversarial system we go and
we debate peac meal Solutions without
ever looking at the underlying problems
we are debating the solutions while
characterizing the others as out of
touch Etc if you're able to make the
parties feel safe address needs over
time you can create Solutions and once
people feel safe enough they're able to
engage in di dialectical dialogue that
can lead to novel shared
beliefs so what do you do with all this
how can you move
forward I am not so naive as to believe
that voting and adversarial politics are
going to go away anytime soon they are
not they are here are they dysfunctional
I think they are can democracy evolve I
think it can how
well there
think globally act
locally I believe that if we are able to
begin to get people in their everyday
lives in their professional lives in
their political lives to begin to learn
these sorts of strategies and ways of
thinking about self and other the idea
of connecting to the humanity of the
other the actual process of separating
needs from positions the process of
dialectical thinking that when I see the
opposing thought I don't immediately
think that that has to be wrong but in
fact I am entered into a dialogue with
that thought and the moment I begin to
think that that thought may have some
crul credibility the meaning I the
moment I treat that thought with that
other person as credulous rather than
incredible I become humble I must be
able to at this point begin to reflect
upon what my thinking is and accommodate
it to yours if possible and you to me
it's not a giving in it's a clash of
opposites a breaking down possibly of
opposites and a synthesis and
integration of opposites to get to a
higher level I believe this can be done
starting locally not globally it starts
with little kids it starts by bringing
it into teaching people to do this and
bringing it into their relationships
into their marriages into their schools
into their organizations into their
local or Spats in their organizations
into the communities into the church
into the local government and little by
little by little by little as people can
see my hope is that once that you could
see that that we can resolve conflicts
better than we think that we might that
we ordinarily can that it can Ripple and
then perhaps prominent people look at it
and they say look this is possible we
need to promote this and why prominent
people don't do this already uh is
beyond me because it's based on fear so
much of our so much fear is at the root
of all of our so much fear and
humiliation fear and humiliation and the
antidote to fear and humiliation is
connecting to the humanity of each other
and that's
hard that's what I
got I
stop wonderful Michael thank you so much
um before everybody came we were
thinking about how to frame and how to
start the conversation after your
presentation and I think one of our
ideas was if you have a question for the
participants rather having a
standardized Quin a session with
you well the
question that I have for participants
um I can't help but thinking that it's
really the question that they have about
it which is what are you crazy um you
must be silly uh this is Pie in the Sky
nonsense um how do you get people to put
down their defenses you're
naive is this
naive maybe that's the
question um or let's state it
differently
in what ways is it possible
specifically if
desirable to put these start of
strategies into practice on a local
level
or are the times when it's Justified to
go and bomb the
other those are some questions that come
to my mind and again my would be that I
become one of you and we have a
discussion rather than it's to me that
my suggestion thank you
Michael how
exciting yeah I've been thinking hard
about as I get more out of my head and
into the concrete details of things
how is it do you get right to the core
of the experience of compassion and
empathy and understanding the needs of
the other when you're so angry and that
the more concrete and you've talking
about painting on concrete yeah have
more concrete than that uh the more
concrete the better go development goes
from the concrete and the experiential
to the abstract and we we always go at
least I do from the abstract to the
concrete it's got to be the other
way great one of my questions is how can
we um what's the motivation for people
to join a conversation at all so Michael
you were sharing the example of these
people these six people I think going
into dialogue and and probably a person
facilitating this dialogue and did this
must have been many hours I assume at
least and why did they do it at all why
did they do it or also you shared the
example of darel Davis the the black
person who was um having these dialogues
with um kook's clown members so you find
on the website that I just shared a book
that he wrote about the Kooks Clan and
also why did these people even talk to
him so what's the first motivation maybe
you can say something about this yes I
can uh um there are two motivations why
people participated in the group that I
did one is because all of them had some
caring about the problems of
polarization uh and then there was the
less important one uh very very distant
in the in the background which was that
I paid them uh to do it
so there was that um but the the example
of Daryl Davis is fascinating I'm gonna
get it wrong uh but you'll get the gist
so he is the only black man in a uh
country music uh band and they're
playing in some bar somewhere white
people and somebody comes over uh to him
and says you know I really like your
playing I've never seen a black man or
heard a black man play this music before
okay they're playing Blues they're
playing they're playing
jazz um and they were playing Jerry Lee
Lewis songs and so it started to bond
over you like Jerry Lee Lewis goes yeah
he goes um uh uh and then Daryl Davis
says to the guy you know Jerry Lee Lewis
learned this from a black man you
realize though no Jerry Lee this is
Jerry Lee Lewis song no black man could
play like this excuse me I know Jerry
Lee Lewis he's a friend of mine says
Daryl
Davis and now now this person has now
got a conflict he's got an internal
conflict how can I believe at the same
time that blacks are inferior that that
that the music that I love that I feel
this concrete visceral connection to is
created by somebody who I see as
anathema and then they begin to bond
over the music and then they begin to
have conversations and again it comes
it's the relationship stupid it's the
seeing the humanity in this case the
shared love and movement of
music and the internal conflict I mean
that's the thing is that I don't think
that we really appreciate enough
and P said this the best in many ways
the role of internal conflict in
motivating development when I I have ex
if I have concept A and I also have
concept B and we do it we are fragmented
inside and they conflict with each other
the moment somebody draws my attention
to that I'm motivated how do I do both
at the same time and that's what leads
to
development in my
view have you has there been any
followup with and Moren to find out
whether they still agree or whether
they' have reverted to their original
positions as we bring up children
through
school they're taught that there's right
and wrong and there's taught they're
taught that there is a right answer to
certain
questions and so their understanding of
what's true and
what's correct knowledge becomes
somewhat fixed
and how do you go about kind of
unlocking that because it seems to me
that your process requires a fair amount
of flexibility in people's thought
process and willingness to accept that
truth may be
somewhat less fixed than commonly
children are taught
one uh nick uh Moren still feels the
same way that she does I haven't talked
to Cliff about it uh um Cliff the Trump
supporter the Trump supporting guy who
when
I total my car and my insurance company
wouldn't pay for the totaling he found
me people who would fix my car for Less
for whatever the insurance company would
pay and so I know it's a it's a it's not
answer your question but look at the
wonderful compassion of this person who
who we would who many people would
simply dismiss on the basis of his of
his politics uh but um that's all I got
to say about that um okay I want to
answer um I believe uh uh I believe I've
come to believe um in a in a way of
thinking that I call moral relationalism
moral relationalism we have this idea
that there's right and wrong and we try
to buttress our theory of right and
wrong in some ground that ground is God
that ground is nature that ground is
cons mind Universal moral principles I
don't believe that there that these
grounds exist I believe that the grounds
that exists are relationships are are
relations that in every given context
there are multiple Goods multiple
constraints that exist between you and I
and that we must decide morally what is
good in that context at the basis of all
the constraints so Nick you're eating
and I take the bread out of your mouth
and because I want it and because I'm
hungry and I want it and then you cry
and then you get angry and you lash out
at me so now we've got three needs my
Hunger your anger your your your hunger
your hurt all these things together we
need to put together to find the moral
rule that's where it comes from It's
Always open-ended and constrained now
how you how you do that how do you get
that moral understanding in kids Etc I
suggest you know do you need a mediator
all the time I say you need a mediator
in the same way you need a mediator to
do calculus in the same way that you
need a mediator to tell the time those
mediators are called cultural agents
they're called parents they're called
teachers voty says okay you know any
higher order function in the child's
development occurs twice on two levels
on the social level then the individual
level we learn to tell time by taking
the cultural process of those words
teaching it over time with the kid the
kid internalizes it now the kid can do
it himself you do it the same with
Calculus and everything it's got to get
built into the culture and we have to do
it in our culture and then only and then
do it get into the kid then it moves
forward so yeah uh the the the the the
process is hard and
Monumental and It just strikes to me
about the the the pity the the the
pusillanimous nature of our of our
capacity to resolve conflict in our
culture that's what's got to change
they're cultural
processes that's my that's what I think
thank you for stimulating that thought
thank you sir would it be appropriate
for me Bernard to ask uh to to state um
you say you're studying socio emotional
intelligence or social emotional aspect
of conflict could you maybe comment
about what it is that you're doing or
what it is you think are the is the most
important socio
emotional aspect of of this process in
Conflict Management is may I ask that at
least
briefly when I first came across 's work
um I found it interesting how he was
making distinctions between cognitive
and social emotional
development and first of course um not
of course but first I made the mistake
maybe some others also seem to make that
they um that I kind of saw them
separated like distinct but not
connected um and so only now more and
more of course I see how it's possible
to talk about them and it's good to have
a language for talking about them
separately and not mixed but at the same
time um always having in mind how they
are how they cannot be
separate and I think what what we could
what I could hear from what you shared
Michael is that a dialectical approach
is very helpful to support people as a
mediator facilitator but without having
social emotional rounding in oneself and
in in one's communication it's more or
less impossible probably
to execute if if this is a correct word
this dialectic maybe you could correct
or or
enlarge no I think that's correct I
think that you can't do it without the
social emotional the social emotional
part of it um the social emotional
relational part of
it you know sadly in my opinion how can
I say this in the states and maybe it's
also in in the UK there's a tremendous
movement toward socio emotional
understanding and promoting it in the
schools but it's in my opinion
wrong-headed
um what it does is it prompts the
student to reflect upon his or her own
plight if you will it doesn't get the
person to get into the experience of the
other and to see that courage is needed
in order to connect to the other because
they are often devoid of values uh in
the United States people like to teach
in a value neutral way they don't want
to go to Val they don't want to say that
here's the way in which you should be in
relation to other people we need that we
need we need to help people develop the
type of socio emotional intelligence
that gets them out of themselves and
into the other uh in a in a in a in a in
a in a value in a value sensitive way
and there is one link We I haven't
shared yet which is the link to your
book Michael or one of your books from
conflict to collaboration maybe you want
to say a few sentences is what you
presented today would we find it also in
this book or find much of it in the book
we wouldn't find the political stuff in
the book but it's the foundation for the
political stuff the interpersonal is the
foundation for the for the political
stuff there's more but thank you thank
you so much everybody for being here for
sharing and for creating this space
together goodbye see you next time
