all right well thank you thank you very
much and uh thanks for uh having me uh
at this amazing meeting I'm sorry I'm
not there in person um and I hope to
share some ideas with you today around
this idea of non-neural intelligence so
um the details of everything that I'm
talking about data sets papers
everything is at this site and my own
personal thoughts on what it might mean
are all here so um the summary uh that
I'm going to uh try to transmit today
are basically to describe uh some
aspects of biolog iCal systems as
self-constructing polycom Computing
agents that operate in very diverse Pro
problem spaces they navigate these
spaces at multiple scales uh which I'll
show you examples of and they form a
kind of agential material that is not
well described either by U things like
the laws of chemistry nor by some of the
um computational paradigms that we have
um today um I'm going to uh towards the
end uh talk about how biology emphasizes
saliency not the it of information
because the medium is fundamentally
unreliable and this has some very
important implications for both for for
for engineering but also for for biology
um I'm going to show you examples of how
biology makes creative agents not uh
solutions to specific problems as we
might think of the evolutionary
process uh and uh I'm going to talk at
the end about this idea of emergent
cognition not just emergent complexity
so the talk is in three parts uh a
little bit about non-neural problem
solving and get us warmed up to think
about examples Beyond brains and then
talk about some fundamental principles
that are beginning to come to light
about how this works about intelligence
that uh that self assembles uh picks its
own goals and so on and uh then then
give you some um really kind of wild
speculations about where some of these
things come from uh in addition to
Evolution and and uh engineering so the
first thing to to know about biology is
that um the distinction that a lot of
people try to make uh between uh let's
say living things or even humans and
then quote unquote machines is uh a very
tough bin binary categorization to
maintain nowadays not only don't we know
from the facts of uh Evolution and
developmental biology that we are at the
center of a of a Continuum of a very
smoothly um uh changing uh uh
metamorphosis process that takes us from
a single cell the way to whatever it is
that that we are but also now with
bioengineering of different types we now
have this other Continuum where we can
start to make modifications to various
degrees because everywhere along the
levels of organization we can uh add uh
engineered systems to the Natural
evolvements and so what we really have
is a very um a series of uh of of uh
intersecting continua and uh and very
soft categories where it becomes really
hard to say whe you know whether
something is a natural living being or
or or or an engineered kind of artifact
and so on and and that's and that's fine
we need to we need to get on board with
this so uh my framework that I'm working
on is designed to help us uh recognize
create and ethically relate to a truly
diverse uh intelligence regardless of
its composition or of its origin story
so that means um you know the familiar
creatures of course like like primates
and and birds and so on uh but also some
really weird organisms Colonial kinds of
things swarms uh engineered new life
forms that never existed before AI
agents whether purely software or in
fact embodied in robotic and maybe
someday exobiological agents if we find
them so I would like to be able to think
about all of these things uh together
with the same set of tools obviously I'm
not the first person to try for this so
here's um Rosen Bluth Weiner and
Bigelow's um scale of how passive uh
passive matter uh is able to go up uh
these uh different um sort of phase
transitions to get to uh like human
human like uh metacognition and so on
and so the there are there are two main
purposes of this framework one is that
it has to move experimental work forward
so I'm not interested in just philosophy
um I want these things to have uh impact
in in Discovery impact in in biom
medicine and so on so new capabilities
and in fact better ethics to enable us
to relate to novel beings that we're not
really um used to thinking about and so
this is this is the first version of
that the framework is is described here
so I like to think about um a kind of
axis of persuadability so if you think
about all these different kinds of
agents that I talked about what what do
they have in common how how can we start
to think about them well one way to
start to think about them is what would
it take for another agent so this is
very much an observer focused uh
Observer relative you what would it take
for that agent to interact with them
maybe Hardware modification is the only
way but maybe some tools from a control
theory and cybernetics where you can
reset the goals and not micromanage the
hardware quite as much but maybe even
better some tools from Behavioral
Science where you can train uh the
system and really don't need to
necessarily know much about um what's
what's going on under the hood and then
of course all the way up here you're
entering very kind of very complex
relationships where you're uh
communicating and and your your your
agency is benefiting uh as much as you
you putting out which is not the case
here so this kind of this kind of
spectrum and this is this is not tied to
any uh specific substrate or any
specific origin and uh the idea is that
when you have a given system you can't
have philosophical um preconceptions
about where it must fit you actually
have to do experiments that is this is
very much an empirical science where you
make a hypothesis about where your
system sits you then use the relevant
tools see how that goes for you and then
we can all see whether that is an
appropriate uh guess as to the level of
agency of of your system so so so what
what we focus on in in my framework is
first of all um making making this very
much a um not not not being tied to Old
philosophical categories as in when
people say category errors and so on uh
really we just have to do the
experiments and find out and as I will
show you we get lots of surprises um uh
and uh and and and very much a an
observer centered stance the question is
uh what what is it how much um efficacy
do you gain by using a certain set of
tools when you interact with a system in
a certain way so um we all know that uh
touring was was interested in different
kinds of embodiments of mind and so so
so kinds of problem solving machines and
intelligence through reprogrammability
and plasticity but uh one of the other
things he did was to write a paper on
the chemical based of morphogenesis the
self assembly of of chemical gradients
from disorder into order and so so you
might wonder why would somebody who was
who was interested in in uh uh in
computation and uh and programmability
and and intelligence and so on why why
would he be studying something like this
and I think that's because he saw a very
profound truth which is that uh the
self- asssembly of minds and the self
assembly of bodies are fundamentally a
very uh very parallel process there are
some some really um strong uh symmetries
between these two processes so I'm going
to do next is to talk about a few uh
unique features of the biological
substrate we'll take a brief tour of
what I call the agential material of
life and we'll look at some of these uh
some of these examples first of all um
we all take this journey so you start
off as a quiescent oite a little blob of
chemistry and physics and you might look
at it and you might say well there
clearly no uh no intelligence there uh
it's just a little physical system uh
the molecular biologists are doing fine
in characterizing how it works and so on
and then through a very soft and gradual
process something like this or even
something like this results um there is
no uh Magic Point here there's no light
lightning flash where you go from
physics to having a real mind so if you
think that um these kinds of systems
have uh intelligence and whatever else
you might want to say about first person
perspective and and Consciousness I
won't say much about that today but
whatever it is you have to be able to
tell a story of scaling because we know
we know where it comes from it comes
from here so somehow from here to here
that is uh during this process uh it
there's a scale up of the capabilities
that that are present here that give you
that give rise to this so we so so now
we know we have to we have to tell a
story of of of scaling and
transformation um but at least we're a
true unified intelligence right we have
this nice centralized brain it's solid
um Ricard solay talks about liquid
brains such as um ants and termites and
so on but but surely that's just a
metaphor you know we we've got a real
brain this is kind of a metaphorical
collective intelligence well um decart
for example really liked the pineal
gland because it was a unitary organ in
the brain which he thought was well
fitting to the unified experience of a
of a human but um if he had access to
good microscopy he would have looked
inside that pineal gland he would have
found that there's not really one of
anything there there are a ton of cells
in there and inside each one of those
things is all this stuff so uh we are
all itive intelligen is there there is
no to my knowledge there is no
monolithic uh sort of um uh in
non-decomposable uh intelligence and
what we're made of actually is things
that are like this now this happens to
be a free living uh unicellular organism
but this is what a cell is capable of
this is called the lacr areia um you can
see it's it's hunting for for food in
its environment there's no nervous
system here um there's no brain uh there
are no other cells there are no stem
cells um just one cell handling its
business in a small kind of area it has
it has uh very high competencies at
single cell level agendas in fact um
within that cell there are there are
Pathways molecular Pathways or things
like Gene regulatory networks and uh if
you don't assume that these networks are
uh sort of dumb machine like things but
actually uh test them you will find out
that by stimulating the different nodes
and looking at other nodes using the
standard tools of behavior science you
can find six different kinds of learning
including pavlovian conditioning again
no neurons no brains no no nucleus
needed no you know none of that stuff
just just a few um nodes interacting
with each other in ways describable by
ordinary differential equations that is
sufficient for a number of interesting
examples of learning and so all that is
described here but we are now uh
building machines to actually interact
with cells in that way and to train them
which has all sorts of applications for
drug conditioning and things like that
but so so inside of individual cells you
already have this material that that out
of the box due to the properties of the
mathematics are are able to do things
like like learn from experience so in
our architecture what the what the
biological material has is this kind of
multiscale kind of scheme where not only
are we structurally a set of nested
dolls but actually functionally each of
these layers from the molecular networks
to the subcellular components to
networks of cells tissues organs of
course whole whole organisms but also
swarms at each of this level the
material solves various kinds of
problems in its own space so there's
competency throughout so we're talking
about uh I I'll I'll describe in more
detail momentarily what these other
spaces are but basically there are there
are agendas memory forming ability uh uh
learning capacity um and so on at every
level and they're all interacting
cooperating and competing at the same
time so this this remarkable
architecture uh allows some really wild
behavior that we still have not been
able to um replicate in any of our
engineering I'll show you some examples
one example is this so this is a Tull so
here are the nostrils here's the mouth
here's the brain the gut and the tail
now what you'll notice is that uh what
we've done here we've prevented the
primary eyes from forming this is where
they would normally be but we did induce
an eye on its tail okay and so um what's
happening here is that we put this we
put this eye on the tail and then we use
this machine which we have built to test
these animals for visual learning
specifically to be able to um to learn
to stay away from a moving light spot
that chases them around uh what we find
is that they can see quite well uh These
Eyes put out a an optic nerve the optic
nerve comes out uh it does not go all
the way to the brain it goes in some
cases synapses onto the spinal cord some
cases the gut some cases nowhere at all
that we can find and these animals can
can see pretty well now isn't this
remarkable this requires no evolutionary
adaptation we've completely changed the
sensory motor architecture of this
creature um we didn't need new rounds of
selection other other kinds of um
compensatory mutations and so on why why
does this work out of the box why why
does this animal uh why is this animal
able to use this novel architecture
without um all of the all of the
readjustments as I'll argue later in the
in the talk it's because I think from
the very beginning these animals these
these cells in fact do not take much for
granted they're solving their self
assembly problem on the fly it never the
tacle never assumed that the eyes were
going to necessarily be in the right
location and it's able to uh make this
work from scratch because that's what
every embryo does and I'll show you some
more examples of that uh here's another
example these are plenaria these flat
worms uh that have this amazing uh Power
of regeneration so you can cut them into
pieces every piece gives rise to a
perfect little worm but one thing you
can do is you can train they're also
smart you can train them on Place
conditioning tasks where there's a
little bumpy surface that we laser etch
into the petri dish and we feed them and
so they recognize this as a safe place
to eat we then cut off their heads which
contains a true centralized brain the
tail sits there with no behavior for
about eight days slowly grows back a new
brain and when it does grow back a new
brain you find out that these animals
remember where uh they remember the
original information so that tells you
that uh first of all the information is
not
entirely confined to the brain but also
that it can be imprinted onto a brand
new brain when that appears so the
movement of information across tissue
and from from this tissue into uh into
the the centralized brain uh is
something that uh that's a kind of a
remarkable feature the ability move and
to to move and accommodate this this
this radical reconstruction event uh you
can imagine the implications of this for
human regenerative Therapeutics of
degenerative brain disease right so if
we get new tissues moved into our brain
what happens to our personalities to our
memories uh it might be it might well be
okay because at least in some systems
these memories can move they can they
can take over uh new new new
tissues um another another example is
this so this is not Photoshop or AI this
is a real fly what these flies have on
their surface is a picture of some local
ants and uh the what it does is it it it
kind of Wiggles the the wings real fast
and it looks like the ants are scir
around and it keeps Predators away
because they don't want to deal with the
with the biting ants and so it's in
effect it's running this kind of strip
down very coar grained uh 2D uh
morphogenetic program that looks like
ants on its wings and it's kind of
remarkable but not more remarkable than
the ability of the fly to build itself
together so this in fact is just a um
it's a kind of virtualized morphogenesis
that it's doing here but the whole fly
had to do this itself to to to become a
a three diens fly and so what we have
here is this idea that life uh actually
is uh navigating all kinds of spaces
many of which are very hard for us to
recognize so when we talk about things
being embodied or not for example AIS
and software and and other kinds of
things uh whether they do or do not have
an embodiment I think we have to be
really uh careful and humble about the
fact that we are not good at recognizing
spaces unconventional spaces in which
embodiment can take place we are uh
pretty good as humans to observe
intelligence as movement medium speed
movement of mediumsized objects in three
dimensional space you know we see
animals doing clever things we can sort
of recognize that uh but biology uses
lots of different spaces so the space of
possible Gene Expressions uh the space
of possible physiological States and
anatomical morphos space which is the
space of geometric configurations that
the body can take and in all of these
spaces there is some nav ation that uh
if we were good at observing it we would
immediately recognize this as some kind
of intelligent problem solving behavior
for example all of our organs Point
outwards uh if if we had a kind of a
think about it think about it like a
like a sense of taste but pointing
inwards into our body chemistry and you
know sensitive to I don't know 20
different parameters uh of your body
physiology I think we would have no
problem realizing that our liver and our
kidneys are intelligent symbiance that
live in this uh in this space and Keep
Us Alive during um all of the different
uh things that happen to it in those in
those spaces so for the next few minutes
what I want to focus on is this space
right here I want to show you what
problem solving in these spaces looks
like and I could talk about some other
some amazing examples but um for reasons
of time I'm just going to stick with
this one space and so what we're going
to do is uh take a look at what happens
when we uh entertain the possibility
that uh morphogenesis so the uh the the
self- assembly and the self-repair of
living bodies are the behavior of a
collective intelligence of cells so so
we're we're we're kind of pivoting some
ideas from from neuroscience and saying
that the movement within this anatomical
space is a kind of behavior and there's
a collective intelligence of cells that
is executing this this behavior and so
let's let's look at what that looks like
well the first thing is that uh
development is very reliable so you
start off with a with a single cell and
eventually you get an amazing human
target morphology but this is not why
calling it intelligence it is not
because it's reliable it is not because
there's a huge jump in complexity here
that's not it what I'm the reason I'm
calling it intelligence is because this
process has some remarkable
problemsolving capacities in navigating
that space the first one you notice
right away when you cut that early
embryo in half you don't get two half
bodies which you get are perfectly
normal monozygotic Twins and that's
because from different positions in this
morphos space the um the system will
move to a region corresponds to a to an
ensemble of uh of of patterns that are
species specific to this to this
organism and they can avoid various
local Maxima and things like that so so
you can get there from different
positions that's that's already
interesting um William James defined
intelligence as this ability some degree
of the ability to reach the same goal by
different means okay so that's what
we're looking at some animals can do
this throughout their lifespan so this
this guy is an axel this amphibian
uh regenerates its limbs its eyes its
jaws spinal cord heart parts of the
brain and so on and so anywhere that is
uh uh amputated uh along this this limb
the cells will grow very quickly they
will form the pattern and then they stop
when do they stop they stop when the
correct pattern has been completed so
they take this journey they they've been
deviated from this um uh uh region from
the correct region of anatomical space
they work really hard to get back there
when they get back there they cease so
it's a kind of you can think about this
as a kind of um anatomical homeostasis
an error minimization scheme uh that is
that is achieved in this in the space
and uh here's here's another example
that we discovered um some some years
back that uh when you have a tat bow
that has to rearrange its face to become
a frog so the Jaws have to move the eyes
have to come forward and so on um you
you could you could think of it and in
fact people did think of this as a
hardwired process that everything just
moves in the right direction and that's
that but what we we we tested this
experimentally we made so-called Picasso
frogs and uh we scrambled um all the
positions of the crano facial organs
here's the eye on the back of the head
the mouth is off to the side these
animals become quite normal frogs and
that's because all of these different
things don't just move the same normal
path they move into novel paths
sometimes going too far and coming back
until they get to this correct pattern
and then they stop so the genetics in
fact does not specify a bunch of
hardwired rearrangements it specifies A
system that executes a flexible program
that can recognize unexpected States and
take corrective action this is uh this
is context sensitive problem solving
which raises an interesting question how
does it know what's correct how does it
know where it's going in this in this in
this space and I'll show you that I'll
show you that more
momentarily so so let's talk about let's
talk about how how all this how all this
works and uh we've been we've been
studying this idea of morphogenesis as
problemsolving behavior in that space
and by by learning to communicate uh
with with these problem solving um
modules we've actually discovered some
new approaches in um in biom medicine
and uh we did that by discovering uh
that bioelectricity is a kind of
cognitive glue that binds individual
cells towards a common purpose so um
let's talk about
that uh the first the first thing we can
think about is actually um how how do
individual embryos come to be anyway so
so here's a here's a blastoderm an
embryonic blastoderm there be 50,000
cells at this stage and we look at that
and we say well look there's one embryo
so how what what what are we counting
when what are we what is there one of
how what are we counting when we say
there's one embryo can you can you hear
us I can yeah there's there's a uh
remote question oh go for it oh there is
a question in the
room so to the Picasso uh example that
you proved uh wouldn't the information
about the rearrangement into the correct
kind of uh frog pattern also be
genetically coded it's just you didn't
mess with that program but you messed
with the
locations yeah the question of uh the
question of what is actually genetically
coded is uh is really deep um you know
when you read The genome itself of
course you don't see any of these things
the genome codes for proteins it doesn't
code for for eyes or shape or or you
know the number or the location of any
the the direct information that you get
from the genome is protein and so um if
you don't mind can we maybe in the in
the Q&amp;A because we could we could talk
about this for a really long time it's
basically uh you know bottom line I I
think is that what the genetics
specifies is a really interesting kind
of Hardware but um the product of of
that Hardware in solving these problems
I I I don't think it's uh really
fruitful to uh to pin that on the on the
genetics per se but obviously the
hardware is important as as it always is
but I'm I'm happy to I'm happy to talk
more about that after um so so here's
actually this is this is a perfectly
good uh uh example of of the role of the
genetics so so look here here is a
here's a blastoderm it has I don't know
tens tens of thousands of cells when we
say it's one embryo what we're actually
counting is alignment uh physical
alignment I mean the cells literally
aligned but more importantly they're
aligned in their journey to in morphos
space they are all working on one thing
now what you can do and I I worked on
this as a grad student within duck
embryos you can take a little needle and
you can make some scratches in this
blast what will happen is that for the
four to six hours that it takes for them
to heal back up each of these little
regions will not recognize that the
others are there it thinks it's the only
one and it self organizes completely
into an embryo and when they do heal up
you get conjoin twins triplets and so on
so how many individuals are actually in
this blastoderm well it could be zero it
could be one two three up to probably
half a dozen you don't know how many and
the genetics doesn't tell you how many
because this process doesn't do anything
to the genetics what the genetics has
given you is an excitable medium which
is able to self-organize into some
number of um of of of embryos that are
going to perform specific Journeys in
morphos space but how many there are is
uh is flexible and it's up to the the
current circumstances now what we you
know you could you could ask this kind
of question is is like how many of these
could you possibly get per cubic
millimeter of living tissue
um all of these uh systems have to uh by
putting themselves together they have to
actively determine where is the border
between me and the environment because
every cell has some other cell as a
neighbor so this embryo has to decide
where are my borders where where do I
end and somebody else begins and this
has much like everything else that we
study in in morphogenesis this has very
interesting parallels in in uh uh
neuroscience and Psychiatry because uh
fundamentally the issue of um
individuation and and uh a dissociation
like in the dissociative identity
disorder split brain patients and so on
this question of um how many of us are
in here and where do I end and somebody
else begins is a really fundamental
aspect of um of of self
assembly now um another interesting
thing that uh the that the living
material does is uh it really optimizes
for saliency not Fidelity of information
and here's an example to uh to see that
um you've got caterpillars which live in
a kind of two-dimensional world and they
crawl around and and eat leaves and they
have a brain that's suitable for doing
that they have to metamorphose and
become this which is a um actually a
hard body creature which has a
completely different controller than a
soft body here they they fly around they
live in a 3D World what's what's
remarkable is that if you train the
caterpillar for particular stimulus and
and the reward um the caterpillars will
remember so if you train the the the the
butterflies will remember so if the
caterpillar is trained to find leaves at
a particular light color disc the
butterflies can do this but what what's
important is that during this process
that that brain is completely uh
basically refactors so most of the cells
die many of the connections are broken
uh it rebuilds a completely new brain
and the qu the one interesting question
is how does the information survive this
that's interesting but an even more I
think important fundamental question is
the idea that well the actual memories
of this of this caterpillar are of no
use to the butterfly it doesn't move the
same way it doesn't even eat the same
stuff leaves are of no interest to the
butterfly it wants nectar so you can't
just store with Fidelity the original
information you have to remap it onto a
new architecture when you put it
together so this this ability uh of of
of of live of the living material to
reinterpret the uh the memory engrams
that it has at any given moment and to
uh use whatever uh use it in whatever
way is appropriate now as opposed to
trying to keep uh keep the
interpretation stable I think is a
really important aspect of of biological
intelligence and one way that it works
is that this this kind of architecture
this bow tie thing where you have a lot
of inputs and then you have a very
constrained uh set of EI either a single
or or you know a constraint set of set
of nodes here is ubiquitous this happens
in chemical networks in in biomechanical
networks in bioelectrics uh there's
there are there are many bow ties like
this because what actually has to happen
here is that um and this is this will be
this will be completely familiar to um
some of the
uh the machine learning folks is that um
by by squeezing it through a bottleneck
you are forcing a generalization and you
are forcing the the being on the other
side you have to be creative in
interpreting that information because
you've thrown away a lot you don't have
the details you just have some kind of
um uh generative prompt that you then
have to reinl and what that means for
biology is that a living being at any
one moment does not have access to the
Past okay what you have access to are
the engrams the memory traces that um
has been left in your brain and body by
past experience but now it's on you and
this happens every you know few hundred
milliseconds it's on you to at least in
theur in the the neural case uh it's on
you to now reinterpret what do those
memory traces actually mean what do
those engrams mean because longterm as
far as biology is concerned everything
is going to change not only the
environment but your own parts are going
to change evolutionarily you will be
mutated uh you you you know you don't
know what your body's actually going to
look like and so what you have to commit
to because the material unlike in most
of our um you know computerized
constructions the material is completely
unreliable you never know how many
copies of a given protein you're really
going to have what's going to be
degraded what's going to be uh you know
moving around and so on it's it's it's
very noisy very plastic and I think what
biology does is from the beginning lean
into the fact that everything is up for
reinterpretation you don't take the past
uh to um too seriously the the
information you have are messages from
your past self but those messages so so
all your memories are messages from a
from a past self but all those messages
are up for reinterpretation and all of
that all of that is described here but
it has some important consequences it
means and this is back to what I was
saying about that tat B with the eye on
its back it means that every act both of
uh of of behavior in anatomical space
but also in um kind of you know neural
neural conventional neural Behavior Uh
what you're doing is uh at any given
moment you are playing the hands your
you're dealt you are creatively
interpreting the material and the um the
data that you have because um you uh you
don't you don't have access to to what
it really was and and because you're
throwing away so much detail this part
can probably be algorithmic so some sort
of uh compression and generalization so
so so learning but this part has to be
creative okay because I I don't believe
there can be a purely um kind of
deductive process here you have to you
have to creatively uh uh utilize that
information and evolution does this all
the time right so so creatures generally
don't make other creatures they make
eggs and then these eggs have to be
reinflated that genetic information has
to be reinterpreted and it can be
reinterpreted in really clever ways I
will show you an example this is the
cross-section through a t kidney tubule
in a n so so normally 8 to 10 cells work
together to um give a uh give rise to
this kind of specific architecture now
one thing you can do to these is uh you
can you can greatly increase the amount
of genetic material meaning that uh you
can you can sort of squeeze them to to
prevent the cell from dividing but the
nucleus replicates and so you can have
not just two n but four n sixn and so on
so so uh the first the first thing that
you find is that while the nucleus gets
bigger and bigger the cells do to so the
cells grow to accommodate the nucleus
but the nude stays the same
size and if you take a cross-section
through those tubules you find that it
has much larger cells but fewer of those
cells are building the exact same
structure so so so it it has adapted to
the size of the genetic material it has
adapted to the adapted the size of the
cells and now fewer of those cells to
get to the same anatomical outcome
things get really crazy when you make um
6n NES where the cells get so gigantic
one single cell will wrap around itself
and give rise to the same structure so
so so think about what this means in the
service of the uh the the same
anatomical outcome it will call up
different molecular mechanisms to do so
in this case cellto cell communication
in this case cytoskeletal bending you're
reusing you're using the tools you have
in different ways to get what you want
this is basically precisely what um uh
the kind of thing that uh that James was
talking about and think of think of
something else um imagine imagine you're
a nude coming into this world you don't
know how much of your genetic material
you're going to have you don't know how
many cells you're going to have because
we can also add and and take away cells
it doesn't matter you you don't know uh
uh a lot about your own Parts never mind
the environment changing your own Parts
can change and you still have to figure
out how to make a coherent uh structure
and you and what what bi what the
biology does and this is still very
poorly understood in all these different
cas cases but what it what it has is
incredible flexibility because I think
that every instance of uh the self
assembly of both bodies and Minds is
this kind of day noo problem solving
where you have some tools and you find
uh ways to to do this and one of the
ways it does this is through uh a very
uh very extensive
homeodynamic kinds of uh um circuits
where there is a stored set point and
everything works really hard to try to
uh get back to that set point now
individual cells have cells have tiny
little set points so things like pH and
you know hunger level and things like
that they're single numbers but this
kind of thing has to store a much bigger
uh pattern as far as what is the correct
set point right how do we know what a
correct limb or a correct face is and so
we have started making models of what
happens when cells come together into
networks that allow them to do the kind
of pattern completion that you need to
do when you're missing a region of the
body or to um you know uh uh reach reach
specific regions of morphos space and we
talk about um something that that I call
the cognitive light cone which is simply
the size of the goal States you're able
to pursue so what is the maximal size
both in space and time of the set points
that you are capable of pursuing and in
in different spaces and this is what it
looks like biologically so so so so
unicellular organism have little tiny
goals they have everything they care
about is is is right here it's a just a
few minutes back in time just a few
minutes of predictive capacity uh very
small spatially as well little little
tiny cognitive lyones all concerned with
metabolic States um proliferative States
physiological States things like that
but during Evolution and development
something amazing happens they scale up
into networks which pursue enormous
grandiose goals like like like this in
other words the set point that serves as
a termination to this process is a very
complicated structure it has the right
number of fingers knowing individual
cell knows what a finger is or how many
fingers you're supposed to have but the
collective does and the way we know that
is because if you try to deviate it it
will get back to exactly this now this
this this uh this capacity has a failure
mode that failure mode is cancer so when
you disconnect cells from the collective
uh they they no longer uh remember that
they were all part of one big uh
intelligence working on in this space
they go back to this and so this is
human gly blastoma and um these cells of
rolled back to their evolutionary tiny
little little Ancient Ancient goals so
what is the cognitive glue then that
binds them together towards these
grandiose construction projects what
what what is it that goes wrong here now
in the nervous system uh we know what it
is uh it's it's the bioelectricity
across your neurons which allows you to
uh do things like this this rat has been
trained it presses the lever it gets a
delicious reward uh no individual cell
has both experiences so the cells at the
at the Fe to touch the lever the cells
in the gut get the sugar no individual
cell has both experiences so who owns
the associative memory well it's the rat
the rat knows things that the parts
don't know uh and what holds the rat
together as opposed to a pile of cells
is the electrical Network so uh in
Neuroscience this is what it looks like
the hardware is basically uh a set of
cells that have these ion channels in
their membrane that means they can
acquire specific electrical States and
they do or do not pass those States on
to their neighbors through these
electrical synapses known as Gap
Junctions and that's that that that
Hardware underlies this physiology so
here's a um this group did this amazing
video of a zebra fish a live zebra fish
brain and the commitment of Neuroscience
is that we should be able to decode this
so this is neural decoding by by
watching these uh these
electrophysiological events we should be
able to uh to say what are the thoughts
the you know the preferences the
memories the and so on of this creature
as it n Ates threedimensional space and
people are are working on this quite
quite hard but it turns out that
Evolution caught onto this uh this
method of creating higher order beings
with intelligence and other spaces very
early on every cell in your body has
these ion channels most cells are
connected by these Gap Junctions and
around the time of bacterial biofilms
Evolution first noticed that you could
use electricity to uh uh assemble large
scale uh individuals across space and
time and coordinate information and so
what we've been doing for for some years
now is uh using using the approaches
from uh from from neuroscience and and
and Behavioral Science to uh ask the
same question if we if if could could we
decode what the non-neural cells are
thinking in their Journeys through
anatomical space well what what do these
what do these electrophysiological
patterns mean and um on a single cell
level what we can do now is uh this is
again a Tull it has a little tumor
because of an IND Ed human enogen and
the thing is that once that happens it
turns out that enogen are really good at
disconnecting cells electrically from
their neighbors as soon as they do that
you can already see so this is a voltage
sensitive fluorescent die you can
already see uh that that the voltage
here is quite different they're
depolarizing they're disconnecting and
as far as they're concerned the rest of
the embryo is just external environment
to them they're not more selfish than
normal cells they just have little tiny
selves their C get smaller that border
between self and World shrinks and that
now the rest of the body is just
environment so what do they do they
proliferate and they migrate and that's
metastasis so so this this uh unusual
way of thinking about the cancer problem
suggests a novel therapeutic it means
that instead of trying to kill these
cells or in fact fix the genetic damage
so these cells have an oncoprotein which
you know a nasty Kass or a um a p53
mutation or something like that well
instead of fixing it what if we
electrophysiologically reconnect them to
the rest of the cells leave leave the so
so here the these two are the same
animals so the red is the is the tag
it's a fluorescent tag on the enene so
so if you sequence the genetics you'll
say oh yeah there's definitely going to
be a tumor here because we can see the
the hardware defect it's an anene but
actually there is no tumor because what
we've done is injected an ion channel
that forces these cells into electrical
communication with the rest and they
simply go on their way doing what the
network was trying to do which is to
build nice muscle and skin and all of
that so so this is here here once again
we're seeing that dissociation between
what actually happens and uh what the
what the genetics are because some
genetic some some Hardware defects are
fixable in software not all of them but
but but some of them and so what we've
done is developed some tools so you can
see here this is an early frog embryo
you can see all the electrical
conversations of these cells are having
with each other these are some explanted
cells again you can see the colors
represent the the voltage of of all the
cells we do a lot of computational
modeling to try to understand how the
transition between these states um takes
place and how uh the different ion
channels and the the properties of the
excitable medium of the tissue underly
the self assembly of patterns so you can
think like touring patterns and other
kinds of patterns um and and why those
patterns have have memory properties why
they uh they they produce certain kinds
of structures and and so on so I want to
show you um just very briefly what they
look like in Vivo so this is what we
call the electric face this is a
pre-pattern it's a bioelectrical pre
pattern here's the video here's one
frame from it this is this is what
you're looking at here here is the is
the electrical pattern memory that tells
this tissue where uh the various organs
are going to be built meaning all the
different genes that need to be turned
on and off are dictated by this
bioelectrical pattern if you change the
pattern uh then then the the all the
downstream step steps will will change
not only is this uh is this how
individual uh uh organ primordia and
different different structures are
formed but you see across even even
explanted in culture there's some very
rich uh uh bioelectrical Dynamics
happening and in fact individual embryos
use this to talk to each other so
there's a there's a notion that we
discovered recently of a hyper embryo
where actually it's not just within one
being but but but these embryos when you
when you poke this one here uh all the
others know about it and there's all
sorts of Novel gene expression in the
hyper embryo uh that works uh that is
different from what the uh what the
individual uh embryos do and you can see
this you can see this kind of
information propagating across the
collective so again that multiscale
right bioelectricity as the cognitive
glue AC between cells and actually um
even between organs and between um
embryos now now watching these patterns
is all well and good but more
importantly we need functional ways to
read and write that information uh we
don't use um any applied Fields waves no
frequencies no magnets nothing like that
what we do is develop tools to uh
operate the bi electric interface that
cells use to uh communicate and control
each other so that means Target the ion
channels in their surface to control the
voltage and Target The Gap Junctions to
control the topology of the network so
uh in in in the Neuroscience this would
be synaptic plasticity or intrinsic
plasticity we use all the same all the
same tools optogenetics pharmacology and
and so on and so this is the
communication interface that we're
trying to hack so what we want to do is
we want to manipulate the information
content of these electrical p patterns
on the hypothesis that it it is the
medium in which uh the collective
intelligence of cells is storing its
data while it's navigating that morphos
bace right while while it's trying to
get to where wherever it's trying to get
to so let me show you just a couple of
examples of of what that actually looks
like so here is uh an early frog embryo
um I showed you in that electric face
there's a particular little uh little uh
spot that tells you where the eye is
going to be so we can inject a potassium
channel in a different spot of the body
to form that same thing let's do that in
the gut here so so the cells sure enough
they will make an eye these eyes have
all the lens right in the optic nerve
they have all the right um components so
that tells you that these bi electric
patterns are instructive they uh they
they will uh control the the outcome in
fact uh it is very modular so we are not
trying to tell individual stem cells
what to be or or what genes to turn on
we we gave a very high level subroutine
call which said build an ie here and
everything else happens from there the
material is is is organized in a way
that once once a large scale pattern um
uh tell tells the the the system what to
do all the other steps are are are are
undertaken the same way that in
Neuroscience when you're training the
rat you give it stimuli all of the other
things that have to happen like tuning
the the synapses and and and everything
else in the brain you you don't have to
be in charge of that right that that
amazing bioelectric interface takes care
of all of that all you're providing is
the top level experience the system is
rearranging itself as needed to uh to
meet certain goals um in fact this the
the material has has another uh
incredible property which is scaling to
the task it's given so this is a lens
sitting out in the flank of a of a Tull
somewhere um we've only injected a few
of the cells here the blue ones are the
ones we injected there's not enough of
them to form an eye so what do they do
they recruit all of these which we never
touched uh it's so it's a secondary um
recruit event they recruit all of these
to help them build the side in fact they
have a whole conversation that turns out
where these cells are saying don't do
this we're meant to be skin or or gut
and these cells are saying no we should
we should be an eye and depending on who
wins you either get an eye or you don't
but it's a you know it's a kind of
recruitment like you see in other
Collective intelligences where for
example ants will recruit nestmates when
they come along come across a big piece
of food so so this is the kind of thing
you can do you can you can grow um you
can induce entire organs you can also um
radically respecify the shapee of the
body so these are those flat worms that
I showed you the planaria that uh that
need to the pieces need to remember how
many heads should PL areia have anyway
and normally they do this by maintaining
this voltage gradient that says one head
uh we can now manipulate that by
rewriting it to say no actually you
should have two heads now this is this
is uh you know quite quite messy still
but the technology is still being worked
out but what we can do is say now
actually you should have two heads and
if we cut this animal sure enough what
it will build is a two head animal now
notice something interesting this
electrical pattern is not a map of this
two-headed animal this electrical
pattern is a map of this perfectly
normal structurally and in fact
molecularly so the molecular biology
says one head the anatomy says one head
but the stored electrical pattern of
what I'm going to build if I should get
injured at a future time so this is a
very primitive form of counterfactual
memory uh says two heads and in fact
that's that's what happens but it
doesn't do anything it's a latent memory
until you activate it injury and the
reason I keep saying it's a Memory oh
and by the way this is this is another
uh um aspect of the genetics uh there's
nothing genetically wrong with these
with these animals the same exact
Hardware can can uh store at least two
different representations of what a
normal body plan should be and where in
morphos space we're going to go here or
here and the reason I keep calling it a
memory is because once you do this these
two-headed uh these two-headed animals
are permanently two-headed you can cut
this middle fragment no more
treatment of any kind in plain water
forever as far as we can tell um it will
continue to grow two heads because the
electric circuit uh that's uh that's
that's that that's formed in this tissue
has this amazing property that once
youve reset the pattern it keeps okay
not all of them do this but this one in
particular does and uh here they are you
can see this this video of these
two-headed animals hanging around and
again the genetics are untouched there's
nothing wrong with the genetics here so
the question of how many heads should a
planarian have is tricky on the one hand
what the genetics does do is encode a uh
some some biological Hardware that all
things being equal in default mode will
give rise to a pattern that says one
head but it doesn't have to be that way
it's it's reprogrammable by experience
by transient experience where that does
not change the the the genetics at all
and in that case you will have a
permanent line of two-headed animals and
you can imagine we don't do this of
course but you could imagine throwing
these these animals in the in the in the
river somewhere uh they do um reproduce
by by splitting in themselves in half
and regenerating and so 100 years later
some scientists will come along they'll
scoop up some samples they say oh cool a
speciation event here's some one-headed
forms here some two-headed forms great a
speciation event let's see genome and
figure out where where it happen that is
that is not where it is sorry somebody
saying yeah hi
Michael good to see you again to see you
two questions about this specifically
one given that there is this maintenance
that that begs an obvious question of
why does not natural selection work on
this you don't need to be genetic you
don't need to be epigenetic you can be
like this that's one question another
one is you've um shown well I just
changed the electrical field here I
depolarize or I polarize and in this way
I'm producing an eye when I do that I'm
producing a leg and so on so forth but
there must be something different saying
produce a leg versus saying produce a
eye so the obvious question is how many
degrees of freedom how many memories can
you actually store or does that all
depend upon the biochemistry and so on
so forth yeah yeah great great questions
um first of all um I I will say that uh
I think Evolution uses this all the time
because with in every system that we've
looked at things like I mean here this
is uh the the fact that this thing
builds a face at all is evolution
exploiting the uh the the
self-organization of exactly this
pattern and we have computational models
that produce this this this Smiley
pattern in the tissue this is exactly
the outcome of evolution um uh uh
exploiting the self-organization the
memory and the self-healing the pattern
completion uh properties of electric
circuit so I think I think Evolution's
all over this it was from the time of
bacterial biofilms there's some amazing
work by um g soel at UCSD on how how
bacteria use this I think it's ancient
and I think evolution uses this all the
time well but but the question I mean
youve got we've got inheritance but
where's the mutation that's the other
one of the other key ingredients of
natural selection so that it's actually
trying out the space and then you have
differential survival and so on and so
forth I I you know this is this is again
a discussion that could take by itself a
really long time I I don't believe that
the standard story of U mutation and
differential survival is sufficient for
understanding all of the said not not
just the bi electrics but in general I
think there's a lot more going on here
and I think that um the I'll get to some
of this at at the very end but you know
but partly I mean if if you wanted to
look at the at the conventional piece of
this there are certainly mutations in
ion channels so for example when
evolution discovered voltage gated ion
channels by manipulating the the
properties of the protein the voltage
gated the the Ion channel protein what
you get is a voltage gated current
conductance which is a transistor once
you have that you can you can build all
kinds of things so in in a certain sense
yeah Evolution certainly shapes the
hardware and by changing uh different
kinds of um by providing different kinds
of ion channels you get excitable media
with different properties for sure for
sure but I also think that there's um
it's not it's not all about this because
there are uh many many important
properties of this that are and this is
this is the thing I'm going to talk
about at the end if I if I get to it
that are uh they're kind of free lunches
from the physics of it and and and uh
there are aspects of the laws of
mathematics of computation of of of
physics and so on that you get kind of
for free and I think Evolution exploits
this greatly and I think what these what
these proteins are what evolution
actually produces are a kind of pointer
into that space into that latent space
and and let me let me show you let me
show you some some of those examples and
then we'll you know we'll talk more
about this and Mike not I usually I
would be holding up a sign but you have
about 10 minutes left 10 minutes okay uh
I will skip a bunch stuff then and uh
and fly through a couple of things um
okay uh we won't bother with this uh
just to say that it's not just about
head number in fact you can make
different head shapes again it's stock
Hardware we're not changing the genetics
but if you manipulate the biil electric
pattern it can make the shapes of other
species of planaria about 100 to 150
million years evolutionary distance so
there's this morphos space this this
species is perfectly happy to visit
these other locations but that's not
what it normally does uh it makes brains
and stem cell distrib tions like these
other species in fact you can go further
in this latent space and you can make
things that um don't look like plaria at
all uh so you can make these crazy spiky
things and these 3D kind of cylinders
and so on so uh uh this is meant to say
Jour Journey not Journal auto correct
here uh but but the idea is that um uh
we we we need to explore this space I
want to I want to show you uh a little
bit of that if I have time so uh so so
let's talk about um what what can happen
here so so this is normal development so
here are your acorns uh that give rise
to this nice flat Oakleaf and we see so
many of these and we think well that is
what the genome in COD this genome
encodes this exact structure right with
this this is the Temptation because this
is so reliable well Along Comes A
bioengineer not a human bioengineer this
is a wasp what the WASP has evolved to
do is to prompt these cells by S by
signals by chemical signals that get the
plant cells to build this or this or
lots of other things these are plant
Galls they are not made of wasp cells
they are made of plant cells you you
would have no idea that these cells are
capable of building something like this
if you didn't see this example right
because because this uh lulls us into a
false sense of um limitation on what the
what the what the genome is actually
capable of it's actually capable of a
lot more now I'll show you this uh if I
ask you what what you think this thing
is um it looks like something I got off
the bottom of a pond somewhere and then
I could tell you that I sequenced the
genome the genome is 100% Homo sapiens
what these are are we call them anthr
robots they are um a novel construct
made of adult there's no no embryonic
tissue anywhere here there's adult human
tracheal epithelial cells from elderly
patients which under certain
circumstances uh uh uh reboot their
multicellularity and form this kind of
thing that runs around and this matches
no uh normal fa um the developmental
stage of human development uh it has
some interesting properties if you if
you um if you make if you make some
neurons here and you put a big scratch
through it and you let the let these
bots in they'll make something called a
superbot cluster and four days later
what you see is that what they did
underneath is that they took the two
sides of the neural wound and they
knitted them together who would have
thought your your tracheal cells that
sit there quietly for in your in your
Airway for long periods of time could
self assemble into the small tile little
creature that's able to do this it it it
it has a radically transformed
transcriptome 9,000 genes that are
different from what the human body is is
is typically doing so so so all these
things are novel but there's never been
any
anthrotronix
but this is all this is a petri dish
this is a two two two-dimensional
tradition um I I'm pretty sure I showed
you this last time these are these are
xenobots same kind of thing frog skin
cells that uh cannot reproduce by the
normal froggy fashion but they run
around when given um loose skin cells
and they they basically this is like
vman's dream of a a machine that runs
around and makes a copy of itself from
things in the environment because these
little balls mature into the next
generation of Cabots which makes the
Next Generation which makes the next so
so what I'm really interested in is
where does this stuff come from because
you can't pin it on selection there's
never been selection to do any of this
stuff um and um you know it's not
designed by us we didn't teach them to
do all this so so what I think is
happening here is that all of these
kinds of things that we build these
chimeras and these synthetic beings are
they're a kind of vehicle for exploring
this latent space of possibilities that
Evolution uh uh you know makes use of
but I think that uh because there's such
a heavy component from this space that
um we can't really say that it's because
that these things are happening because
of a specific algorithm or because of
the genetics it's a there's a there's a
really important uh external component
here that I do think has a structure to
it which means we can explore it this is
not a Mysterion view I think that um we
just we don't want to be surprised when
these emergent capabilities show up we
want to have a systematic process of of
of uh exploring it and I think that's
what that's what these constructs that
we make are and uh and I'll just I'll
just end uh here by a couple of quick
things by saying that because life is so
uh uh plastic and and solving problems
from scratch every at at every
opportunity pretty much any combination
of evolved material design engineered
material and software is some kind of
potential agent so hbrs and cyborgs and
many of these things already exist but
there's going to be way more and
everything that Darwin meant when he
said endless forms most beautiful in
life is like a tiny little corner of
this incredible option space many of
which we are going to be living in with
in the coming decades
so I really think that the field of
diverse intelligence is critical in
trying to understand novel problem
spaces novel kinds of Minds The
emergence of these things that are not
directly from the algorithms or the
chemistry that we are putting together
to allow us to have a kind of ethical
synth biosis and by the way this this
word was um invented for me by GPT uh as
a kind of as a way to to to uh explain
the idea that we should be you know we
should be figuring out how to live with
these other unconventional um beings and
and we we've begun to study um the
emergent uh goals and competencies of
very minimal systems if anybody's
interested in this here is a study of a
good old sorting algorithms right so if
you if you're a computer scientist
you've you've studied this everybody has
these sorting algorithms they do all
kinds of interesting things that we
never knew about that are kind that are
kinds of problem solving in a very
minimal transparent deterministic kind
of algorithm and so my message here is
you know following following my greed
here who was saying this is not a pipe
this is our picture of a pipe I I I
think that a lot of the um arguments
about whether or not living things are
machines and so on I I'm not even sure
machines are machines anymore I I think
that there is so much surprising um uh
uh not not just complexity not just
unpredictability but but actual
cognition at different levels problem
solving Behavior preferences memories
that come from very minimal setups that
um I think we we need a lot of a lot of
humility in uh looking at these minimal
models and saying well I know what the
algorithm is or I know what the
chemistry is so I know what it's going
to do I I I think it's life is much more
interesting than that so um I will end
here and just to say that I think
intelligence is pretty ubiquitous um we
need to get better at observing it in
unfamiliar environments um I think that
we have a research agenda here which uh
is to develop principal Frameworks uh
that try to get it right as far as um
what kind of mind we're looking at uh by
uh loosening up some of our um kind of
evolution some of our own evolutionary
um firmware and uh in the future we have
all kinds of exciting uh things around
um developing these models and using AI
as universal translators uh so uh you
know this all of this is discussed in
extensive detail I can send this around
if people want um I need to do a
disclosure there are three companies
that are funding some of the work that I
told you here are the amazing people the
postdocs and the and the PhD students
and our collaborators that have done all
this work and I will stop here thank you
so much
