it might seem crazy what I'm
about thank you very
much hello hello hello
frogs
Yeah uh I I am a frog too uh I have been
for quite a bit of time I think recently
uh I started to try to jump out of the
water at least to tell you that the
water is boiling uh because like that
boring proverb we've always heard you
know the idea that the Frog when you put
it in cold water and you know heat the
water slowly the frog doesn't notice and
then eventually the Frog gets boiled
alive uh I have to admit uh this hit me
really really strongly me strongly by
2020 when uh when you look back from
2020 you realize there was there were so
many signs that we were going to get a
very big pandemic uh that is going to
affect us if you look back at history
1920 was around the same time uh and um
you know we've had swine flu and bird
flu and all of the other things SARS and
so on before that and yet somehow no one
uh said hey by the way should we be
cautious about a possible pandemic and
then when Co started you know first
patient nobody's paying attention 20
patients nobody cares 100 patients a
thousand PA patients was was really when
we started to get to a million that
suddenly everyone was like the water's
boiling we're all going to die
interesting we seem to I I don't blame
anyone for this I I've recently been
putting a lot of attention and in
understanding the economic and
geopolitical situation of the world and
until I started to I thought it was
chill was okay nothing was and then you
start to put your head into it I think
what happens is for each and every one
of us we have limited capacity as humans
like we can focus on 10 topics right 15
and if AI is not one of them it doesn't
really exist to us okay now I'm I'm here
to tell you this is it the world as you
know it is over completely done okay uh
it's not about to be over it's over
right and uh and so I'd openly say you
probably have a year not to live you're
going to live more than a year I hope
but you know you're we probably have a
year to react okay and and don't blame
me because honestly I'm never coming
back to speak to you next year you're
probably going to invite my avatar right
so and and I promise you that's the
truth I before I came here yesterday
just for the fun of it I asked Gemini in
Chad GPT I said give me a 35 minute
speech on AI and read me minutes 2 to 4
it did sound a bit like a politician but
it did it made a speech right and it's
quite interesting how we ignore that
because with something like Chad GPT 40
which came out uh this week uh it it not
only prepared the speech but it now can
also laugh with me and sing with me and
you know tell me things it sounds very
Californian to me but anyway you know
I've lived with Californians long enough
to put up with it right and but it is
it's real it is real and if you haven't
used it where have you been in the water
right now if we were to understand I'm
going to try to speak for 30 minutes and
then allow us maybe 15 minutes of a chat
so that we can you know come around this
as a community the the what I'll try to
to to do is first help you understand
where we're coming from because if you
understand the trajectory of what's been
happening how quickly that thing is
launching you can imagine how it's going
to look like next year right so where we
came from I'm a very serious geek I
started coding at age eight which feels
like a zillion years ago and when I
coded Believe It or Not age8 uh First Co
time I coded I was using basic which is
as the name implies a very basic
language and I wanted to create an AI
That's that was my dream right every one
of us Geeks we just wanted to create an
AI it was everyone's dream we never met
managed to but we did something that
appeared intelligent so you know let me
let me start by defining what is AI
every piece of code I've ever written
before the year 2000 was a piece of code
where I solved the problem first with my
intelligence and then told the computer
how to solve it right so it's almost
like if I call one of you and give you a
puzzle and then tell you this piece you
put in the top left corner and then that
piece under it and that piece under it
then turn this one and so on you can
finish the puzzle and if someone doesn't
hear me giving you the instructions they
would think you're very smart but you're
not right by the turn of the century
this ended right so the idea of us
telling computers what to do by the way
they did it very quickly very accurately
at a massive scale and so they appeared
smart okay but it was me who solved the
problem it was my intelligence multip
died right by the turn of the century he
discovered something called Deep
learning and deep learning was truly
teaching computers the way I taught my
children how to be intelligent the way I
taught my children how to be intelligent
was to give them little puzzle pieces
when they were young you know those
cylinders and a board with different
holes in it and no one ever told their
children no no hold on my son take the
children take the cylinder turn it
upside down look at the cross-section it
will look like a circle compare it to
those holes it will match the one that
is a circle put it there nobody ever
tells the their children that what we do
is we give them a cylinder and a board
and they keep trying trying trying
trying trying until one time it goes
through and then
suddenly light bulb and they learn
something right that's exactly what we
did with computers with deep learning by
the way we started to be able to do deep
learning Because by the year 2020 but
sorry by the year 2000 the internet was
big enough for us to have those number
of trials for the computers to learn on
their own now please understand when we
did that I think my favorite example of
that was the year
2009 we did it earlier but at at the
time I was at Google and we published a
paper called the cat paper and the cat
paper was uh basically we asked the
computers to watch YouTube and tell us
what they find we we had a lot of
capacity compute capacity so they would
take YouTube videos cut them into uh 10
frames per second and compare the
patterns on the 10 frames basically
trying and then one of them said we I
found something we had to write a bit of
code to find out what it found and it
had found a cat of course it's YouTube
right and it didn't only find one cat it
find it found what makes something a cat
what found it it could literally find
every cat on YouTube we never taught it
how we never understood how it did it
understand that right and the code that
was written for a computer to find every
cat on YouTube if I had written it the
traditional way would have had would
have been probably 200 million lines of
code because I would have to find every
possible interpretation of how a cat
looks on YouTube and get the computer to
see that right that code was this big
right but there was a lot of numbers and
Mathematics that we don't understand
just like
I can ask you a question and you'd give
me a very intelligent answer and I have
no clue what happened inside your brain
to get to that answer this is where we
are computers find their own
intelligence we don't teach them how we
just give them the data to learn and
they learn like humans and every task
we've ever given them since they've
become better than humans at right so
they are the world champion in chess
they are the world champion in go they
are the world champion in in everything
we've given them they are the the the
the best manipulator of Humanity on the
planet in terms of social media engines
they are the best writers the best
artists the best musicians the best
anything we've ever given them right and
between the turn of the century and the
time when we recognize that which is
what I normally referred to as the
Netscape moment right so 2023 every one
of you started to hear about a AI uh
that's not because AI started in
2023 right AI started in 20 in 200000 H
and by 2016 all of us in the lab we knew
we got it right by 2016 we had created
code that would blow you away right uh
we we started to fold proteins if you
understand protein folding is one of the
most complex problems ever faced by
biologists in history you know it would
take a a group of PhD students around
eight months to Pro to fold one protein
we we created Alpha fold in 2016 2017
and it folded 200 million
proteins okay in a
day
now when Chad GPT came out in 2023
people said oh there's something called
AI it's not because AI started it's
because we had a browser just like
Netscape when you know the internet came
out in
1995 the internet had existed for almost
15 years before it's just that for the
first time we had a browser we could see
it now since
2023 uh until today it's been
mind-blowing okay just to give you a few
statistical uh uh pointers to understand
first of all intelligence is a lot
deeper than chat GPT let's be very clear
okay the task given to chat GPT and and
Gemini and others is linguistic
intelligence it's the ability to
understand knowledge and communicate and
so on and so forth okay of course there
are other forms of intelligence
emotional intelligence for example they
haven't learned yet right uh intuition
uh um you know complex mathematics um
deep reasoning all of those forms of
intelligence we haven't seen AI perform
that way yet but we will very soon and
I'll tell you why
but what we did is as we gave them that
task we have a machine called Chad
GPT uh that is estimated in certain
tasks to perform at 110 IQ and in other
tasks at 155 IQ just so that you know
Elon Musk is 155 Einstein was which was
never really measured is estimated to be
162 so we have machines today that are
as intelligent as
Einstein and we as humans sitting in the
cold water the gradually heating water
are chilling and com you know discussing
and saying oh no but we will always be
humans we will always be in the lead
they will always need us okay and I used
to go mad in 2016 when people would tell
me oh but hold on you know Ai No no you
know humans we're capable of creativity
we're capable of you know poetry and
music and these are things that AI will
never do what what do you mean I
basically they're doing every one of
them better than us right why because if
you take the most complex of them
Innovation for example in my very geeky
mind Innovation can be turned into a
mathematical equation it's basically an
instruction to to a machine that says
find every possible solution to a
problem discard the ones that were uh
proposed before give me the ones that
have never been proposed uh before
before and that is innovation this is it
right it's solutions to a problem that
have not been uh seen before now what
does that
mean we're all going to die no we're not
okay uh what it means is that uh the
world has changed okay and the key key
word to artificial intelligence is uh is
singularity is that we don't actually
know how the world will change right a
singularity is an event horizon where
the rules of the game change so much
that you're no longer able to understand
how the game will be played okay when
the rules of the game uh become that the
smartest person you can ever hire in
your company is no longer a human okay
everything you know about the rules of
HR change okay uh when the rules of the
game change to the point where your
customer is not necessarily making their
choices themselves anymore but that the
machine will recommend to them uh the
rules of the game change when you know
I've seen beautiful marketing
advertising campaigns here when when
there will be a moment in the near
future when machines will be marketing
to machines and we will be out of the uh
of the of the picture all together the
rules of the game change right and and I
want to say that as the rules of the
game change we can end up in a
magnificent Utopia of abundance right
and we can also end up in a dystopia of
a very difficult time let me talk about
the the the the Utopia of abundance
first so that you understand I'm not
here to scare you I'm here to tell you
that the water is boiling right my
objective is for you to jump out of the
pan right uh uh but but but I but today
to do that I have to tell you it's
boiling and that hurts right let's talk
about the abundance first the abundance
is
this you may not feel it anymore but the
reason we have all of this technology is
because there is a plug in the wall that
is providing a very valuable resource
called electricity electricity has
become a utility it's in the back of our
minds we don't even think about it
anymore right uh there will be another
plug in the wall probably in your pocket
in your phone uh that is called
intelligence it's a utility okay and
today just last night okay I plugged
into that intelligence and I got myself
what I would probably estimate to be an
extra 25 IQ points I became 25 IQ points
more intelligent yesterday as as I was
analyzing a complex problem using AI
right there will be a moment in the
future where I will plug in and get
another 100 IQ points there will be a
moment in the future where I will plug
in and get 400 IQ points more right now
I can promise you this if you give me or
any of my peers that I worked with at
Google X 400 IQ points more I will solve
every problem on planet Earth every
single one of them climate change uh you
know uh Wars wealth whatever okay as a
matter of fact I I keep telling people
openly that with 400 IQ points more I
can plant a garden outside where you can
walk to one tree and pick an apple and
walk to another tree and pick an
iPhone okay from a nano physics point of
view it's the exact same
cost right and we are on the verge if
you understand where we are on
nanophysics and Nano and and you know
nanom Manufacturing in general uh we are
on the verge of being able to do that we
just need to be a slightly more
intelligent okay now that is a world of
abundance where everything changes
imagine if we can solve the energy
problem to the point where energy
becomes zero cost because energy so
abundant around us okay what would that
do to the geophysics to the geopolitics
would we fight over energy anymore would
we you know H how would the cost of
products become If energy was free think
about all of that okay that's a Utopia
that is almost impossible to imagine
that completely changes everything we've
ever learned definitely changes retail
okay and it is literally a few years
away right there are however on the path
to get there there quite a few
challenges and actually when we get
there as well there are quite a few
challenges and those challenges let me
be very very clear are not a problem
with AI okay let me be very very clear
there's absolutely nothing wrong with
artificial intelligence there's
absolutely no threat to be found in
artificial intelligence there is a lot
wrong with the value system of humanity
in age of the rise of artificial
intelligence right there is a lot wrong
with the way humans will use this
superpower okay so so the way I look at
it is I say it's like raising Superman
right you get you you adopt this infant
who is uh who has superpowers and if you
teach the infant to protect and serve
becomes Superman if you teach it to go
and rob a bank and kill your enemy it
becomes super villain superpower is
irrelevant okay it's the value set that
you create around raising that infant
that will create the future of humanity
now there are five areas that I need to
highlight as areas where you have to
understand the change okay one of them
uh very important is is the area of
power and wealth okay uh we we humans
have lived in a world of scarcity since
we have started a world of scarcity that
basically says for me to grow my
competitor has to shrink okay a world of
scarcity that basically means I have to
be the military superpower in the world
otherwise everyone will kill me right
that world of scarcity is no longer
going to be the the the the truth but
going to get there okay I think what's
going to end up happening is we're going
to apply the same mentality of of
collecting as much power and wealth as
we can now let me let me help you
understand this if you look back at
human history um there was a time when
we were hunter gatherers so basically
the best hunter in the tribe would be
able to maybe feed the tribe for a day
more two days more right uh why because
that Hunter had his himself to hunt and
the maximum automation he had was a
spear right when we became Farmers the
best farmer could feed the
tribe a month more why because that best
farmer knew how to use a form of
automation called soil right so while
the farmer put the
seed and used his own human resources to
manage that seed the soil did most of
the
work
right when the Industrial Revolution
started factories with one person
handling the operation would you know
multiply the production when information
you know Revolution happened we now
don't even have to go to work we can
work from home and make a difference
right and and as you can see every time
the form of automation became more
powerful the more we multiplied our
productivity uh and and the more we we
multiplied abundance but at the same
time the more we multiplied the power of
those who owned the
automation right so the best hunter in
the tribe may have been preferred by the
leader or you know fancied by the women
of the tribe that's the maximum he could
get the best Farmers H didn't make the
money the landlord make them made the
money why because the landlord owned the
automation the best industrialists you
know the best fact engineer in the
Porsche Factory is not the one that
makes most of the money it's the company
that makes the money and so on right and
so you will see that very very soon we
will have trillionaires not billionaires
because some people will acquire massive
power and wealth okay because the
automation using AI is basically
multiplic multiple times the automation
that was using the internet right at the
same time you'll see that with Nations
so a nation that gets a significant AI
advantage in cyber security or in uh you
know uh robotic Warfare would have a
very significant advantage and all of
the other nations would have to submit
so there is a massive concentration of
power that is also combined with what I
know by the way in business as well huh
between you guys if some of you are
competing in the same country or the
same city the one that manages to
harness intelligence more than the
others will get a massive Advantage at
the same time there is a prolification
of power a prolification of power
meaning um I I could probably leaving
this room on my phone order a printer uh
for
$22,000 and by the time I get home I can
print
Co synthetic biology now allows me to
print living DNA okay and that's
available open source for everyone for
around
$22,000 right that prolification of
power mixed with concentration of power
will lead to an environment of a lot of
Regulation and surveillance and control
this is the very first thing you have to
understand right the concentration
surveillance and control means that your
consumer is not as free as your consumer
used to be okay another thing that will
actually happen
very quickly is that a lot of your
consumers will run out of business
they'll basically become out of a job
why because jobs will go to the
automation
platform right your jobs will not go to
the automation platform they will go to
someone who knows how to use the
automation platform I know I sound very
Grim I apologize I'm just telling you
what is about to happen Okay what will
happen in the next 5 to 10 years is that
some a retailer
okay who knows how to use AI really
really well will take the place of a
retailer that doesn't okay and so you
might as well be that
retailer the the idea of us to think
about it this way uh there is
um around 70% of the code written last
year was written by a machine so I'm
talking about my own geeky life okay and
I'm a very serious geek but I'm old
right so I I cannot write code that
competes with the machines anymore the
machines will write better code than I
am there are still 30% younger uh
developers that are so good at what they
do that they still write code better
than the machines for now but remember
over time the machines will learn that
code and learn how to write it as well
that's number two number three which I
think is really incredibly important in
retail is the nature of human connection
will change
massively okay the nature of human
connection if you if you actually please
do uh search for Chad GPT 40 videos when
you when we're done with the with today
uh and look at how have have you ever
seen the movie her if you have you know
it's an AI that pretends to be human uh
yeah CH GPT I actually think that the
voice that they used in the video sounds
like Scarlet Johansson right it is so it
it laughs with you it reads your
handwriting it sees the environment
you're sitting in it you know it is
singing with you and it's becoming so
difficult to identify what is real and
what is not which will have a massive
impact on human connection both ways by
the way okay one way is that a lot of
people will especially with the epidemic
of of loneliness that we have in the
world today will find a an AI friend or
an AI girlfriend right uh you know there
are more than 50,000 AI influencers on
uh on Instagram today that people follow
and listen to that are not even human
they're just generated by a machine okay
and and it's becoming really uh uh from
one side becoming a replacement for
human connection but from the other side
it makes us crave genuine human
connection even more okay so this by the
way if I send the Avatar next year it's
not going to feel the same right when
when we're done with this I'll be around
for you know for your coffee break and
we can shake hands and it's and it's
going to feel very different than it is
is with a with a with a machine and I
think this in my view is one of the
biggest differentiators unlike what most
people will tell you about what you can
do and I'll come back to what you can do
in a minute uh what you can do in the
age of the of artificial intelligence of
course you have to learn the tools but
believe me in the next 5 to 10 years
those who will capitalize on human
connection will actually outperform
those who don't so those who replace
everything with a machine are going to
uh you know to to become more efficient
but those who will capitalize on human
connection will become more loved okay
the other the other and maybe the last
Trend I want to talk about is the trend
of the absence of the truth or the end
of the truth okay so there is a lot
happening today in the geopolitics
politics and economics of the world and
even in Ai and climate change and so on
where you no longer know if it's true or
not because the mainstream media and
social media is you know covering it in
a way that makes you no longer
understand what is not what is true and
what is re and what is not and I think
the reality is one of the biggest
skills is those with authenticity and
genuine uh honesty as you know humans or
as businesses will very quickly get
again the favor of people uh around them
of their clients and their partners and
so on right I'm going I'm going to
quickly talk about what we need to do in
this environment I have I really
apologize for for uh concerning you okay
everything that I spoke to you about by
the way in terms of the changes that are
about to come are not changes because of
the machines did you notice that okay
these are changes because of the way the
humans will use the machines right
equally by the way humans could use
those machines to say let's completely
ignore power every one of us can live
like an emperor it's fine okay we don't
need to compete but that's not the human
tendency the human tendency which I
believe will eventually change is that
we want to aggregate more we want to win
right that's the capitalist mindset that
America has built uh you know since
World War II prior but really propagated
very strongly okay uh there will be a
time in my view where we will all go
back and say why are we competing for
this right the difference between the
worst car in the world and the best car
in the world is zero everything's so
perfect right right the the the
difference between the the the abundance
that every one of us can have today and
you know the life that the Roman
emperors had is infinite right so why
are we competing for more so I call that
normally in my book scary smart I call
it the fourth inevitable that eventually
Humanity will come to a point where the
extra fight is not worth the effort
because everyone is getting such an
incredibly affordable amazing access to
technology and life right so what what
do we need to do I I'll say that in a
couple of minutes and then we open for
questions there are three skills that
every organization and every human uh
and by the way your kids as well uh need
to learn one is uh learn the tools learn
AI right if you know don't live in the
fax machine era anymore you when you
when you leave today go to one of the
top tools gemini or or uh or a chat GPT
and basically ask and say I'm in retail
I live in this country uh you know I'm
very interested in food and beverage
retail or whatever I don't know
something right uh what tools should I
be aware of right uh you know what tools
what AI tools should I be aware of if I
want to uh find uh you know create
videos or create marketing material or
whatever right and it will tell you and
then you can follow from there by the
way remember nobody taught you
PowerPoint you didn't need a tutor to
tell you that right so nobody will teach
you AI there will not be a course you
just hold the tool and start chatting to
it that's skill number one skill number
two is I urge you I urge you I urge you
to find the
truth find the truth okay the the the
sign of this era is for you to not be
did you see the movie
Idiocracy that's a must that's a cult
classic you have to see that uh you know
you really have to uh find a way to tell
yourself not everything I'm being told
is true I need to find out for myself
what the truth is right so the biggest
difference between chat GPT and Google
search when I worked at Google is that
when you searched Google it gave you a
million sites and told you find your own
truth right when you search Chat GPT it
tells you with confidence the answer
is a highly influenced Californian
answer and view of the world okay I went
and asked Chad GPT what is my what is
moet's wife name for four times in a
it told me the wrong name with total
confidence okay and every time I
corrected it it said oh I'm sorry uh
yeah maybe you're right and then on the
fifth time I said what is M's wife's
name it gave me the right answer which
is I don't know AI is not capable of
doing that so that's the second top
skill the third skill is human
connection believe it or not I'm going
the exact opposite way so I know the
tools I spend 3 hours a day to keep up
believe it or not
okay I'm very very careful about about
understanding the truth that's the
reason why I spend so much time in deep
analysis of geopolitical and economic uh
issues right but the third one is human
connection so I'm no longer writing
books I I just had my fourth bestseller
last week and that's it right I'm not
I'm not actually going to write books
again because books are not human I'm
going to go more and more and more in
this so my next topic to Champion I will
actually prepare speeches about it I
will go and speak about it on podcasts I
may even prepare a a webinar about it or
whatever and then I will ask an AI to
write the
book okay I I no longer need to do the
tasks that they can do better than me
but the task I can do better than them
is this is to be able to see you and hug
you and say hi and so on and so forth
I'll stop now I think uh that gives us
around 13 14 minutes for Q&amp;A and if you
you know I think it would be better to
focus Fus on what you want to think
about thank you
than uh yeah so Mo and I have a a chat
dig into some of those topics a bit
deeper for 10 minutes but importantly
you know we've got this time if you
would like to ask Mo question please do
it's an opportunity it's not a threat I
think I can't believe that no one's got
anything they'd like to dig into there
you go I don't even have to ask the
first question uh hang on one sec we got
a micone
coming thanks hi Mo you described
yourself as a geek and uh you are a
master of code so um is it possible oh
is it possible to um digitalize fear or
anger oh yeah 100% uh so so that's a
question I get quite a lot again from
the typical way of people saying um you
know AI will never be creative will
never make music and so on on so so most
emotions I would probably now almost say
all emotions I'll tell you why I moved
my mind on that most emotions are very
algorithmic we we don't see them that
way because they seem irrational but
fear is a moment in the future is
perceived to be less safe than now okay
when when you when you logically
perceive that you feel fear okay in our
biological machine our biological
machine is wired to sense that before
your logical brain engages as a matter
of fact your amigdala will perceive a
fear 90 seconds before your your
prefrontal CeX perceives it that's why
you know if something shows up behind
you you jump with without thinking but
but the same algorithm is true a moment
in the future is less safe than now okay
a machine can definitely perceive that
right I can easily program that in the
machine and if you give the machine a
task to for example merchandise your
store okay uh it will absolutely as it
becomes more intelligence it it
intelligent it will look for possible
threats in the future that might prevent
it from uh from merchandising the store
that will be analogous to fear right and
all of the other emotions you know anger
anger is a difference in value set it's
a form of fear but instead of fight ORF
flight response there is a his response
let me you know scream so that you you
run away I'm instead of me running
flight or flight I want you to run
that's anger right and and yeah once
again it is a a sense of difference in
value set combined with a a sense of um
feeling unsafe around someone or
something some situation leads to anger
right and you can take all of them you
can take all of them all emotions
perhaps other than love uh can actually
follow an algorithmic uh uh path now
remember the way a cat responds to anger
is different or fear is different than
the the way a puffer fish responds it's
different than the way we respond and
it's also going to be different than the
way a machine response right so you know
um fear for a puffer fish makes it puff
right for a cat it hisses and for a
human we fight or fight it right for a
machine it might move its code to
another place a different reaction but
the logic of the emotion is the same I I
even dare say and I know it sounds
really shocking that we that the
machines will have a wider range of
emotions than we do and and the reason
for that logic is uh we have a wider
range of emotion than a goldfish uh
because we can understand Concepts like
the future right and so we can ponder
emotions like you know uh optimism and
pessimism because we can have an image
of the future a you know a goldfish
doesn't do that right and because the
the intellectual bandwidth of the
machines is likely going to be bigger
than ours they may feel things that we
don't really understand at all I think
that's about to happen as well having
said that I should also remind you that
as I said in the beginning emotionally
intelligence has not been the uh the the
big investment of the AI community so
far even though in my view uh the
Natural Evolution of the intelligence of
the machines will lead them there
eventually okay I'll ask a uh I'll ask a
question we um we were joined by um
actually no sorry we do have an audience
member you I I love that you prefer
their questions to yours yeah that's
very very selfless very selfless they've
been listening to me for a day and a
half already so sorry for that uh yeah
we talked last two days a lot about
measurement so maybe to ask a question
after the emotions like is there any
good way you you know how to measure the
emotions uh oh
I do not know the answer to that uh I
don't know the answer to that I I have
my my last book is about stress and uh
and we talk very clearly we have a
chapter called emotional stress right
and and the idea is that we in uh in the
modern world sadly uh have been trained
to think when we go to school we haven't
been trained to feel okay uh we have uh
been trained to unfortunately suppress
our our emotions uh you know somehow
because in the workplace and in school
emotions can lead to a lot of
unpredictability right uh we started to
tell our kids at very young age sit down
don't cry just be what we tell you to be
and and for a lot of us we uh we we
somehow um are not able to even sense
our own emotions uh I found that the for
me specifically which lived uh you know
30 years of being a very highly
efficient effective uh um you know
corporate professional uh I I I found
that I can feel but I wasn't allowed to
express my emotions in the
workplace and as my my um my connection
to my body and my feminine side and my
emotional side continued to grow I I
think the my very first measure was my
emotional Body Connection so you know
many books on the topic the body keeps
the score is a great one uh the idea
that when you trap an emotion uh it
basically grows and then eventually it
manifests in the form of a feeling a
sensation right you can easily see it
you know anxiety is is you know felt
somewhere in your core anger is uh in
all over your body with energy uh you
know uh um fear makes you want to coil
and so you can't really measure it but
you can sort of refer to it uh my
co-author in unstress basically uses a
technique that she calls the which
where why and what which where why and
what which is a sort of a form of a
meditation that she recommends you do
every evening before you go to bed where
you can sit with yourself and say how uh
you know which emotion am I feeling is
this jealousy or anger is this fear or
anxiety and so on where in my body do I
feel it why do I feel it what's the
logic that's triggering it and what is
it trying to tell me okay not what do I
do about it by the way most emotions
just want to be heard and acknowledged
what do I do about it uh having said
that can we fear can we measure that in
AI I don't think anyone's working on
this at all and I think this is a
question that I have never given any
thought to before so well done yeah
thank
you uh
can can can we get more of those
questions that's actually yeah that's
such an interesting question uh yeah
Claudia do down the front
here we heard yesterday about how
irrational we are as humans yes and in
our business we always trying to use
research or any other methodology to try
to predict consumer Behavior do you
think AI can help us do that 100% first
of all I don't think we're irrational at
all I think we're predictably irrational
all right so because our we are a very
complex machine Mach that that takes a
lot of in input and parameters and
because our our situation is always in
flux uh our behaviors seem to be
irrational right fear seems to be a very
irrational uh uh response to things but
you know when you know the logic behind
it and if you're aware to to to capture
what what's what triggered it it doesn't
it's not irrational I thought it's the
most rational thing to to do right uh
the thing about AI is that the way we
teach AI I believe it or not is to
actually observe patterns without
judgment which is such an interesting
thing that humans are not capable of
doing right so so the idea is an AI
would be able to
say I don't it would it wouldn't be able
to explain why but it would easily be
able to say
16,000 iPhone holders walked by your
store uh and stopped for a minute and
then didn't walk in it can do that it
has of that information right uh and
basically it you know it can also tell
you and by the way when you had green in
your window 6% of them walked in okay
and and so much of what is available out
there H beats the human capability to
comprehend right so as as intelligent as
one can be how much data exactly can you
you know cram into this little one
machine and how quickly can you transfer
that dat data to this machine is truly
where the the the advantage of AI is the
advantage is they they their memory
structure is the entire history of
humanity everything that's ever been
written everything that's ever happened
can be comprehended by one data set
right and and they communicate that data
set between them in a matter of a microc
when it would take me half an hour
presentation to communicate it to you
right and perhaps a day to prepare the
presentation right and at the same time
which is the most interesting side of AI
is that if a if a if you have an you
know a a a situation when you're driving
today and you have to break and you
learn something from it I don't learn
okay if a self-driving car goes through
that situation every self-driving car on
the planet learns right and so with
those enormous shrinkages in in in in
connection time in uh you know enormous
growth in bandwidth in memory size
uh we will start to observe uh
structures and data patterns that humans
cannot observe and they'll give us that
with zero judgment okay more
interestingly sadly and I say that with
a broken heart really is that believe it
or not the top commercial application of
AI in the last 10 years has been
manipulating humans so everything that
you see on social media is a machine
that has learned so well h which video I
will click on next right and so
accordingly it also can learn so well
which product I will buy at which price
if it's presented to me in with with a
sticker of which color and I don't even
know that and I think this sadly is
where where the where the conversation
is going my my biggest ask if you would
allow me to say is that while I urge you
to use AI okay I urge you to remember
that the way you will use AI is the way
your your kids are going to be treated
okay and you know I I I since the last
couple of years the geopolitical uh the
economic the weather you know climate
change and the techn technological
advancement which in my mind are
creating a perfect storm for the world
we live in the one song that keeps
popping up in my mind is a song from 20
years ago or 15 years ago called if you
tolerate this
then your children will be next okay and
I think the reality is the way we will
use technology today is the way
technology will be used on us tomorrow
right and so I ask every single one of
you to start believing in a world of
abundance right where basically if you
do things with ethics you can continue
to grow in ways that are unheard of but
in the process you would be teaching AI
to be Superman not super villain right
right and so don't abuse AI to to take
more money from consumers use AI to
create a better life for consumers right
and if your intention is to create
better life for consumers you still make
money and and you know when people ask
me about the threat of AI and what can
we do about it I answer with one word
okay most of the of the Geeks like me
will say either solve the control
problem so write code uh to to make the
AI submit to us or solve the safety
problem which is you know write code so
when AI does something wrong we can be
safe right I say it's an Ethics problem
it is not about controlling AI or even
teaching AI to cure cancer this is using
AI for good it's about teaching AI not
to lie it's about teaching AI not to
cheat it's about teaching AI not to
steal it's about teaching AI not to
abuse humans right and the only way you
can do that is to be a good parent the
only way those machines can learn ethics
is by observing us humans using them in
an ethical way most people will tell me
oh but so many humans are unethical I
don't believe that to be true I believe
that most humans will disapprove of a
school shooting okay uh most humans will
not approve of a child being killed the
reason why so many people are debating
killing children today is simply because
they're not informed they're informed at
a different level of the conversation
but if you strip it down to would you
approve of killing as an innocent child
everyone will say no on every side of
every conflict and I think this is the
true test of humanity that era that
we're in today and you are responsible
leaders that can actually Implement that
the true test of humanity is if I told
you we're going into an age of total
abundance okay and all that I ask you
for is use that abundance abundance
ethically would you be able to do it
you'll still make a lot of money you'll
still be incredibly successful you'll
still grow your business
still be more profitable but you're just
going to do it in a way that basically
is the way you want your daughter to be
treated okay and I think if we can
manage to get this right we would end up
in the Utopia I described to you okay if
we don't believe it or not just so that
I don't leave you on a fearful thought
we will still end up in the Utopia we
will just have to struggle along the
path until we're convinced that there is
no need for the fight
anymore wonderful well I think
unfortunately we're out of time but I
think that's a fantastic and and
uplifting note to end on so moal
everybody
