welcome back to dsyi I'm Anastasia I'm
Shiloh and today we are talking about
what it would look like to actually have
a functional science institutionally
speaking institutionally speaking to
some degree for sure but also like are
institutions necessary is science an
institution what are the things that
make institutions die and how can they
be revamped or revitalized into
something that's functional to the
Future and we've had a bunch of these
conversations I would say that we
probably talked to Jim Keller about
institutional birth death and Decay
sya Ben Taylor so good no I just jinxed
you on that fando
Taylor and it's just this thing that
happens to be in the background of a lot
of conversations because if you've stuck
around here for long enough you know
that we're sort of skeptical about the
ability of current scientific
institutions to be able to provide the
kinds
of knowledge advancements that are
necessary to power us through the next
50 to 100 years like I'm not really
quite willing to accept that the sun has
set upon whatever you want to call the
culture that we inhabit but I think that
if the Sun is too not set that we have
to figure out ways to make the
institutions that have been around for
the last 400 years still function for us
and science is at the center of that and
so with us we have Jeff Anders who is
the leader of an organization called
Leverage research who's put a lot of
effort into figuring out a cohesive
story of The History of Science and he's
also involved with one of our other
guests claresa Yello on her Quantum
biology initiative and is kind of also
in like the crypto world and trying to
figure out alternative ways to be able
to fund scientific projects that are
happening on the outside of instit and
govern them I think they I think that's
what we're going to find we haven't had
this conversation yet so we don't
totally understand but I think they're
trying to use crypto architecture
to basically set up the administration
of the program and how decisions are
made yeah exactly and so it's basically
a group of people that are trying to do
something that's kind of audacious and
well outside of the context of the way
that we normally think and talk about
science which is Academia and so I don't
think I really need to belber the point
I think it's a really interesting
conversation we left off on a really
interesting point which is okay well
we've talked for almost three hours
about how to make science go faster and
how to make science work better and it's
like okay well how good do we want it to
work is it a terrible idea to have a
science that's really really effective
at creating new technologies that screw
with our psychology and our society or
is it best to figure out how to have a
really effective science and then also
figure out how to apply really good
breaks to it so that we're producing new
technologies at a rate that we can
actually integrate them into society
without breaking everything and we don't
answer that question we just walk right
up to the edge of that and then call it
a day but if you guys enjoy the
conversation and you tell us in the
comments and you tell us what other
directions you want us to explore we'll
have Jeff back and we'll be able to
actually dig into the subject of just
how far and fast do we go yeah and he
also has a bunch of research on his
website about I think it's the
psychology of belief structures
something like related to that I really
wanted to talk to him about it we didn't
get to it so I hope we do get to talk to
him
again remember guys podcast is entirely
paid for by you guys the listeners uh we
don't have any ads other than the ones
YouTube slaps on there automatically we
don't sell any products to you that
other people make we're generally
committed to making this a Renaissance
project where we're paid for directly by
patrons so if you have the smallest
amount of money to spare every month and
you enjoy the show you find yourself
listening to it often consider coming
over to patreon.com check out what we
got going on over there it's a pretty
cool group too you know we get together
once a week over Zoom we hang out chop
it up about all of our favorite subjects
we started having some podcast guests
come by so that's a pretty cool little
perk and you get access to the episodes
early but but most importantly you can
rest assured that you are making sure
that this is not a project where we are
trying to sell stuff it is just a
project that we are trying to bring you
the edge of what's known in all of these
different disciplines and we're chasing
our curiosity and we'd like to have you
along for that ride so check it out at
patreon.com if you don't have any money
to spare today but you might tomorrow
great you can share the podcast with a
friend you can rate and review it make
sure to subscribe on YouTube give it a
thumbs up if it was a conversation you
enjoyed all these things do contribute
to us ultimately being able to reach
more people and get better guests and
build this into a more strong project so
there's a lot you can do and we have a
really exciting announcement to make if
you've been listening to the podcast for
a while you probably know that we are
all about exploring the theories that
challenge our conventional understanding
of the world you'll also have heard us
and our guests talking endlessly about
how difficult it is for the Academy to
embrace these often far out ideas even
in the face of an imminent Paradigm
failure for example everybody sort of
realizes the data streaming out of the
James web telescope has kind of pulled
the rug out from under the standard
model of cosmology but instead of
calling for a new Theory most academics
remain hard at work on Paradigm repair
almost all serious Alternatives can only
find an audience on the fringes there
seems to be no institutional space for a
conversation between those two camps we
believe that thought a healthier
scientific society would include both of
these perspectives and more which is why
we're bringing together Alexander unzer
of unzer real physics Eric learner of
the Big Bang never happened Gareth
Samuel of see the pattern Dr Mike
McCulla of quantized inertia Dr Andre
catoris AIS of the University of cenis
Dr CS un Krishnan of the Tata Institute
of Technology Dr Angel bonck of the
University of Portsmouth and others to
discuss what lies Beyond The Big Bang
and the crisis in cosmology so this June
12th to 16th deuson will meet in cimbra
Portugal at a gorgeous Seaside hotel for
a long weekend talks panels discussions
and mingling space is going to be pretty
limited but we really hope you will join
us so check out the links in the
description or visit deisy side.com for
more keep that in mind for now enjoy the
conversation with Jeff Anders enjoy our
exploration of the history of Science
and we will see you next time the
Scientific Revolution Starts Now inde
this podcast
let us see in the
dark do you guys know s b you have you
talked to him yet we did talk to him but
we completely up the audio for
that conversation I forget what exactly
happened it was that the video somehow
froze towards the end of the
conversation so we still had the audio
we didn't have the computer plugged in
something it was something yeah
um but yeah we did it was fun to talk to
him but we kind of sced screwed up that
recording so and we just released an
episode with uh Ben landow Taylor oh
yeah yeah both of them used to work for
me
H interesting what's uh what's Sam up to
these days you guys in touch still yeah
yeah he he runs bismar analysis that's
where Ben Works um and he's working on
creating an atlas of all the world's
players and institutions hm that's cool
what exactly does bismar do by the way
I've never really UND said that um they
do contract work for clients who want to
understand some aspect of the political
landscape better and and canr political
broadly so like maybe you want to
understand philanthropic giving better
like who are the players what are they
doing Etc he's super good at that and
then they why would you want to
understand that
um is this like Market uh maneuvering
and stuff or like you could you could
think of it
as you could think of it as yeah if you
want to understand your Market but you
want to go a bit deeper on the analysis
and then probably you'd contract s if
you agree with some of his major claims
or major thesis um he thinks that it
really matters how functional
institutions are this is why mentioned
him because you said all institutions
die and I'm
like maybe maybe maybe um uh but he also
has this thesis about Live players where
the idea is that knowing who is uh
essentially an inventive or agentic
person in terms of the landscape power
will give you a lot of information about
what's going to
happen interesting
I think everybody is really preoccupied
with being able to predict the future
right because if you can predict the
future you can put yourself in the right
position to be able to be one of the
people who wins instead of loses because
you know if you're some guy who's
manufacturing windmills I always think
about this like windmill manufacturers
used to be one of the main money-making
operations on the frontier because
everybody dug wells and in order to not
have to be able to dig or to pump the
Water by hand they had windmills and
then with
within I don't know maybe 50 years of
the frontier becoming populated and
windmills being really big sellers
everything was electrified and so you
didn't need windmills anymore and so now
windmills have like the yard windmills
have turned into these just Chach keys
and so if somebody was around at the
Windmill company and was like hey we
should just pivot to making pumps or
something yeah they might still exist
yeah if you like a good example nowadays
is AI it's like should you jump in
should you invest should you buy a
bunker right for that you want to
understand the technology you want to
understand the players bmar is a a good
place to go for that interesting I mean
that topic of the lives and deaths of
Institutions
and you know how dependable any
institution is in the long run is
something we've explored a bunch we
talked to do you know Jim Keller he runs
a bunch of
we had a conversation about that because
he he kind of has a theory that
institions have this really parallel
life cycle to human beings and kind of a
similar uh trajectory where you spend
like you know your 20s and 30s getting
like figuring out how to do something
and then you know the next decade you
actually put it into pract next two
decades and then you kind of retire like
just kind of lean back on that for the
last portion of your life and do do you
have a do you think that institutions
can be immortal though
um I I think so um we obviously haven't
seen one yet the the longest lived
currently existing institutions the
Catholic Church famously they've had
problems recently they're still
immensely powerful and
influential
um I think so um the I'm not totally
sure but I don't really want to give up
hope until I see a a proof
that that institutions have an advantage
over human biology happy we could talk
about that too because I'm interested in
the longevity question but um with
institutions you can you know you
replace people it's like replacing Parts
over the course of time this is one of
the things that s highlights is the
succession problem if you
canthus if you can yeah but but there's
like this key part which is who's
piloting it and so if you can get the
captain if you can replace the captain
properly and you can replace them in a
way that they can solve the same problem
then maybe maybe you could keep the
thing going indefinitely there's like
the weird Innovation crisis too which is
these corporations are often rocketed
into the stratosphere on the basis of
some singular genius idea right like
apple is a great example um even Google
to some extent but then the bigger the
company becomes to meet its demands the
less flexibility it has in terms of
encouraging Innovation and you just kind
of get this slow
stagnation yeah I I it's certainly what
seems to happen most of the time um I
assume we're not recording yet are we
recording yet oh yeah we've been
recording since the beginning yeah we
are all right all right welcome happy
happy to talk about any any whatever
ever you guys interested okay so we'll
check it out I think that this question
of Institutions is deeply related to the
philosophy and History of Science
conversation that we're going to have at
least in my mind and so to to connect it
more explicitly the question is do you
treat science as an
institution that's a great question um
I've just been rereading Coon's
structure of scientific revolutions and
thinking about this and related
questions I
think I think I do think of science as
an
institution um I think about
institutions as having been founded
created by some number of people so it's
weird to think about science as having
been created uh but I do think that the
Royal Society marks as far as so I'm I'm
still learning I'm learning about the
history of science think
you know understand some things I'm
looking forward to understanding a lot
more but as I currently understand it
the Royal Society was the beginning of
Science and I think that you can make a
meaningful distinction between science
and natural philosophy which came
before so yeah I think science is
obviously it's much larger than the
Royal Society now but I I do think about
science as being an institution what is
that uh segregating wall between the two
natural science or natural philosophy
and science yeah so people will have
heard
about natural philosophy usually it's
referred to as well it was science
before we started calling it science um
but I think there's actually a an
important difference the uh I think
about philosophy as being a more
individual Pursuit obviously you can do
it in groups but you know the
quintessential philosopher is like
thinking this is an activity that
they're doing individually when you look
at Works in natural philosophy they're
in tretis format so
they're you know n00 pages long and they
employ a huge range of different methods
you could be looking at observations you
could be doing you know long arguments
you could be you know there's all sorts
of things you could be doing um and the
audience for those things typically ends
up then being individuals so it's you
know you write your Treatise and then
someday someone picks up the Treatise
and they read it and they're inspired or
they're infuriated and they go and write
something further that's a very
individual Centric activity
whereas science as I understand it
involves uh a group activity where you
have observations and this is a a thing
that you know was done at the Royal
Society you you know have the slogan nus
and verba take no one's word for it you
do an experiment you have an instrument
you produce an observation and everyone
checks and can tell that they make the
observation the
people sharing observations and then
mutually checking and correcting each
other I take that to be the thing that
defin science as an activity and then
that it might seem like it's a small
difference from natural philosophy but I
think the difference between an
individual activity and a group activity
they're they're in fact very different
so I think science you get this
grounding an observation and you get it
being a a group it so I propose that's
the
difference there's something about it
that you're because philosophy natural
philosophy I think can be the study and
observation
of Concepts more than objects like I
feel like a lot of the natural
philosophical ideas of the spirit that
imbus matter and the kind of alchemical
spooky stuff that was a big part of it
has to be some measure reflected in the
distinction because science all of a
sudden stands up and is like well no
like we start with the stuff we start
with the objects and then we have to
task ourselves with figuring out what it
is that the objects are doing that
that's the philosophy part though as far
as I can tell like at in every
scientific paper there's a paragraph at
the end which is very philosophical
where after everyone's agreed on the
observations and the phenomenon has been
you know adequately inscribed or
restricted then there's this speculative
phase we call the conclusion section but
it's
really like I used to do this uh sem I
had to take a seminar in grad school
where we would just analyze these uh
high impact papers and it was funny
because we'd go through all of the data
and then at the end we'd read the
conclusion and the conclusion rarely
aligned with what we would have
concluded from just rigorously tearing
apart all of the figures you know and so
that seems like a philosophical domain
where you're actually adding this layer
of interpretation and that kind of
that's where things start to depart from
this consensus idea where you know maybe
everybody kind of agrees on the
conclusions but not everybody agrees on
all the conclusions and so you actually
get this kind of individuation well
there's some there there is some
individuation I think you're right but
there's also a sense of what is allowed
to be said and what isn't allowed to be
said so if you do an Immunology paper
and you know it's a cell paper you have
figure FES 1 through 15 panels a through
H in every single one that's like giv me
anxiety now that's representing some
case that you're making and you get to
your conclusions and you're like Ergo we
have proved that God moves within the
animal world and IM the immune system
works by the hand of God it's like I I
don't think you could publish that it's
got to be a natural mechanism I suppose
that's I think that's a really important
key difference is that the like natural
philosophy has this sense of like the
Spheres operating and science is this
idea that it's like no it's there is
something that
is designated within the experimental
system as being the thing that explains
it cause and effect are terrestrial and
material and observable and
manipulatable but I think newon and the
natural philosopher would would have
agreed that the mechanism has to be
natural that's what the word natural
means right philosophy might be in some
domain of thought and like mind
proce I can actually ask you guys a
question then because the um there's an
interesting question about what counts
as natural and um you were just making a
distinction with the sort of domain of
thought one uh field that I've studied a
whole bunch is psychology um and if you
go back and look at philosophers who
comment on the mind like there are a
whole bunch so there's David Hume has
his theory of the order of the train of
thought Plato has the tripartite soul
and has a theory of the different the
souls the mind for Plato you have
different types of mind that then
correspond to different types of
citystate that you can have and so does
that what does that count as like you
could is that a of natural philosophy
it's certain it always gets it's
classified as philosophy right it's in a
book where many many different you know
subjects are treated um but yeah how how
but because if you think about Plato
looking at the different divisions in
the mind he gives argu he makes
observations he gives arguments it's
like you might think that you shouldn't
eat the chocolate cake but you are
eating the chocolate cake there he
doesn't use chocolate cake but
that nevertheless shows argues Plato
that you have different principles
different things in the mind that are
you know cause and effect causing
different things to happen so you have
to distinguish the rational part from
the repetitive part and then he tries to
correlate those observations with uh
observations about how cities work or
city states and so does that does that
count as philosophy natural philosophy
does it count as science like what what
is
that I mean
I'm not totally I I see the difference
between science and philosophy that
you're pointing out which is this uh
group activity of it uh but n like to
roll this back to Natural when I think
about natural mechanisms or natural
philosophy I'm just thinking you can't
point and say it's magic that it happens
you need to show me a stepbystep
mechanism by which the actors pull off
the actions that inscribe the phenomenon
so you know I wouldn't consider most
quantum physics to be natural
philosophically grounded if you're
saying that there's just some magic that
happens like it's a particle and a wave
and we're not going to deal with what
what that means then you're not really
doing natural philosophy
anymore are we no go ahead no no no go
ahead um
are is it okay to identify a phenomenon
and then to uh with essentially the
promisory note that you'll figure out
how it works so one thing that like
newon um like Newton you know initially
does there there's no postulated
mechanism of gravity eventually with
Einstein we get a mechanism I was
thinking of yeah well uh well it's it's
still just like a quantitative
description of what's happening it's not
really a mechan mechanism you don't
think you don't think the the bending of
space counts as a me I
absolutely do not I mean it's like I'm
sorry you just wandered into like our
favorite dead
horse I mean only only because it's not
like a physical theory has to have
physical actors that do physical actions
in order to provide an explanation for
the phenomenon so if you start warping
ideas and applying physical
transformations to Concepts then you're
in the realm of analogy and it might be
accurate and and poetic but you're not
actually giving me a natural mechanism
by which something occurs so it's like
it's okay like I'm open the idea that
the Universe operates through magic like
if you want to go down that road just be
honest about it like let's not pretend
that it's a natural mechanism
it I was thinking of the history of
electricity um because even though
people think they have mechanisms at
various points they really don't for a
long time and uh I think
the I'd be interested in
in and I know you're supposed to be
interviewing me but we can sort of how
you I mean we try to just like we try to
like not do we try to do conversations
more than more than interviews yeah well
so then I I would I would want to
understand how do you characterize magic
when I when I think about magic I don't
just think of mechanism lless uh the
reason for this is that there's an
infinite regress problems with mechanism
so if you have it be that gravity works
by gravitons then you're like how was
the graviton emitted and if you're like
here's the equation you're like great
that explains the pattern by which the
graviton is emitted but how precisely is
it emitted if you go all the way down
you're going to find that for the last
you know the last joints in your
mechanism there won't be a mechanism so
I don't think about magic as being
mechanism
mechanism when I think about magic I
usually think about it as relating an
important way to the human Spirit or
will where you know you're thinking
about uh you know there's a question of
is it natural philosophy I'll I'll
interested in interested in your
thoughts I think that this ties into a
conversation that we've had before me
and Shiloh about the differences between
Magic myth and
mysticism okay and the way that all
three of those things play in the mind
where it's like I I view magic as being
something that is
inherently there's a subterfuge there
there's someone who is the magician like
magic doesn't necessarily just happen
someone is doing magic and some and but
on the other hand
myth appears to be something that does
just happen it's something that's in the
water it's this cultural thing where by
a communal decision we take some figure
or some story to be incredibly valuable
like shus started doing this thing where
he uh we watch a movie and then he'll
start to try to figure out which Greek
myths it incorporates most accurately
and I don't think there's been a single
movie that we've watched where you
haven't been able to pin it to a set of
really really ancient stories and it's
weird because none of us inherently walk
around and are like well we believe in
the Greek gods and yet we're still
telling the same stories and that
doesn't seem magical it seems mythical
in the Joseph Campbell sense where
there's just
some way of how we relate to the world
that has been maintained over the course
of history so with such Fidelity that
something like a Greek myth can still be
applicable and something like the
Catholic church can still be a good
institution okay so and that's that's
like myth it's there's a powerful Story
magic feels like somebody's doing it and
mysticism feels like someone is
intentionally trying to delude you into
thinking that something is that
isn't that's interesting um on the the
characterization of of myth
is I think cool I I want to think about
that for for magic
um interested in what you think about
the alleged phenomenon of synchronicity
so this is a thing that Carl Young talks
about uh you essentially have people
experiencing surprising
coincidences um you both think to call
each other at the same time even though
you haven't spoken to each other in
years and then he has an explanation you
know there's there's a question of can
that be given a physical Etc explanation
that strikes me as something that seems
pretty magical rather than mythical um
but that there's not necessarily A
Caster can I roll back and and address
something you said earlier let I do want
to get to that that's a that's
interesting also U yeah thank you um
there's two things that you mentioned I
don't want to slip by one is the
infinite regression of theories right
the inability to terminate but I also
wanted to point people and I pointed
this out on the podcast before there's a
fantastic paper I think it's called a
100 Years of magic and physics is enough
and it's by a philosopher that's that's
not literally it it's something close to
it I'll dig it up and put it in the
description and he does this really cool
analogy where he's like look
relativity is kind of like showing up to
watch an Illusionist on stage and The
Illusionist is sawing a woman in half
and the relativists would aggregate all
of the perspectives of the audience
members add infinum right so you would
just basically take every perspective
possible and create a mathematical
description of what it looked like to
see this woman getting sawed in
half but the hidden reality is that the
woman is inside of a box and she puts
her legs up and you can't see that and
so there's this hidden actuality of
what's physically occurring but to
assert that the conclusion is is that
everybody sees a woman getting Sal in
half therefore the woman's getting Sal
in half is absurd because everybody
knows that that's not naturally feasible
and so to tie this back to the idea of
what the hell do you do because at the
end of the day you you're limited in
your observational capacity right you
can only see so small and I would say
that the solution to that the ingenious
solution to that is the hypothesis and I
would say that a hypothesis is B basic
Bally making an assumption that you ask
the audience of your of your work to
roll with so you're like let's assume
that there's atoms right but we're not
going to split we're not going to fight
over it we're just going to assume that
there's atoms in this presentation and
that the atoms are these physical
objects that are going to act out all of
the different behaviors that we're going
to ascribe uh in explaining this given
phenomenon so I think I do hate to cut
your legs out from under you and know
this as I say this but do you remember
what last night we were talking about
why is there stuff versus nothing that's
that's the Gap in your explanatory PO is
that even if you begin with atoms and
you're like the universe is made out of
atoms which I think is a really good
starting point and a very valuable one
you then get down to the bottom of it
and you're like why the are there
atams and you don't like there's like
there's no explanation for you just have
to take it and so right right I just
wrap it into the Assumption of the
hypothesis essentially that's true but
and it's like you could prove to me that
there aren't atoms right you could tear
apart my hypo you could destroy my
hypothesis and so there's people in the
academy are obsessed with hypothesis
testing right because okay if you
destroy my hypothesis then my theory
falls apart but I think that what Jeff
is saying is and if I understand this
correctly is that each assumption that
goes into a theory then demands its own
mechanistic explanation if you assume
that it's never it's a never ending
process right and so you get to a place
in the process of explation where even
if Adam is your fundamental building
block then you're stuck at this place
where you're like well why is there
something rather than nothing and that
is a place where it breaks and you're
like well there has to be mechanism but
then you run into this philosophically
intractable position
where many many people before us have
foundered which is how do you explain
the birth of Eternity and everything by
the way that paper is called 111 years
of
magic pop up 111 years of magic are
enough let us return to Science Now by
Demetrius
christopoulos there you go excellent
we'll throw it in the description it is
a very good paper but so like there's a
bunch of there's a bunch of handles on
this let's see if we can get to a place
where there's one that's easy to grab on
to
um you sh you you were trying to pull on
a couple of different threads one about
the kind of magical interpretations of
quantum physics and these phenomen
was that tied to a
larger I think we were just started off
playing with like what is a natural
mechanism right and and the funny thing
is too I don't know if it's time to
bring this idea into the conversation
but um those mathematical descriptions
that completely lack explanation
whatsoever are perfectly valuable for
technological progress right you can
make you know from your study with
electricity I'm sure you could comment
on that but you know you have a few
equations that describe how electric
circuits work like you don't need to
know a damn thing about the atoms or
what they're actually what hidden
processes they're doing to one another
you just need to understand how to
parameterize your system in such a way
that you can figure it you know figure
out how to make your machine
work okay so is that a distinction
between natural philosophy and science
is that science is aimed at
parameterization that allows for
eventual application
maybe even without that really drives me
crazy is like we have institutions of
Science and Technology but most people
couldn't tell you the difference between
the two if their life depended on
it it's it's
true I met you guys through Clarice yo
who's the preeminent scientist in
Quantum biology you guys will be talking
to her soon um the uh she and I have
been talking to Lots in lots of people
who are really passionate about science
um but that when you dig the thing that
they're actually focusing on is
technology with sometimes incremental
scientific advances uh it's very science
themed uh but um many fewer people who
are interested
in science in the sort of finding a new
type of causal mechanism
so yeah I I see people confusing Science
and Technology well part part of the
reason if we're if we're trying to go at
the nature of science it's like how does
science differ from natural philosophy
and how does it differ from
technology there's a way that science is
or has been supposed to be in charge
it's like when are you when are you
supposed to say yes if people are like
this is science then you're supposed to
agree and you're supposed to tell your
friends and you know and so forth and so
it's not surprising trust the
science right right we saw that recently
with the pandemic if some if an abstract
concept like science is declared King
then it's not very surprising to see a
whole bunch of people try to get in on
that and so technology want to cast
itself as science lot lots of things
we'll try to cast themselves as
science so as you're as you're as you're
saying this I'm thinking back to the
question you asked about Plato which is
okay so Plato is looking at the human
mind and making these analogies to city
states and I'm like is it a treaties of
political science then in some sense
because it's being instrumentalized
towards
some practice in the world of either how
to manage Human Relationships or how to
manage so like political relationships
because that feels very technological at
the end of the day it's it it it is and
in fact the what I was referring to is
from the Republic which is his his most
famous uh Treatise in political Theory
essentially or political philosophy or
political science um though you could
also see applications like a lot of it
is involves uh discussion of virtue and
understanding you might think well I'd
like to be a virtuous person
a bunch of Plato's dialogues pertain to
this and so you could look at the study
of the mind or the study of human
character as something that then could
be a technology like it could be if we
could figure out what's the formula
behind virtue then you could
have mechanism maybe you you have
different pedagogical mechanisms you can
teach people uh and through different
teaching methods then you could
cause people to be more virtuous in my
mind that's a
technology okay so is there also some
aspect of this that has to do with
natural philosophy being a thing that
was practiced when the the the other
side of the coin was like religious
philosophy where it's pointed outwards
inherently onto nature like not onto
humans which are clearly theologically
separate from nature so so you think
that the study of the mind and the study
of political forms doesn't count as
nature and this this was the question I
was asking earlier because on one hand
we're part of nature but on another hand
like you were saying it seems like we're
different I this is actually really
funny I have a good friend who uh got a
PhD in romantic poetry and I remember
there was one point after we graduated
where I was on the phone with her and I
was trying to make this case about the
fact that human society was structured
along fundamental biological principles
that like if you were to look at
bacteria and observe the principles of
multicellularity like this is what I
studied right I studied bacterial
multicellularity so I'm like okay look
you can see all of human society play
out in the microbes oh that's
fascinating huh and she was like you
can't do that and I was like what do you
mean I can't do that and she's like you
can't you can't just say that like
that's a thing that's not
that's not sayable in why are you not
allowed to say it because in the
humanities you can't draw this bioh
human argument there is still even
though it's not uh an
explicit
allegation or an implicit an explicit
rule there's the implicit idea
that the the weight of social movements
that is behind saying that humans are
like nature is social Darwinism is
eugenics is population control it's all
of these really ugly things and so we
must somehow excise ourselves from
nature and not draw those
parallels I would also say it's a useful
distinction if you're trying to in
certain context right where you have say
synthetic biological organisms that have
been cons so like anything that has been
made by a human it's difficult to it's
less useful to consider that natural
even though obviously human beings exist
and we were we're a product of nature
but if you're trying to distinguish
between stuff we made and stuff that
everything else made then perhaps
natural artificial or a good
delineation that's fascinating
because there's an interesting question
how much humans are their own creation
and maybe this gets to your point about
the you know
if darwinists your social darwinists
tend to think about this as though this
is like human Doom in some way it's like
well we came from nature readed and
tooth and Claw therefore Human Society
will be equally bad but Humanity
obviously has the ability to create
itself to a certain degree and so maybe
yeah maybe it's like the coins landed on
it on its edge with respect to you know
Human Society created by people
maybe we think um there's a question of
could have have been created differently
I want to vote Yes um and then we didn't
create most biological organisms only
the couple that you know the
synthetically made ones um but then for
ourselves yeah it's it's what's even
crazier is like how much can you like
when I agree with you that we do seem to
be have a unique propensity to create
our own selves but I also then start to
wonder like to what lesser extent is
that a principle of nature in general
like to what extent do other organisms
do the same thing but in a less obvious
fashion right like this and this brings
in that horrible dirty word will or or
uh desire or or like directional
movement across evolutionary time
towards some form like shoh we were
talking last night about the evolution
of species and Consciousness and the the
way that humans are kind of this weird
eyeball onto the universe like it's
weird that the universe made humans to
then look back on itself it's almost
narcissi in its uh in its construction
that like the universe would create a
mirror for itself and then we were we
were kind of toying with the idea of
other beings evolving I'm like I look
around and I'm you know there's trees
and ants and everybody else and is it
possible to have them
take
over the Earth and have some kind of an
this sounds so crazy plan or on a
different planet but it's like okay what
happens if ants are not somewhere down
mid tier on the food chain but are
actually the creatures that are biggest
and strongest and smartest on a planet
do they eventually evolve to some kind
of like
insectoid super intelligence the way
that humans appear to be evolving
towards this kind of human super
intelligence because I'm like you look
at the way that we train super
intelligence now and it's not like we're
booting into it the organizational
principles of Brian shrimp and ants and
forests and whales we're like read our
work right and despair or whatever and
so I'm like what would it look like to
have a super intelligence that's ants
likee I think it's possible right yeah
exactly and so like I just think that
our sense of
our super intelligence our our Creations
our our our prominence is deeply
informed
by the way that we interact with the
environment and with each other and
there are alternatives if your sensorium
is different but I think that humans are
kind of locked into a path that the only
way out is through like I don't think
you can go back in history and then hit
play and then have World War II not
happen like I think that World War II
always happens and I think that World
War III might always happen until
everybody gets together and is like okay
well we need to have some kind of
permanent way of remembering this that
we shouldn't do this and it's not uh I I
don't think that it's a it's it's a
branched path I think that it's it's
folded in onto itself somehow that's
interesting if it's if it's not a
branched path does that mean that we're
not really
choosing so that's the crazy thing I
think that you do choose but you choose
based off of all of the inputs that you
give that you get at a given moment and
if all of the inputs are always if the
inputs are the same each time then
you'll make the same Choice each time I
like the uh fat fist delineation between
strategic and tactical free will on this
subject which is like you know if you're
a giraffe like you're going to eat some
leaves that are probably at a certain
height or something but you also get to
choose which leaves to eat and so there
there is like I I have you know I don't
have the free will to float out of my
chair right now as much as I would love
to do that but um I I can choose how to
move my body while I'm stuck to the
chair so
there's it's not a black and white issue
necessarily no but I I think that this
is tied back to this question of like
are humans natural or
not and I think what are we if we're not
natural um what are we if we're not
natural well if everything that we do is
synthetic then it's hard to imagine like
then you come down to this like
cartisian thing of of the cartisian
dualism of you know where does the
spirit reside in the body if the spirit
is immaterial and the body is material
you're stuck with this interface problem
and so if everything that we make is
synthetic and we're not synthetic then
where does where does
synthetic emerge like it's just it's a
it's I think it's an almost impossible
line to draw I don't necessarily think
that the things that we make are
synthetic I think that philosophically
it's almost impossible to say that what
humans do is synthetic and then say that
humans are not synthetic because I'm
like where does the synthetic
emerge I mean maybe there's the question
of what people really have a choice over
so I mean on one side there might be we
do everything exactly the same way on
the other hand maybe there's tactical
Free Will um and I like to think
that at least Humanity seems to have the
ability to make different choices about
technology you can see this in different
societies I've visited Japan a few times
and it's just fascinating that they just
very simple example they have bending
machines that give you hot drinks in a
can and that's just whenever I'm there
like why has this not made it to the US
it's amazing um but Japan also has
high-speed Braille uh they got the
bullet trains part of the reason they
can do that is they have a different
culture different sort of way of
relating to the government um if you
imagine that all of the different
cultures all naturally produce different
technology sets then and we have some
choice you have to suppose in the
creation of the different cultures then
maybe we have choices over which
Technologies we deploy and which ones we
don't and that maybe maybe that gives
away
anything that we can choose for
ourselves or choose not to do should
count as self-created maybe maybe put it
like that okay and that's really
interested anything that we can choose
to
do is
self-created yeah say you want a two-way
power you want it to be that you can
choose or you can choose not if you you
know you've got a you can choose to flip
the switch but something's moving your
hand up then you couldn't I know you
wanted to be that you could choose yes
and choose no okay so to link this back
to like to put a handle on this we were
talking about this question of natural
philosophy versus science and I posit
that natural philosophy
was was
in context of religious philosophy as
being the two main ways that you could
encounter the world and one was about
everything that was out side of
human nature human kind human behavior
and the other was very specifically
about the Divinity of man and our
relationship to God and then what
happens is as natural philosophy starts
to transition into science you meld the
religious aspect and the natural
philosophical aspect together in some
way because the science is like you were
saying earlier a holistic worldview for
how the world operates and what can be
done and what what ought to be done
because like consensus kind of operates
that
way you think that I I was surprised I
thought you were going to say that the
religious philosophy a aspect got
ejected I mean my my experience with uh
so s you will undoubtedly have talked
about this in you know previous
conversations but uh you may be familiar
with the idea of the Multiverse where
it's proposed that all of the different
possibilities exist and we're just here
in you know there's a million then there
we are number 227 and it'll be that
there are way more than a
million as as far as I can
tell one of the reasons I'm not saying
this is the only reason but one of the
reasons physicists have ended up with
the Multiverse picture is that they
didn't want to consider postulating
something like a Creator and a Creator
could be could be God could be something
spiritual uh it also could be an AI and
we could be in a simulation so you know
it could go one way or another but the
I I've noted I I've been in
conversations with Scientists where
their thinking seems to
get confused when postulates come up
that might have to interact with
something outside the human realm and
so I it's it's interesting that you
propose that the religious philosophy
got melted in I I would have thought
that it got pushed out I think you can't
push it out I think that humans have a
deep and desperate need for Gods God or
Gods whatever you want to say and we
need to have this mythical framework and
with that mythical framework if you
remove the scaffold of an established
tradition if you basically say hey go
ahead I mean just to like convince you I
want you to finish your that but I just
want to convince people that it does
still persist deeply and I think it's in
those magical leaps like the quantum
mechanical super position or it's in the
black hole or it's in the Exotic
unimaginable dense material of the white
dwarf where it's in the The Impossible
creation of everything during the Big
Bang like or or particle the God
particle well yeah the god equation God
particles but also like let's leave
physics what about biology you have this
procet you have this force of of
darwinian evolution and it's funny
because you can literally read a biology
paper and if you just every time they
say Evolution did this or Evolution did
that you could just swap the word God in
and you know God has a rationale of
course in evolution but it's still this
hand of of some con some abstraction
some abstract actor right I remember I
got really into origin of Life research
at some point and I was reading the wosy
paper that was the one that established
the
RNA uh pedigree for basically being able
to map their their tree of life and I
swear to God if I remember this
correctly they called Darwin their
patron saint like explicitly it's I I've
noticed I've noticed that groups that
this happens with you know atheists as
well people when they try to put all of
the religious and spiritual stuff on the
side then it ends up coming in in terms
of flavor and then you worry that it
seeps into the theories I I agree with
that and so I think that that's what I'm
saying I'm not saying that it was
explicitly mapped onto natural
philosophy in order to create some kind
of unified discipline what I'm saying is
that we have this really sticky need of
a cosmic significance and value system
and whether that's the Multiverse or
that's black holes or that's warped
SpaceTime or or whatever like all of
these things are simply us turning away
from the fact that we have discret myths
about what we should be doing and our
place in the universe our cosmology and
we have discreet stories about the rest
of nature that we're separate from we
suddenly were like oh my God we're not
separate from the rest of nature we're
not in a privileged position all of this
religious stuff probably isn't accurate
so we have to Now find some new vessel
to talk about it and I think that that
new vessel fundamentally is science and
to bring it to the point that you were
making about this moment of choice where
you have you have the ability to either
choose to do something or not to do
something I think that the reason that
the institution of science is
so ragged right now is that it offers
you no guidance as to which way you
should choose there's no moral veilance
attached to our Central belief system
that's where like the mythological
structure
yes it has Supernatural actions and so
forth but I think you know from a union
perspective or something there's there's
a solid arguments being made that if
you're trying to if you're approaching
those things from a literalist
scientific standpoint you're kind of
missing the points right and so it's not
clear that in the absence of a myth a
shared mythological background upon
which we all live our lives that we're
able to orient ourselves towards what we
want as a culture as a society
and if it gets and then it gets sucked
up by science or whoever's claiming to
be the authority on the shoulds right
and that's kind of a disaster and it's
that's interesting also because mean you
see in science like the things that the
people will say is that they're just
pursuing Truth for its own sake and they
just are answering questions but
interestingly if you're just pursuing
Truth for its own sake it's not clear
that that gives enough structure to the
research like there's truths in every
direction you could research anything
and so if I mean there is this question
you you talked about the you know
institution of science being ragged
right now I completely agree I think
it's absolutely in crisis there's a
question about why and it's multifaceted
but I think at least one part is the
lack of well-designed principle research
programs I mean the you can think about
like science wasn't always housed
primarily in Academia before that it was
was quite a different thing um Academia
promises academic freedom people can go
off in roughly whatever Direction they'd
like there's a really important question
of whether that provides enough
structure for you to get sufficiently
fast scientific progress or or even to
have the different people talk to each
other I've I've become worried that
scientists are we know things are
specialized but I've started to become
worried that they're becoming much much
more specialized so that you won't even
get enough people talking to each other
and in my view if enough people aren't
talking to each other sharing
observations and engaging in mutual
checking and correction then you stop
doing science and you revert to
Independent investigation and this is
something that I'm you know that you
want the I guess I I think the Royal
Society of calling back to the beginning
of the conversation like the Royal
Society wasn't the same thing as science
but it was the house of science it was
like where science was set up and so
it's like science as an institution can
be sponsored or housed in different
places and then for it to really work
well you have to get the institution
that's sponsoring it to line up with the
institution of science
itself I mean I think you bring up a
really good point about the social
nature of science that most people miss
the points on as well like people are
always well I going to say always but
you know people will to us and be like I
have this really cool Theory how the
hell do I publish it in nature and it's
like well you better start by embedding
yourself in a society of people who have
published in nature and learn what it's
like to form a community of people that
can mutually support the theory from
their own uh investigative principles
and so forth and I think that in general
there is this myth and I I believed in
it too and tell well into my late 20s
that if you had a brilliant idea that
that was sufficient to make you the next
Einstein or whatever it was right I've
been out this for in like the 10 years
since I have seen incredibly brilliant
ideas put forth by people who have made
themselves Persona nonr in scientific
circles and as a result of that I'm
afraid that their ideas will never see
the light of day and not not never but
right not in the same efficient time
like those ideas will be rediscovered
they will play out um it's not clear
those people will get credit for having
those ideas in the original form um but
there is something like desperately
political and social about the
institution of science that most people
Overlook and no one talks about when you
go to grad school and it's a very real
and Powerful driver of what the science
ends up saying and a lot of it has to do
with I mean there's social structures
right the like the peer review the
people that sit at the journals the
editorial boards but then there's also
when I think about the Royal Society as
far as I remember wasn't it in some ways
convened in order to show stuff to the
royal family like weren't they getting
audiences from the Royal Society to like
demonstrate things that
that is that's my understanding uh my
understanding is that
they from the Royal perspective this was
like a thing you could show off I think
I'm thinking of the patron I don't think
I know for the Royal Society in
particular but for the patron model why
do the patron support science well maybe
you care about science but you can also
show your friends cool things and you
get to see cool things and so at least I
think it it holds generally there and so
I think that there's something that's
really important in that as well which
is
that it's
really uh fruitful when you have a
crazed hobbyist that cares about nothing
else in the world except for this
esoteric thing that they're studying and
they're able to build interesting
machines and you know make electrical
current dance or Sparks Fly Like with
the with the experimentation on elect
there's apocryphal stories of like one
of the main guys who was involved in
figuring out how electric current worked
he was living basically a in in I think
it was called like a chapter house where
he was just supported by public money
and he was recruiting all of the people
that lived there to do these experiments
they had some like little boy that they
would suspend on silk strings to see if
the chaff would stick to them if they
could like trans transmit the electrical
charge between you know charge like
metallic objects suspended from the
ceiling and they were figuring out like
can we use wool strings or do we need to
use cotton or silk or yeah this is um
it's is interesting my uh researchers is
um studying this era right now this is
the gray and duet era and I was thinking
of asking him before this call but did
not get a chance about how gray was
funded so um I I seem to remember that
he I I can double check this but I seem
to remember that he lived I can't
remember if it was a chapter house or
something else but it was basically
um
cured kind of academics like they
weren't really academics because they
weren't at the University but there it
was like philosophers and experimenters
that were just like all living in this
house which seems a lot like the Silicon
Valley model right now which is you have
all these houses of people getting
together to just try to do stuff and so
there's a sense that people are trying
to bring this back right because
everybody recognizes that okay the
institution seemed to work really well
at some point that point was a really
long time ago we went through all of
this maturation technological
achievement we've squeezed the juice
from the lemon and now the question is
well where do we go next and it's
unclear that there's anywhere to go
except for around
it's so the the lemon here I assume is
Academia or the existing fun establish
like the the existing Paradigm it could
be like anything like you could be like
making CER but just no I think I think
this is completely right the and and in
terms of what to do the thing I've been
sort of astonished by is that I think
there are a lot of really either good
good
hypotheses or big discoveries that have
already been made where my favorite
example right now is St Wolfram I don't
know if you've had a chance to talk to
him um on your show but uh you know for
I mean the book looks intimidating new
kind of science it's like this big Tome
it's mostly pictures the text is sort of
big it's way shorter than it seems um
but I didn't have the opportunity to
read it until just recently
and I think
that not to put to find a point on it um
he's right that he's figured out
something really big it has applications
in physics and biology and possibly
elsewhere um it's essentially a new
paradigm should everyone you know should
everyone join no and has he figured out
everything in physics yet no but that
doesn't stop it from having a whole lot
of
value and the thing I find so amazing
about his case is that he just crushes
it on credentials you know he's
publishing physics papers when he's 17
and super early PhD and goes to the
institute for advanced study and etc etc
he ends up you know funding his thing
through Mathematica which is the
software that he created notably now a
lot of people when they do physics using
math software they're using the software
that he wrote and so you would think and
then he he comes out with this big
announcement it's like okay figured
something out you would expect there to
be at least really serious review and
you know attempts at you know separating
what's good from what's bad and then
uptake of the good as far as I can tell
very very little of that has happened
and so uh but it's not it's not just
wolfer I mean you know you'll talk to
clares yo I think she has an amazing
research project in uh Quantum biology
and that that's not praise that I give
lightly I care a lot about research
project design um and but she's got a
very good hypothesis um and if it's it's
good in the sense that it's not accepted
currently by the mainstream scientific
establishment it is very well supported
by the evidence and if it's true it has
all sorts of impacts for how we should
think about in particular quantum
physics and biology but that's another
one I think there are all of these ideas
actually just ran a workshop on
revolutionary science and got a bunch of
these people together they're are ideas
and they're just not being aggressively
picked up they're not
even slowly being picked up by the
existing
institutions so I mean I mean yeah I I I
I think that Paradigm shifts are really
painful I think that goes underspoken
like and I think that there's an analogy
for this in all of our own personal
lives which is that generally speaking I
think that we start off as little uh
kids with basically no idea of how to
get along with other people we're
certainly not masterpieces and then
ideally you go through all of these
crises throughout your life right where
you're like you know and it might be
it's different for everybody you go
through these traumas right maybe it's
getting dumped by your first girlfriend
maybe it's a psychedelic experience but
you start to like kind of Recon consider
yourself at various points where you're
like damn maybe I am kind of an
or whatever it is like it could be you
know you have and and honestly I I at
this point kind of recognize these on a
daily basis to some extent to the extent
that I'm hopefully growing as a human
being but it's painful to go through
that realization right you almost need
to break first and so with paradigms I
feel like the old Paradigm has to really
break in this painful way before anybody
who's inside of that Paradigm has any
interest interest in stepping outside of
it and so if the people inside of say uh
wolfram's peer group think that they're
getting by just fine on their old
Paradigm then they have very little
incentive to reexamine themselves right
and so that's why I think with a human
being it takes like a psychedelic
experience or it takes you know some
tragedy often for and it could be a
minor tragedy on a daily basis you know
it takes something to really shake you
up and really make you reconsider
the the belief structure that you have
and I would add one other piece to that
which is that you also have to have
something to turn to that feels as
satisfying as the thing that you're
giving up and the thing that we're g
like if we're talking about science as
an institution I like your analogy about
the the the human transition right you
have this like really crazy psychedelic
trip you wake up from it different
theoretically you wake up from it
different because you saw something
while you were on your trip that you
were like this is the structure that I'm
going to use to replace the structure
that I have right now it's not like you
were well this is why a lot of people
hate weed I think honestly because
they're like ah it makes me paranoid I'm
like yeah it's supposed to like you're
actually supposed to reconsider your
situation and that might not be good for
like certain people who are already
break yeah definitely I always think of
that kir Your Enthusiasm episode where
smokes weed for the first time and he
just goes into the bathroom and he like
for the first time recognizes what an
 he is and he can't really deal
with it but so yeah like uh the the the
rationalists always talk about this idea
that there
are these these um pillars to somebody's
worldview and you have to not you you
have to be able to let these pillars go
and you're confronted by other knowledge
and I'm like yeah that's not quite the
full story I think that the full story
is that you have to have a sufficiently
well constructed house that you live in
that you can take a couple of the polls
out without the entire thing falling
down on your head and so with an
institution like science I think that
you have a house that is relatively
wobbly in the sense that there's like a
single Central pole that holds the whole
thing up and if you walk in and you're
like we got to take that thing out the
people that are in the house are like
well what the like that's the only
pole that we have the roof's going to
fall down and so if you're like well
we're going to jack it up and we're
going to replace it with these other
ones and then this is how the roof stays
up then I think people are more amenable
to it but without that I think it's just
you're asking people to embrace full
chaos and understandably like I I listen
to a lot of Joe Rogan I I hear what
stuff people are saying about scientists
and academics in that sphere and I'm
like you guys are like almost right but
I can see the seething discontent at the
gates that the academics are like we
have to nip this in the
bud well there's and and then this is
where because I'm trying to imagine what
does a psychedelic experience for
Academia look like or something and the
but there's there's this other problem
which is
that so I was just at a conference um I
guess last last week and the um it was
the week before anyway um somebody on
stage cited the a statistic drawn from a
published paper that I think it was 85 %
of research funds are
wasted now that's that's first of all
that's a crazy idea but let let's
suppose that it's even if it's just
half the one of the things that I think
is so challenging about Imagining the
current system reforming itself is that
when you you're talking I think you're
totally right that reform and change are
much easier when there's a new structure
to transition to you don't need to
reinvent the entire universe from
scratch you need to reinvent this one
you don't have to rebuild your house
from the ground up you have to re
rebuild one room but
the it's hard to figure out what you
have if you have so we also had this
analogy earlier of Institutions as
people and so maybe they have similar
life cycles and so if you think about
the institutions currently housing
science as having become rigid um you
think of the institution as having
become bloed in some way then it's it's
hard to figure out what do you what do
you transition to right whatever you're
going to transition to it's it's you
know if it's 85% is wasted do you
transition to something that that cuts
that or
doesn't well I I mean I think that it's
hard to argue that 85% of funds given by
patrons to the loopy experimenters
weren't wasted like you give somebody
funds and they do a bunch of weird ass
experiments that are poorly controlled
it's a fair point that's a fair point I
like that and so I'm like go ahead can
we can we I don't know we don't have to
deal with this right now but um that's
science in the day of the Royal Academy
was not done by people who were career
scientists if they were anything
approximating that like they might have
spent a lot of their time on science but
they were independently wealthy and so
this this postwar pure
review system is pretty new
right that's is this is this is
definitely true interestingly there are
some people who are career scientists if
you look at foxby from he's the 1706 guy
who isolates um electric light
electricity as a source of light he
worked for the Royal Society as an
experimentor um though I guess his his
main profession was uh instrument sort
of manufacturer that's still pretty
close um but you're you're completely
right that after and this this is part
of the if you look at the graph of
number of phds produced in the US it you
know goes up dramatically from 1900 to
2000 it's like you know 100x or some
very large
multiple and so yeah we have a new
system and I mean I guess the conclusion
of this is just really simple you just
need to just need to design a new system
for the thing to move over to so that
it's easier for the existing system to
transition yeah let's play with what
that looks like maybe so something that
we've come across before is do you know
the work of Michael Len uh yeah little
bit a little bit a little bit and like
in Broad Strokes Michael Len's idea is
that going down into each individual
cell and trying to tweak molecular
switches is probably not going to be the
way that we're able to make large scale
reconstructions of tissue Behavior like
you won't be able to regrow a limb by
going in and tweaking each and every
single little lover his philosophy is
that you have to figure out what are the
conditions in which the cells want to
make a new limb and if you can change
those conditions then you get the
limb and I'm
like go ahead I was just going to say I
I I haven't looked at his work closely
yet I did read The Body Electric I don't
know if you've come across this book um
it was recently recommended to us yeah
yeah we have not read yet I mean I'm
sort of on a hunt for all of the
explanatory principles that are missing
in biology like we have this sort
of substant surprising complexity in
biology you know this marveling about
how you know you you feed a cat cat food
um it's a true for animals and en you
feed them fairly simple things they
produce other animals like that's this
is a completely shocking thing we don't
have computers that you give electricity
too and they produce other computers
it's like that's completely amazing um
and if you look at how people normally
explain things biologically you have
chemical explanations mechanical
explanations DNA is sometimes analogized
to code but when you when you go in and
look
it's still we still don't really
understand how a lot of the things work
and my thought as a theorist I'm like
okay there are missing explanatory
principles here that's why Quantum
biology is weak magnetic fields
interacting with Quantum uh effects the
bioelectricity is another interesting
one um the Wolfram stuff actually ends
up being another possible way to explain
some things in biology but yeah I I um I
just wanted to to mention the Body
Electric which is the I think the main
book people go to when they're starting
to think about
bioelectricity yeah we I think the
podcast we just put out last week I
think it about a week ago was with a
biochemist uh Michael Hughes it's a
longtime front of the show and he was
also trying to reveal interesting unseen
ways in which water participates
electrically in various information
channels within cells and that there's
there is there are imaginable circuits
um let's say dark matter of biology
places where we kind of put these
placeholders in like oh yeah there's pH
things that matter like don't worry
about it um and then you're like wait a
second why does pH matter and that you
start to really push on these things and
start to arrive at these electrical
processes and really come up with a
different a wholly different approach to
understanding how the proteins do what
they actually do uh and I think Michael
actually mentioned the Body Electric
maybe if not in that podcast somewhere
else I'm pretty sure that it came up
during Patron chat too Gilbert too but
yeah that's something we've been meaning
to get into for
sure pardon the interruption I just need
to remind you that this program is
entirely paid for by list ERS over at
our Patron page
patreon.com dystify where you can join
our inner crew and hang out with us once
a week tell us what you think help us
get oriented towards the most
interesting problems in the world and
you can just sleep better knowing that
you are making sure this program happens
without us having any advertisements or
sponsors I'll see you there
patreon.com the way that I see it is
that there's two
questions
here one
is can things go
differently if you were to recreate
initial
conditions and the other is how do
you go about recreating
recreating newly functional conditions
after something has broken down it's
like can you actually regenerate
and I just I don't know I kind of want
to leave that General I think that that
I have a bunch of ideas for how it Maps
into stuff but I I kind of want to hear
what you guys think
before I I I Dro My my
map I mean it's a huge question just
science or societies I mean when we were
talking to Ben Lando Taylor we had a
similar thread that we were pursuing
throughout the conversation which was
once a civilization has crossed its
golden age is there path back and uh I
don't know that we actually got an
answer to that question well I'm like I
I think that you can look at any
biological system in general and ask
that same question right like there's a
relatively
narrow uh fraction of species that can
regenerate themselves there's some like
jellyfish that can return to a popse
state and then play out the entire Arc
again and I'm like is that just some
kind
those trees those seeds that they found
recently that was crazy oh yeah they
found like a bunch of seeds from
Siberian permafrost from 30,000 years
ago and they planted them and they
germinated and they grew aant believe it
I believe it it'd be really funny if it
was just uh just weed SE like some weeds
that somebody had in their yard and they
just like slipped them into the I it
turn out that somebody has some like you
know nent science institutions in the
freezer and we just have to B them out
and then we can plant them and then you
know they they've been around since
play's time or something that would okay
well I think that that's one possible
mechanism right like spores like if we
extend the the the the metaphor of
biological organization to both uh human
and psychological principles then spores
are a vessel by which things weather
Long stretches of adverse
conditions I think I think that's right
I think a disanalogy or a reason i' I'd
look for a different analogy than spes
is that with biological things they have
all the information somewhere inside
them at
least I'm actually not even sure that
that's true they have a lot of
information that they start off with
inside them um I think that if you and
so I uh would trust Ben and s's
understanding of the history of
revitalizing Institutions more than my
own I I like to think uh I'm learning
about the the history of those things
but I'm trying to sort of think about
institutions as such um a lot of the
materials that you would want to
build a functional scientific
apparatus are materials that
have existed at a certain point so let
me give an example so usually when
people are uh so controversial Viewpoint
um I think that it's pretty likely that
more stem education will actually
decrease the quality of science now this
is surprising right because you think
the more you educate people in science
and techn engineering mathematics
the better science you'll get but
usually stem trades off against the
humanities and the as far as I've been
able to tell the two ways that anyone
understands science um is through the
history of science or through the
philosophy of science you can get some
experience with it directly um but
there's always a question of are you
really doing science or are you doing
something that is called science that is
adjacent but if you want to you know be
sure you're looking at Bonafide science
looking at the history is a great place
but if you're looking at the history or
philosophy of science then you're
looking at the
humanities I've thought about the but
then you know do we need new histories
of science actually I do think yes and
do we need new philosophy of science I
also think yes but there's lots of good
stuff
that already exists and so I would think
that one of the big activities of trying
to cause
revitalization um for any Human
Institution is to learn as much as you
can about the relevant topic from it's
like if you imagine you know in
picturesque terms the civilization is
declining and then we have these huge
aqueducts that we no longer know how to
build and we hear stories of you know
the Ancients who could do all these
things that we can't do absolutely you
should study them and you should also
try to think on your own but yeah I
think in the context of uh declining
institutions there's tons that can be
learned from how those institutions used
to
behave so what is your what is your
vision of science 2.0 well so I'm I'm
realizing on I i' I've been getting
closer to this over time but I do think
this conversation is causing me to
realize that just a a full new view
needs to be
articulated um and so I'm not be able to
say an entire disappointing I'm not
going be able to say an entire one on
the spot but I can take a step dab yeah
let's hear it yeah I'm right there with
you man like we've this is something we
think about all the time and there are
some sea of there's a sea of
possibilities but I'm not sure which one
is the proper way forward yeah so the
first thing that I would note is that so
I do I do have to think about the the
point from earlier which is you know
it's the 85% of scientific funding
wasted but lots of scientific funding
supposed to be wasted okay I do need to
think about that it's a good point um I
still think it's going to turn out that
um the operation of most science is
going to be much less expensive than
people
think I I don't know that that's going
to be true absolutely entirely across
the board but I'm a big believer in uh
the exceptional performance of certain
individuals and groups it's like if you
can figure out who are the absolute top
people and you can fund those people and
those people's research projects then I
think that's going to end up doing a lot
this is one of the reasons I'm working
with Clarice as far as I can tell
she's one of these people you know and
then here the thing that I think is
necessary so here I'm you know sort of
in whatever reserve the right to
backtrack I'm invent venting
here I actually think the thing from
earlier about how scientists in Academia
are sort of pursuing their interests all
truth is valuable you can go in any
direction I actually think that having
well-designed research projects is very
very important for driving science
forward
the that maybe just sounds totally
obvious but it is really different than
the wisdom I frequently hear which is
just hire the you know smartest people
and then get out of their way and let
them do whatever they want the the sort
of thing I mean so for
example I'm uh thinking about whether my
organization should host a conference
next year on complexity in
biology this is
because as far as I can tell it's
the biggest remaining visible Central
mystery like it used to be where did the
universe come from Etc and I agree we
don't have an answer yet to why is there
something rather than nothing but I
don't know we've been looking at
particles for a long Time and Dark
Matter and string theory like people
have been doing that for a while the we
do just have biology biology is amazing
um the complex and then there's this
question you know do we actually have a
good explanation for the complexity that
we see in
biology there's a standard explanation
we mentioned you know Darwin and natural
selection you know you guys proposed
that natural selection sort of maybe a
standin for God you see it doing all
sorts of things um one of the cool
things that uh seems to come out of
wolfram's research is that the
optimization power of natural selection
is actually not as high as people think
there's there's if you imagine there's
like some number of generations there's
certain types of constraints we can run
simulations and so if it turns out that
natural selection is a weekly optimizing
Force rather than a strongly optimizing
one then there's this really interesting
question okay well where does all the
weird complexity come from wolfram's got
an answer you know the intelligent
design people have an answer the uh I am
toying around with ways that maybe you
know the weird laws of quantum physics
could help to explain some of those
things
the I think that you want basically and
this is sort of okay applying sort of
the kunian idea but trying to do it
deliberately if you have a
paradigm if the Paradigm is sort of
running dry there's tons of people doing
normal science but we're not getting as
much in the way of results then the
thing you want to do is you want to
identify the
anomalies the anomalies are going to be
the things that are the most solidly
verified least compatible
things with the least compatible with
the existing system so with Quantum
biology weak magnetic fields are weak
magnetic field effects are the thing you
know you'll get to talk to Clarice about
this but essentially there
are all these cases in biology where
very weak magnetic fields have effects
and the only known explanation that can
actually work for this is a Quantum one
scientists haven't wanted to go the
quantum Direction I think for a bunch of
social
reasons and so I I think cool anomaly
you got we people will grant Birds
navigate using the Earth's magnetic
field um that's a weak magnetic field
how does it work no answer is given I'm
like ah
anomaly okay cool we've got one I think
the complexity in biology is another
anomaly I think there are actually a
whole bunch of these um the one that
people get really weird when you talk
about it for some reason is
consciousness um I do think
Consciousness is real I'm conscious you
guys are conscious Etc you mentioned
Consciousness in some circles and
everybody becomes
upset in the sense that they don't think
that Consciousness is a thing because
I've heard of a lot of people be like
humans are the only ones that are
conscious I've heard a lot of like crazy
takes on what defines it but I've never
heard anybody get upset about the nature
of consci being a parent no no it's um
I've encountered it in a bunch of
different cases the the reason I think
that it's upsetting to some people is
that primacia you mentioned day cart's
dualism Prima fascia it's hard to mesh
the idea of Consciousness with the
physical world decart great gave this
really simple argument you can imagine
the physical world existing without
Consciousness you can also Imagine
Consciousness existing without the
physical world it's like the Matrix
except no Matrix there's just no
physical world it's just your mind and
he proposes if you can conceive of
things
existing you know a existing without B
and B existing without a then they're
distinct roughly that's the argument um
that argument gets repeated later like
David chamers one of the sort of top
philosophers of mind and you know
analytic philosophy now he gives an
argument which is similar to this um and
that's vexing like in fact my own
journey and thinking about all these
things I used to have a it's all
particles view of the world then I got
to thinking about Consciousness and I
was like uh oh it's like there's this
completely beautiful picture of the
world with these mathematical equations
and it all works out nicely and then
there's this little string sticking out
and you're like what's that and people
are well maybe you pull on it and figure
out that your beautiful picture needs to
change a bunch of people want to say no
no that's that not a thing or it's not
special I think it's an anomaly I think
there are a bunch of these
anomalies not all anomalies are fruitful
uh or or like easy to investigate um I
think we could probably come up with a
bunch of anomalies that are pretty hard
to get information out of the thing you
really want I'm sort of talking about
research program design as I see it the
thing you really want is you want uh a
very tightly constrained evidential
circumstance you want it to be that
you're seeing something that you're
pretty sure doesn't make sense there's
there are some things where there could
so it's like you know if and I haven't
looked as I'm just learning about
particle physics now but it's like if
the higs Bon's larger than we think well
I don't know we didn't really know why
the particles were supposed to be the
size as they are there's tons of options
um the really sort of par you want to
look at quasi paradoxes you want to look
at places where there's something that
really doesn't seem to fit given
everything else you know because that
shows you that you're wrong about
something if you're like this shouldn't
be possible given my assumptions and
it's possible it follows that some of
your assumptions are wrong and so that
indicates tractability so I guess the
thing I do is to specify how the money
gets raised got ideas there um um but
then you
identify well-designed research programs
that go after the major anomalies and
it's okay if they all disagree with each
other that's actually fine um and then
while I'm speculating here you create a
research center that gives each of the
different people their own area but has
them have lunch together roughly so that
then you get cross talk uh uh between
all the different research programs um
yeah and probably some other stuff but
let's start there how do you protect
against Paradigm repair programs so we
see you know ample examples of anomalous
findings you know let's pick on the
galactic rotation problem for example
right and the you know this could be
seen as a reputation of the
gravitational dominance in the Galaxy
however the
popular approach that's emerged in the
last few decades is to create a magical
substance called Dark Matter and then we
can keep the gravitational Paradigm for
the Galaxy together and you know if we
just build nice enough detectors we'll
eventually find this stuff right so and
that's a really like bright example
that's glaring but this is a this is a
generalizable principle I think which is
that univ yeah the age of the universe
is another one right they launched the
James web satellite there's all sorts of
contradictions of the standard Big Bang
explanation and instead of being like
wait a second maybe this big bang thing
isn't actually the best way to go here
they're like well let's just you know we
can just do some stitching and uh you
know give it a little tummy tuck and
also like the structure of stars and the
evolution of
stars it's like there's constantly
paradigms that we've invented that are
maybe what 50 to 100 years old that
we're big fans of that have and all of
you're like great think you know if
you're selecting for great thinkers or I
forget what you called them but like the
sort of cream of the crop thinkers um
they're going to have come up inside of
those paradigms right and identifying
and unfortunately identifying the people
working outside of those paradigms those
are usually the crazy people in their
garages or something right or the guy at
the patent office or whatever it is yeah
no this is well this this is this is
great I well so a couple thoughts so
okay thought thought number one the
repair of paradigms it's really
important to understand that this is
both natural and frequently good it just
it's the
uh the actual evidential landscape the
data um is noisy and so if you require
perfect fit between the theory and and
the raw data that's not going to happen
in almost any case so you even when the
theory is correct you should just expect
that there's going to be what looks like
hand waving and so forth so you can't
there there is such a thing as bad hand
waving um but we can't ban all of it
it's just people the we need to be able
to uh the the thing you want to do go
ahead I think that we need to be
comfortable with the idea that you can
come up with a theory that works pretty
well in most cases and recognize that
the way that the universe unfolds is
inherently chaotic and complicated so
you will always find exceptions even to
a paradigm that seems to hold most of
the time and I think that our searches
for functional paradigms have to be
looked at through that lens we're not
finding the
final mold
model is a good synonym for Theory don't
you think and so if you're building like
a scale model of a B52 like you could be
like well that model sucks cuz the bombs
don't explode it's like I guess but it
still does look a lot like a B52 and
there's a lot of useful features of that
model at the same time right yeah I just
I think that the the thing that we have
to figure out is when somebody is trying
to pull the wool over your eyes versus
when somebody's like look it works in
all of these cases and there's some that
it doesn't which means that there must
be something else that's happening and
then gives that person grounds to go
explore that right now what we have you
called it Paradigm
repair yeah did or rehab or something
like that I don't know I just threw that
out there I don't think that's not a
term I got from anybody or anything no
no no I just I like I like the the
Cycles yeah yeah yeah exactly by the way
yeah that was a really really productive
model right it really does recall the
phenomenon very very precisely and I
think that the way that we can figure
out hand waving versus this Paradigm
repair is when somebody is like the fact
that it doesn't fit doesn't matter or is
irrelevant versus somebody being like
well the fact that it doesn't fit might
be representative of something else but
the thing that I'm trying to make the
case for still
holds I'm uh so I have I have a a a
different sort of proposal the thing
that I worry about just
with tests like the one you're
suggesting is that if those get
institutionalized they're very very easy
for people to game people can you know
if if they learn that you know saying
you know there are no exceptions is not
the way to get funded if the thing they
need to say is well look there's there's
exceptions that's fine but it works in
these cases I think I think the thing we
want
is uh I do think that people falsifying
data is very bad and there are a bunch
of different ways I've been thinking
about how one can go about essentially
catching people um that do that sort of
thing but on the sort of constructive
side the thing I've actually been
thinking about is whether there's rather
than stopping the people from saving the
appearances within their own Paradigm
figuring out how to get impeding
paradigms identified and advanced the
problem that ends up happening in a
bunch of cases is that the reigning
Paradigm
gets a lot of funding so it gets a lot
of ability to repair itself the
competing Paradigm it is some guy in
their garage and the
um uh and
then they frequently don't end up having
the resources to actually turn it into a
real competitor um there is the
challenge of how do you pick out the you
know promising people from the crazy
people but let's bracket that one for a
second if you assume that you actually
have picked out the promising people
then and I'm I still don't know if this
works so I'm I'm I'm actively thinking
about this and want to do this if I can
um I'd love to pit paradigms against
each other where they get some amount of
resources to be able to each develop but
then either the people inside the
paradigms or the whoever is running the
whole thing works hard to identify
crucial
experiments that could conceivably
decide between them and so it's like
each side gets the opportunity to build
up and you identify the crucial
experiment and then that helps to show
whether one or the other ends up working
and you could imagine like a scientist
doing this in their own mind they like
have different competing hypotheses they
do experiments but it's hard for like
scientists need to spend a lot of time
thinking about particular hypotheses
it's hard to build out the other side I
actually have
go ahead I'll give an example though
I've got an example I've been thinking
about yeah go ahead I was going to give
examples upon examples as well well
there is a fracture Point too there is
there is a fracture point I want to hear
your example though because there's
there's an issue with that too that I
could see okay yeah so obviously love
more ideas on how to make these things
work um the one I've been most
interested in uh mostly because I've
been spending so much time thinking
about Quantum biology um is quantum
biology and
nanotechnology where so there's this
famous Fineman lecture entitled there's
plenty of room at the bottom where he
talks about this vision of well maybe if
you got your manufacturing really good
you could make extremely small machines
all those Nano machines maybe you could
make Nano machines that can make Nano
machines and then this Vision was
Advanced by Eric Drexler in particular
and so then you have a whole bunch of
people who think that this is a good
idea and could work and the thing we
have to do is figure out not just IBM
spelling out IBM with little atoms but
figure out how to make little robots
essentially that can manufacture other
things and Etc the so that's that's
nanotechnology the reason I've been
thinking about that in the context of
quantum biology is that as far as I can
can tell the
nanotechnology sort of
approach assumes that and this from what
I've seen so far it looks like it needs
the quantum element to factor out at a
certain point so we believe that the
quantum element factors out by the time
you get to large objects like humanized
objects we don't walk around seeing
superp positions or we do we don't know
that that's what's happening
um the and then I was glancing through a
nanotechnology book and looked at the
number of mentions of quantum Dynamics
and it was very like one mention or
something like that now I think that the
semiconductor industry has to deal with
deviations from classical predictions
all the time as they get down and build
the tiny tiny little circuits they end
up finding that the materials don't
behave the way you would expect on the
classical View and that's because the
Quantum View is the Quantum thing that's
what's happening but so then if you
essentially if you imagine that as you
zoom in as you go down you eventually
start to hit Quantum
distortions there's a question about
whether the quantum distortions kick in
at a high enough level or strongly
enough that it makes it actually really
hard to build your Nano
machines we can easily imagine a world
where it's not a problem you know uh
Quantum effects kick in at the nanometer
level and you know not higher and they
factor out pretty cleanly so don't you
know have things dip below that you can
also Imagine one where Quantum effects
start to come in at the 40 nanometer
level and that they become more and more
intense such that in reality you try to
build your little nanobot and the
Nanobots going to have a bad time this
is an example where this is thinking
about Quantum biology
and the expectations of the
nanotechnology area um I currently think
there is actually a conflict here and
that this could actually be resolved and
so this is the sort of thing I'm
imagining where have different
approaches and then you get some
different crucial experiments and then
you know it doesn't NE you know if you
could there's going to be an argument
the other way which is if you can build
the Nano machines then then you know
then it's really hard to get relevant
Quantum effects that end up impacting
biology in different
ways I'm not sure yet that that works
but it might and then the idea of having
those pit Against One another in with
these crucial experiments I think is
just at least a very cool idea what are
what are the paradigms that are pitted
against one another I was going to ask
the exact same question you said what
other ones no this example yeah because
we were talking about pitting paradigms
against one another yeah yeah so the um
it's
a uh it's a certain type of classical
chemistry Paradigm versus the Larice
Quantum biology Paradigm the classical
chemistry Paradigm has various
assumptions about how you should be able
to build Nano machines and the quantum
biology
Paradigm thinks it's much less likely
and so and I wonder I'm not is there an
approach is do the quantum people have
an approach to building these Nanobots
or it sounds like they might just be
saying that things get so weird and
fuzzy down at a certain scale that it's
not manipulable in the same
transparently straightforward way there
there's a there's like a totally coin on
edge wishi
world we could imagine where there are
substantial Quantum effects but we can
engineer around them but it's really
hard to engineer around them but we
still can and then in and then you can
go to either side of that it could be
that nope you can't and we're not GNA
able to build Nano machines or you could
imagine something that's like less
extreme which is sure you could build
nanom machines but you have to imitate
biology really closely because biology
is actually made of Nan machines in a
bunch of ways and so there is something
special that biology has figured out how
to do with Quantum and you have to do
that as opposed to treating it like a
computer or something like that yeah
that's right I see I see I see I mean
one of the things that I thought about
earlier when you were talking about
pitting paradigms against one another is
that unfortunately I think history will
reveal and it might be more obvious a
thousand years from now than right now
but I I think that history reveals that
we do adopt uh the Lesser like paradigms
do get pitted against one another but
often times the one that wins out only
wins out because its opponent is unable
to answer some critical question which
is put in front of it like uh there's a
number of these I can point to that are
kind of unfolding right now in the
astrop I mean I like I work in the
astrophysical space so that's kind of
what comes to my mind but you know
there's uh the famous uh Vagner kry
debate which is like why the how the
continents moved apart over time um and
you know another one would be which hold
on to make That explicit Wagner is a
continental drift that they were once
part of Pangia and then they moved to
kapart Sam waren K's uh expansionist
where he says that the Earth is smaller
and then expands in order to move the
continents apart which explains why the
seaf floors are only 200 million years
old and like all these other things yeah
let's just stick with that let's not
even bring more examp
the problem with the with car's theory
is that to this day no one's been able
to figure out where the extra mass for
expansion would come from like there's
no motiv like if you're like okay fine
expansion addresses all of these things
there's a lot like there's uh there's
missing pieces of the prehistoric plate
like there's this ancient ocean called
the teos sea that nobody can find and
they're like oh it's been subducted
that's why it's gone it get even worse
though because the reason I think that
uh car car's
idea uh well Carrie didn't have a
mechanism like NASA said for the
expansion but uh vegar actually was kind
of a fringe scientist in his day I don't
know that he lived to see his
continental drift thing be accepted but
anyways it was accepted and the reason
it was accepted is because somebody
couldn't tell you who proposed that
there was these conveyor belts of Magna
magma under the uh under the the the
crust which provided um the Motive Power
mapped the sea and they found these
spreading ridges and they were like it's
like a convection cell problem is that
all attempts to locate these convection
cells in the locations where they're
supposed to be yeah they're not there
and in fact the the up oh yeah it gets
God and actually I'm going to have to
look into this this is oh no all right F
I mean I could just spend the whole rest
of this podcast telling you examples
like this where it's like I think that
maybe uh Carrie didn't have the full
idea and he didn't really understand
what was happening but he seems to have
perhaps been on to something kind of
interesting that never got developed and
I can just point to example example you
know there's tons of these and and it's
it would just take too much time for me
to go into each one of these but where
somebody didn't have the fully right
idea but some other Paradigm that seems
to have been even less successful has
become the dominant one and so there's
these these these uh Paradigm Wars that
do happen and the winner by consensus
does emerge
but uh oh you know well I've got some
thoughts about so this is great examples
though this is helping to put you know
help forcing me to make you know revise
and make my ideas better or proposals
better the
um so I've been thinking
about so the first thought is that you
don't want to have the winning paradigms
so to speak you don't want that to be
judged
on uh something like an absolute
standard of correctness or with respect
to final physics we don't we don't know
necessarily what that's going to be we
would we have rejected Newton because
you know he had gravity without having a
mechanism the answer is no we want to
have accepted Newton at the time so
there I do think there is going to be a
a crucial question of how you decide the
things the way I've been thinking about
it has actually been to and this this
may not end up generalizing to cover all
the areas I do think the um continental
drift uh area is a super good one for me
to learn about and think about but I've
been thinking about tying it to existing
technological research programs where so
like one of the examples that I think is
really interesting is AI you know there
are a bunch of people who've got a lot
of news over the last couple years
thinking that AI is going to destroy the
world um I happen to think that it's not
correct it's not going to um but I've
been spending a bunch of time trying to
understand how exactly that sort of
viewpoint or Paradigm came about also if
you look at the AI companies there's
actually a really large amount of money
that's being spent on
you could call it a particular Viewpoint
or Paradigm around the idea of
intelligence it's like there's all of
these assumptions about we're going to
get artificial general intelligence
there's assumptions about how human
intelligence Works about how that's
going to be
replicated I think that if
you not totally sure but my my Intuition
or my my hunch is that if you start
with areas in
technology that people are trying to
develop and you reverse engineer from
those or Trace those back to the
paradigms then you're going to find
things that there actually already
people currently invested in
where there's going to be some practical
outcome that can be tied to some sort of
difference of scientific hypothesis and
if that ends up being true then the
thing
you're checking is something like the
near-term prospects for the Paradigm as
believed by the people who are advancing
the
technology and then conceivably if you
can you know you could save a whole
bunch of money on research and dead ends
there's a lot of interest in it already
and the problems I think much more
constrained I'll know once I finally
made a bu set of whatever brackets that
have you know the the different fields
uh set against each other and I I'm I'm
still thinking about whether even the
quantum bio verse nanotechnology one
works I think that the quantum one
actually works for me most clearly in a
very different way like we have made our
first foray into Quantum Computing
conversations so we got a Yale Professor
who studies quantum Computing who
designed one of the first like hard
Weare quantum computers I think he also
came up with like the essential
operating
topology to to come on the show he's a
fundamental physicist a theoretician and
we're like can you explain to us the
stern gerlock experiment and can you
explain it to us in a way that like tip
to tail where we're able to run through
all of the possible different
explanations right because they're at
this point where they're like the thing
that we're stuck on is error correction
and error correction is is at the atomic
scale and so they have these atoms that
they have held in place with lasers or
whatever photo tweezers they're using
and then things are breaking because the
quantum computer goes from being a
quantum computer to suddenly no longer
being in Tangled to suddenly being like
it just behaves in this weird way and so
I'm like
okay I think that you have to make sure
that your Paradigm for understanding the
atoms is really really good because or
at least spin I think that I mean
Stern gerlock for everybody who's
listening if you don't know this the is
the essentially the definition of this
super it's where this idea of
superposition comes from experimentally
which is showing that there's this
quantized property called spin which
doesn't behave how the theorists
expected it to behave originally so the
the experiment is set up in such a way
that they have a vacuum chamber with a
piece of silver in it they evaporate and
heat they they uh Evacuate the chamber
and heat the silver until they get get a
a gas of silver atoms and then they
organize them by passing them through a
couple of different pores and then
through a magnetic field and classically
you should expect that as you pass them
through the magnetic field that you get
this smear of atoms on the back wall
that is basically representative of the
shape of the spray of atoms as they come
into your magnetic
field what they get obviously is they
get a bimodal distribution where
everything is either spin up or spin
down and so this is foundationally the
Cubit which is that you have an atom
that is either in a superposition state
or it's in spin up or spin down and so
you're resolving it based off of how its
superposition state is
red and we're talking to and we're like
well hold on a second doesn't the stern
GC experiment make sense if you're
treating each atom as like a little bar
magnet that's tumbling when you throw it
into the magnetic fields and so it's
either based off of the angular momentum
of the atom you're never going to see
anything that goes straight you're going
to see things that either go up or down
because they're little tiny bar
magnets and it was really weird because
you could tell that it like
was necessary for him for there to be
some kind of spooky superposition that
was occurring Oh weird as opposed he was
like the atom is like a Gyros you can
model it as a gyroscope and so so it's
uh the angular momentum doesn't matter
because when you throw it into the
fields it the the axis will process but
it won't tumble relative to it and then
shil was like but what about spin I was
like spin isn't gyroscopic fundamentally
like it has this weird symmetry right
that
requires like essentially complex
mathematics spinner notation from derox
treatment and the result is that you
have a rotation that has 720° symmetry
which is very difficult to model as a
simple wheel on a bar and the point is
this that like this appears to be the
place what is it I was going to say he
kind of gassl me about it though a
little kind of like no they're basically
like uh gyroscopes yeah they're
basically gyroscopes and I'm like okay
see i' I've encountered this I've
encountered cases where I think one of
the things that as you know sort of I
feel like were you know looking at the
systems and forming like a revolutionary
Force to help like bring science back
into
alignment I've found that
scientists use metaphors that are
misleading to explain things and then
you need to have enough technical
knowledge to be able to point out that
the thing they said is not actually
literally true or doesn't make sense and
then once you do that they like go back
and they're like okay well actually
there's this problem here and so like
this is the search for the anomalies
yeah I think a bunch of the anomalies
are being hidden by the uh metaphors and
sort of thought AIDs that the
researchers are using combined with
popularization it's that they they use
it as part of their thinking in a way
where they're not screwing with the math
but then when they explain it to people
the analogy is supposed to hold
literally and then if you know enough
you can push back and say so wait is it
I mean yeah how does spin actually work
and then they're like okay well you know
we don't really know you know but it's
even worse because you're like you're
like yeah I know we don't really know
but like shouldn't we figure that out
like because if we did maybe we wouldn't
be left with this magical superposition
stuff maybe we would actually understand
that the atoms are in this whatever
state of motion their surfaces are doing
whatever they're doing and then we can
actually have like
heighten uh predictive ability like when
it comes to designing these tools like
now it's not just this like statistical
smear it's like oh okay okay hold on the
adoms over here are doing are oriented
this way their emotion is doing you know
you you actually can get to that level
but as long as you're pretending like
that's not a mystery it's just kind of a
tragedy I 100% this is this yes this is
this is this has got to be I think
people should just do this in like
regular it the the challenge is that if
you uh I've been able to do this in some
conversations about quantum physics
because I know the philosophy side not
because I know the physics side so if
they say something about the many worlds
interpretation that's not actually
literally true then I can say ah wait
but I I think that yeah the the practice
of covering over an actual Gap in
scientific understanding with a nice
explanation that has to stop we have to
be able to see where the anomalies
are well I mean there's a generational
thing about this too right because as a
student you're fed these analogies and
honestly you're too busy as a student
with the rest of life and all of your
projects and everything to really stop
and reconsider these foundations I I
think that there's there's very little
time aside from the guy in his garage
for people who are already working
inside of these systems to stop and
really ask questions like wait a second
shouldn't we actually understand this
spin thing which is why taking the
technological approach to it is so
valuable because the way that I've
always constructed this is I'm like okay
well the Paradigm that wins is the one
that does something
useful like you have a mess of paradigms
one of them will eventually build the
steam engine and then you're off to the
races because you have everything that
follows but if you have somebody that's
trying to build the steam engine and
they're like we can't figure out
this part like it doesn't make any sense
or it's breaking all the time and then
you're like okay we need somebody who
can figure out this part and then you
fund based off of that then all of the
sudden you don't have to have somebody
come up with the theory and then make a
bunch of predictions and then build a
machine like you're you're spreading out
the labor of figuring out what actually
is amongst the people that are actually
more intuitively uh aligned with it like
sh's always talking about this where
he's like God it probably would be
better if science was organized where
there was somebody who was coming up
with the experiments that should be done
somebody that was collecting the data
and somebody else that was analyzing the
data and then maybe like another person
who's like telling the story of what all
this if you want to make it an
institution that's all vertically
integrated sure I mean this occurred to
me like historically when I worked in
cancer research because like I started
off like before I even went to grad
school I was working on all these labs
and like the translation of Cancer
Research into actually useful medicines
is abysmal I'm saying it doesn't work
sometimes it does but the success
stories are really really few and far in
between compared to how much work is
going on and it's because people need
that ro1 you know they're willing to
like kind of look at their data like H
it's got an effect you know we just do
200 more mice in this experiment like
that P value will pop open a little bit
and like all of a sudden like here's the
pro you know we can and it's like I get
it like I understand like you got I'd be
hack all the time no but no not that I
mean I've literally one of my first the
first time like my little heart was
broken when I got into all this was I
was just like a little lab grunch right
after college working in a lab and I got
invited to go and visit the
statisticians and their lofty office you
know in the sou building it was fun CU I
got to get out of lab for a day and like
go to this meeting at this big fancy
table and everything and like the
conclusion of the statisticians was like
yeah you just need more numbers in order
to make this
result impactful and it was like just
such an obvious case for me where I'm
like wait a second like this is how
we're going to move forward with our
understanding of this system is just to
show that it's more important than it
appears to be at this point in time so
like to take the same cancer Paradigm
imagine that the way that we approached
the treatment of cancer was not okay we
have a bunch of labs and every bu's
pumping out small molecule Inhibitors
and we're going to screen all of them in
mice and we're going to work our way to
maybe one out of a million that's a hit
and we'll be able to decrease the
mortality rate of cancer by you know 10%
in a small population of Southeast Asian
women of Israeli descent okay great um
what if we figured out okay well these
are people who are diagnosed with cancer
and these are the interventions that
they do and this is what appears to
their cancers go away right because you
hear stories about
this yeah I mean the in cases where yeah
I I when I think you're talking about
things that are considered to be
anomalous and that yeah yeah so so no no
I'm I'm look I'm 100% in favor of
investigating those things I think that
there's a tricky thing with tying it to
what's useful I think you ultimately
want the things to be useful but a lot
of the developments are end up so like
with electricity electricity is a great
example 1600 Gilbert William Gilbert
figures out that he he thinks
everything's a magnet roughly is the one
who discovers the Earth's magnetic field
um but when you rub Amber it attracts
leaves and chaff and and he's like
that's not magnetism that's some other
thing let's call it electricity okay
cool electricity dis
CED this does not end up being
particularly useful until you get to
electric light and now we have computers
and so several hundred years on the
thing ends up being no intended
shockingly useful um uh but it's really
really hard to see how you could foresee
any of that like you have to go from
static electric attraction to conduction
to you know actually having you know
wires and batteries and and light and
and so forth I think
that this is this is why I I think that
there two things you want to
have whoever is helping to run the you
know manage whatever new institutions of
science come into existence I think
think you want them to have some
scientific knowledge themselves I think
you want them to be trained in
philosophy so that they can think very
logically about relevant things and
imagine different
possibilities but I think we also want
to start breaking down the barrier
between the technical experts and
everyone else this is sort of continuing
on the idea of well sometimes the
experts are hiding uncertainties or
Mysteries
underneath analogies of different types
I you know so I've been learning about
Quantum biology for the last year and a
half and usually quantum physics it's
like so you know intimidating it's you
know people say if you think you
understand quantum physics then you
don't um and that person's a famous
Quantum physicist and so are you
supposed what are you supposed to do one
of the things that I've been doing
working with Clarice yo
is working to figure out how to explain
the things in a way
that does not mislead does not introduce
inaccuracy but is
also understandable by Regular People
and so far this it I found that this is
a feasible thing to do I I think that
the if you here's a here's a theory that
maybe fits some data points I don't
fully know if it's true but you know we
think about the history of um history of
of research you've got people who want
to study the stars and study the
mysteries of the universe ah but how do
they fund themselves well they have a
bunch of knowledge they could teach your
children okay so you have the astronomer
who funds their research through
education you'll note that matches how
funding works universities today you
have the smart you know learned
researchers who study the universe and
then they also educate your
children well there is a a sort
of a bit of a possibility of perverse
incentives here where if you really
manage to transmit the knowledge then
you might not have as much of a product
to sell anymore it's like You' you've
explained it okay people understand it
you don't need an advanced degree
actually it is understandable enough
well if you don't need an advanced
degree then how useful you are how
needed you are as an educator goes down
so I think there is a natural tendency
and this is sort of uh I think of this
as the infinite Library it's like you go
into the university and you see the
stacks heading off you know endlessly in
all directions and you're like wow it's
impossible to ever know and it's like
yep that's designed to make it so that
the uh that that helps to solidify the
position of the researcher education
business model to put it that
way it's an interesting question how
things should be funded but I think that
that's all gone too far and that we
should really really be working to
reduce the size of technical Specialties
like the way you would do this is by
figuring out how to translate more and
more of it out to the point that people
could actually understand the things the
more you manage to train it's not like
you're cutting information out you're
figuring out how to bridge between
regular people and um and the actual
science and so I think that's a possible
thing I think it's not an easy thing to
do but I've had great luck in
conversations with Scientists where they
say something I do not know what they're
saying and then I say okay so you're
saying it's a it's like a sponge and
they're
like yeah like okay but is it not a
sponge is there am I wrong you can you
like they're like well okay it's not
exactly a sponge I'm like okay so is it
like a sponge with a hard core and
they're
like okay that actually is a pretty good
metaphor and I'm like okay great um the
I just think it is possible to bridge
the gap at least way more than people
have between what is commonly understood
what we all can discuss here not being
experts in all the different fields and
the technical disciplines themselves so
this is related to so many things Shiloh
has multiple times pointed out that is
it the equations of fluid dynamics that
are Universal across all these different
phenomena if you just go to the
transport phenomena Wikipedia page
you'll see this it's like diffusion heat
flow there's a bunch of them they're all
congruent though so there's a bunch of
natural phenomena that can be described
by the same mathematics which implies
that if you're trying to simplify some
kind of phenomenon to something that is
more intuitive if they're mathematically
congruent then it's possible to actually
make the analogy and have it be accurate
yeah yeah yeah and so I think that
that's really valuable where you're like
there it's not quite the sponge because
they're thinking almost mathematically
about like well there's this other
modulus that's in there and then you
stick the heart like the backbone to it
and they're like yes okay great so I
think that that's really useful I think
being able to put things
into uh lenses that people can
understand and you do something with is
really useful like you were saying
earlier that perhaps having a really
really extensive stem education is
detrimental to your ability to do
something weird and crazy in stem and it
might be because at some point you've
memorized so many things that you lost
your ability to be creative because
you're just you're overfitting the data
you're like this is how it is I know all
of these answers already and so okay
great my thought about the like start at
the technology and work backwards is now
that that inherently lends itself to
cloistering because usually when
somebody's trying to develop a
technology they're doing it inside of a
market driven system where they want to
be able to figure out how to optimize it
to the next level and they want to be
able to maintain that knowledge for
themselves and so you can't really
depend on it being a technology back
process of figuring out because if
Philips figures out how to build the
first quantum computer they're not going
to tell you they're they're like that's
going to be under 10 layers of
NDA for the next hundred years plus
protected by patents and everything else
to make sure nobody else can touch a lot
of scarcity mindset going on here that's
creeping into the Crocs of the standard
institutional models right it's like I
think that a lot of that initiation that
you're you hinted out a little bit I
can't remember the exact words you used
but you're like do do they really want
to hand over the knowledge to you so
easily or do you have to like prove that
you can sit in the classroom for a year
and then you go to this 200 level course
and it's like if I was going to design a
cult you know like a Scientology type
thing like that's exactly how I would
set it up I'm like all right so you got
to get through the first chamber and
like pay your respect to you know the
grand wizard whatever the hell it is
then but maybe by the time that you've
like put in
$200,000 to this thing and you know
we've given you the paper that you need
to get you in the door at this job that
you want maybe I'll tell you like you've
gotten to wear your professor's Nobel
medal for a minute yeah you can park in
his Nobel parking place at Berkeley have
you seen those things hilarious um yeah
so there there is this almost uh
makavelian layer to the way that
institutions seem to naturally arrange
themselves that that is protectionist
and and I don't know how you get around
that exactly because you're right like
things are you should be able to explain
your your scientific theory to like your
grandma like at least on a surface level
and if there's a part in it like like
electron spin that you don't understand
just say we don't understand it we don't
know yeah completely agree with that the
um well I think um we mentioned s borya
earlier he has a a really good framework
for thinking about
um uh institutions and uh he's got this
sort of framework called Empire Theory
where he talks about whether the
institutions or the empires are um
expanding versus declining um and
whether they're centralized versus
decentralized and I found it to be a
useful framework but essentially the way
you would Model A lot of the existing
scientific institutions is as declining
centralized so it's if it's expanding
then you get a different set of Dynamics
if it's declining then if it's
decentralized Parts break off and seek
their own fortune if it's declining
centralized it's like the center is
trying to hold all the pieces in so that
everything sort of goes down together
and that but that way the it's not
necessarily conceived that way but it's
like they don't they're not letting
Parts break off and do their own thing
um in isn't it interesting about the
mythological parallels between science
as an institution that is going down the
drain and taking everything with it and
the idea that like at the center of each
Galaxy there's a massive black hole
that's gobbling everything up that will
devour the universe like it just seems
like there's multiple layers of
mythological patterning that you start
to see when you think about the stories
that are being told where they're like
this is how the universe works and it is
the one place where we have these sorts
of
stories and that's oh man I'm going to
need to think of a positive sort of
astronomical sort of you know like I
know companion myth or something the
because I think in the face of a
declining centralized Empire The Thing
You Do is you just build outside of it
it's it's the you try not to fight um
and uh maybe sometimes that's
unavoidable but the usually in things
like that their focus is um internal and
so I mean I have been just extremely
encouraged by
how easy it is to build out out side by
by how easy I I don't mean this is very
easy at all I mean that
um so just as a a simple example so
History of Science
research the it turns out there's an
important thing that's missing from
History of Science research and that is
an accessible data set so we're here
talking about the history of Science and
we each have a couple data points in our
mind you I just finished you know
instructor of scientific revolutions and
he's mentioning you know a bunch of
different discoveries but he's doing
pretty shallow Dives on each of them
some of them we've actually checked out
deeper dive style and the details
actually differ you actually need to do
a a deep dive on each of the discoveries
and then it just turns out that no one
has has done this yet this is a sort of
a plug for my mainstream science
research program but if you actually
count up how many major discoveries have
there been in the history of science we
tried to estimate it is obviously lossy
but we think it's like between 200 and
300 um that's actually and you know
obviously as you dial up or down what
counts as major you can get larger or
smaller numbers but history of
electricity it's like somewhere between
12 and 14 from Gilbert to
Maxwell and then there's magnetism and
astronomy and geology and
Etc it's not that many and each case
study takes you know you want to do a
case study on each it takes let's say
six months to a year well for let's say
it's you know a year each and it's 200
you know cases that's 200 person years
and it sounds like a lot of person years
but not really that's actually really
small number of person years um and it's
been possible to find researchers
they're qualify there there are people
both inside and outside Academia that
we've been able to employ um they uh you
can it is sort of shocking to me that
this hasn't happened just like the
here's the study on all of the major
discoveries with the main question being
how did it happen why did it happen now
as opposed to like could it you know is
and as far as you can could it have
happened faster like what are the rate
limiting steps like what's the what's
the what's the actual Discovery in one
case we found that people hadn't pinned
what the actual Discovery was um but
it's like what's the actual Discovery
how did the person make it it's like
military history except it's like with
military history people you get these
military history
Buffs who love to study previous battles
just because you don't have a big data
set every case is super important so you
want to learn everything you can from
every actual conflict that has happened
same thing is true in science right it's
you know there aren't that many total
discoveries each one is different in
some way you want to learn whatever
lessons you can from it okay great but
so we've had you
know I'd say basically no trouble
finding qualified people to do it no
trouble with actually having them do the
research um we also haven't had trouble
getting it published in mainstream
outlets and we ourselves are you know
outside Academia so it's independent but
it's like entirely backwards compatible
it's like it's very friendly um and so I
think that you the history of science is
just like there's this project getting
the basic data set on successful science
that just can be done there's nothing
stopping it you can you can just do
it sometimes you need a bunch of money
to build cool instruments that's
clarice's case that one you need several
million dollar to build the fancy
instrument but we may actually end up
succeeding in raising that money in
which case that's another case where you
can just build outside of the existing
system and science continues
what is the example of the discovery
where you realized that the actual
Discovery hadn't been properly
identified this is so it's amazing um so
it's Francis foxby um and the reason
it's amazing is
that he there the Royal Society now has
an award which I think is called the
hawksby award um but it's for the unsung
heroes of science it's for the
unrecognized people people the people
who are doing the work in the background
and you know not being rewarded for it
so we we we looked into it because we're
doing all the we're doing the whole
history of electricity to start with and
turns out foxby was not actually an
unsung hero he
just um he was from a different social
class than other people at the Royal
Society that didn't seem to pose a
barrier he was an instrumental he was an
instrument maker he was funded to
perform EXP experiments everything
seemed fine he was recognized he was
also Newton's assistant like so you know
no problem in terms of recognition but
then as we looked at modern scholarship
on it we found that people knew that he
had done something
important
and as far as we can tell we got a paper
that at some point will publish on this
when you know whenever that seems
relevant um but they hadn't identified
exactly what he did so it did turn out
that there was some weird paradoxical
way in which he was an unsung hero the
thing he did was isolating electric
light so the the the tricky thing is
that people had bumped into electric
light you have this case of boil where
he rubs a diamond and gets some light
there were other people who had come
across the phenomenon of electric light
the problem was that there were all
sorts of things that produced uced light
it's like bioluminescence and those
regular fire and you have these like big
lists of who uh you know big list of
things that produce light the thing
hawksby did was he took existing air
pumps as the you know early vacuum
chamber uh made it better um in such a
way that it was possible to run
experiments in it created a vacuum put
electric materials like Amber in it and
then rubbed them
and the thing you find is that the
vacuum quenches or puts out regular fire
but it causes electric light to become
brighter and that should and because
it's happening with a substances that
produce static electric attraction when
you rub them this shows that there is an
uh that the electrical substances are
themselves producing light and the light
is different from the light uh produced
by regular fire and so it's I
experimentally isolating electric light
as its own phenomenon that's the thing
he
did that might seem like the tiniest
detail but it's super weird if you have
a data set and you're like this guy was
important and you've like got a fuzzy
circle around what he did instead of a
Sharp Circle I mean it's a crazy
question to start to figure out where
these lines of scientific realization
boiled down to and I'm surprised that
it's not more frequent that you stumble
on something where you start to dig and
you're like that's weird seems
like this would be really useful in in
the service of addressing who was it was
it Austin who was talking about the NIH
panel that was unable to determine which
research projects would be successful
compared to chance was uh Keon who was
at the patron CH the study where the uh
ability of the NIH to predictively fund
research that would lead to Publications
was non-existent uh well s you know they
they judge the success of the reseearch
Publications no lead to lead to
Publications that get cited often that's
how they measure that's how they measure
the success of of a
project and so they they were basically
I believe that yeah I believe that like
we could just throw a dart at a wall and
like that would work just as well but we
put all this effort into triaging these
and trying to yeah in a lot of cases
what's happening is that the panels at
NSF NIH um or the decision makers are
are frequently relying on Expert
judgment uh from Academia so you you
have judgments being outsourced and
then I think specialization is a is a
serious problem it it's you
have specialization plus everyone feels
like there is a scarcity of funding
there may actually but at least people
feel like there is and this causes
people to
develop these sort of like quasi
Advocate positions where it's not just
that they're a scientist who happens to
be investigating X and now it's it's
that they're an advocate for x and that
means they're tacitly an advocate for
not the things that might get you know
the other things that might compete with
X and
so and then I haven't worked out the
picture here fully there's there's some
way this relates to the peer review
phenomenon so we all know peer review is
having issues scientists aren't super
motivated to do it they frequently give
you know give uh peer review is
frequently do I these people report it's
do I agree with your thing rather than
is this science well done I haven't
pinned this down but I think there's
something like the scarcity of funding
plus specialization is making it so that
people
don't end up being super good judges of
everybody else's work I came across a
really terrifying AI tool recently
called
consensus and it is in a professor Dave
video yeah he's advertising this for
those who know the uh the glory that is
Professor Dave um it is an AI tool that
allows you to query the scientific
literature and it tells you what you
should believe on the basis of what is
consensus like it tells you what
consensus is in the literature for a
given question and it's marketed as
basically a way for you to be able to
appropriately shape your
beliefs this it just called can okay
yeah i' think I found
it I think there's like this real I
think this scarcity mindset is a real
pollution in the whole world in general
like but I think we could narrow it down
to Academia and ideas as well like I see
people who they have a cool idea and
they devote the rest of their career to
Prosecuting that idea and I feel like
that's that sort of behavior is is
driven by this belief that having cool
ideas is a rare and scarce thing like I
think if I've also met incredible people
who are just they'll just throw out
really crazy cool ideas all the time and
they won't prosecute them and try to
convince you of them they just say stuff
and move on and like those are my
favorite types of people
but I feel like Academia is selects for
the people who are willing to you know
play that game and just dig their teeth
in and and hold on to this thing and
just March it through 40 Years of a
career publishing incremental pieces on
it and so on and so forth were you're
saying Academia doesn't have those
people or or yeah that's that's
interesting yeah i' I'd love to
understand better
what
the because this was one one of the we
were trying to figure out why haven't
people done this history of science
project I described right it just seems
like imagine if there was this nice
little index of 200 or 300 discoveries
where you could read a nice synopsis and
then there's also this nice long paper
in case you want to learn more that
tells you you're like okay please tell
me what actually happened with Maxwell
and the answer is blah the um
and one of the answers that we came to
was that academic freedom which is good
in a bunch of ways essentially allows
people to follow winding paths as
opposed to staying on one thing for 40
years like you're describing this is one
of the reasons that I'm such a fan of uh
focused research organizations um if
you've heard this term this is a thing
that's being experimented with now it's
like there's a couple different formats
um but essentially it's sort of a hybrid
between a startup and an academic group
and some other things but essentially
it's Mission driven and it uh you isn't
necessarily aiming for Publications in
the short run but there is there is some
goal that it's aiming at I I think that
that's like a really good way to to do
it um and you could imagine it's like
you know if you have 10 people each of
whom do a case study say we get the
process a bit more efficient it's six
months each they do two per year cool it
takes 10 people 10 years to do 200 then
that actually then you produce this
thing that's of like really substantial
public value and I don't think that that
that doesn't happen naturally inside an
environment where you have a essentially
lots of researcher Freedom obviously
researcher Freedom again is good for a
bunch of things
but I like the focused
projects I also wonder if it isn't
partially because science has been
working relatively well for relatively
long time and I think that when things
work well and you're able to make
technological gains and every decade
seems to be like you're better off than
the previous one it's like why spend all
this effort figuring out what it takes
to make really fantastic
science like you kind of you're living
in The Spoils of it and so there's a
really strong tendency to not
overanalyze when things work and it's
only when things start to break down and
people start to look around because like
I don't think we could have had this
conversation 40 years
ago yeah like not even necessarily
because of the technological limitations
I just think that people would have
laughed you out of the room they're like
science is great science is doing just
fine well but this this this um gets to
the uh the point about the change in
science after World War II where I think
about it as a big experiment it's you
know you have the atomic bomb Manhattan
Project then you have Sputnik okay fine
we want to scale up science then science
gets scaled up um I think it's like 40
years ago
like we're in the
80s I think the experiment was still a
little too
early I mean a ton of biology was coming
through in the 80s right it was
molecular cloning it was figuring out
all of these the ability to take the
insulin Gene and put it into yeast to
like vat produce medicines like all of
this stuff was still like biology was
exploding in the 80s because it was the
first time that we actually had like
modern techniques to actually be able to
do the kind of industrial biochemistry
that we just take for granted today I
think this always this makes me wonder
how fast we want science to go because
when I think of that I then think well
couldn't we have that occurring in all
the fields at the same time and then I
think that wow that would be that would
be crazy would does society actually
have the ability to absorb that amount I
don't think it do I really really really
actually think that it does not and I
think that if you think about what
happens to us after the atam bomb I
think you what happens to us after like
Roundup Ready crops what happens to us
after the invention of radio and
television yeah I think we're still like
way far from being able to figure it out
and I I don't know maybe this is
actually a good place to to to rest to
on this question of like how fast should
we be going we're preoccupied with well
we should be going fast clearly there's
ways to optimize how fast we go and then
there is also in the back room this
question of like well hold on a second
what happens to us when we go fast do we
know I mean you want your institutions
to be sort of slow moving in some I mean
that's why government is impossible to
get anything done in too it's like well
yeah but that's kind of nice also
because you don't have to like expect a
completely new form of government every
morning when you wake up and it's like
that's nice and I understand that that's
why we lean on institutions because
they're Dependable in that sort of slow
oish
way but man I wanted to uh we didn't
even get to talk about some of your
other work too because I really was
interested in talking about the
psychology stuff um but we're we've
almost done three hours here so I don't
know maybe maybe we'll have a chance to
talk again sure down the line this has
been a a great conversation I think the
the the pace question I think is a
really really good one I think um
there's a slogan that a bunch of my team
and I always had which is go slow to go
fast um like the reason you'd want
things to go slower is that they don't
jam up or explode or be bad for people
because you actually want it to go fast
so it's like we do want it to go fast
but that doesn't mean you make all the
parts of it go fast you want to find
what's the rate that Human Society
what's the rate that we as people can
actually absorb scientific and
technological change and I don't yet
know the answer to that but um it's I
don't know I it's it's a great place to
rest the
conversation I think it terminates on
the tiptoe the line of Order and Chaos
which has been like a
mythological it's like the foundational
myth iCal cosmology of almost every
single culture going all the way back
it's like even in your own life right
like you can get over ordered a
government can become overstructured and
then it starts resembling some fascist
totalitarian hellscape but you can also
be overly chaotic right and then you
know you're just tripping over your
clothes trying to get dressed in the
morning or whatever it is right but so
so striking that balance seems to be
critical and it's it's not an an easy
task but anyways I'm cracking open cans
of worms so we don't have time to finish
so I just yeah I think that uh we should
put this conversation out and then see
how it plays and if people enjoy it then
we should plan to have another one
because there's a lot left here I I I
want to say thank you for for taking the
time I know that three hours is a big
block especially on a Sunday afternoon
and I just I really appreciate it and
for putting us in touch with is it uh
James sinka James Sinker yeah yeah so
he's he's gonna help us figure out uh
he's gonna convince us that crypto is a
good application for long-term projects
and then we've got Clarice coming and so
it's going to be really good to get the
whole picture of this so I appreciate
you kicking it we let you go uh people
want to learn more about your work
what's the best way to read about you
and maybe get in contact anything like
that uh yeah so um
for uh contact people can just check out
my Twitter handles at Jeff Anders send
me a message um for my work um Leverage
Institute that's uh we got a new website
going coming up in ideally the next
couple days actually um but we're really
trying to essentially
it's research projects or research
programs that pick out areas in science
and technology that we think are stuck I
think can be unstuck history of science
is one mentioned psychology
um we've been helping Clarice with
Quantum biology um but the the bigger
vision is that there's all of this great
stuff out there that can be discovered
that is being discovered um and we want
to help people understand it and we want
to push the things uh forward at the
right pace I love it yeah that's what we
need we need those parallel Bridges
before we ripped down the old ones
absolutely and hey we're in the bay
probably like five or six times a year
so we might hit you up the next time we
come down grab a cup of coffee uh I
actually live on the east coast um
whoops that won't work interesting for
some reason I thought you were based in
the bay uh I I was um and yeah and my
organization leverage was based in the
Bay from
203 through 2022 I guess um but yeah no
now in the east coast but we don't never
go back there yeah well let's stay in
touch maybe maybe uh physical paths will
cross okay very cool all right thanks a
lot cheff all right see you guys bye bye
everybody
