this episode I'm joined by philosopher
Mass humar to discuss myth mytho
philosophy the work of ludic claras
thorgy and more I'd like to say a big
thank you to my paying patrons and
subscribers making all of this work
possible and if you'd like to support
the podcast and keep it going into the
New Year please find links for the
patreon in the description below
otherwise please
enjoy so M hmark thanks very much for
joining me on mic podcast
well thank you for inviting me uh we are
going to be discussing a sort of broad
range of topics you reached out um to me
because of uh the fact that I've done a
few episodes on claras and interest in
the podcast and then you sent me your
own stuff um which I then had to
admittedly run through a translator
because I was you know I will read
anything on the work of lud claras and
so this your focus on mytho philosophy
on claras on myth on chaos on calabasis
uh on a lot of extremely interesting
things so this going to be a very broad
uh conversation which is sort of born
from uh as we were jokingly saying
before we began born from the the the
hopefully increasingly growing group of
people interested in the work of claras
it was born from this uh maybe from an
acknowledgement of our love of this this
strangeness of his philosophy but um
yeah before we before we go forward just
tell us a little bit about yourself what
it is you do and yeah I mean how would
you describe your word work yeah okay
and thank you for having me one James um
so I guess I'm so part from being a a
clarus Enthusiast uh a fellow clarus
Enthusiast I'm here by virtue of being
somewhat of a mythomaniac I guess and um
I'm actually quoting a participant uh in
of one of my myth philosophical
workshops that I've been doing over the
last couple of years who said that uh to
me I think like a year ago maybe
and he did add that he was using this
word mythomaniac in the most positive
sense orbe it not the the usual sense of
the word being uh yeah really
enthusiastic about M and so a bit of of
facts about myself I'm originally an MA
in Philosophy from the University of
Southern Denmark way back when so I
graduated back and what was that early
to 2003 so that's approaching 22 years
that's a long time ago and since then
I've
been uh I've been living most of my
working life in the public and private
sector doing uh in-house Consulting
external Consulting on topics such as
leadership development organizational
development dealing with train change
and transition and um stress and crisis
uh meaning and motivation so on and for
the last many years actually I've been
with the Danish Association of lawyers
and Economist where I function as a
counselor and then um it's not that I
completely left philosophy or my love of
myth by the wayside with that like
professional career began but it did
slide somewhat into the background and
then back in 2019 I became a member of
the Danish Society for philosophical
practice and you have that type of
organization in several countries around
you have the the US I'm not really aware
if there's one in the UK but you have
the apaa the American uh practitioners
philosophical practitioners Association
there's one in Norway Sweden Finland so
on uh the one in Denmark stems back to
actually just before I graduated um I
became a member back then then an
alternate board member in 20120 and then
more member of the board in what was
that 2021
and I think so from 2019 is where I
really started to ReDiscover my love for
philosophy and myth and it's it's been
somewhat of a and it is still somewhat
of a journey because I think I'm
actually in the process of discovering
what it is that I'm doing and here we're
probably already venturing into like
clest territory
because how much do we actually know or
comprehend about what is going on even
what we are doing ourselves so so again
the the the mythomaniac um uh thing and
also the I think even the term with of
philosophy wasn't something I came up
with it was
either it was either uh Dr Lis de
Miranda is a researcher at the
University of tro in Finland or it was
fin toon Hansen who is a full professor
of Applied philosophy in alok in
Northern Denmark uh it was one of them
who who used at first about what I was
doing and I thought yeah yeah that's
probably what it is or what one might
call it so it's kind of like a yeah Noy
to to be mythical here how would you how
would you
uh Define myth myth
philosophy so I think basically it's um
yeah just to start with with the fact it
is it's the way in which I cannot not
think it's um and
to to go a bit back to my campus years I
think I had a lot of like maybe this
goes for a lot of us I guess I had a bit
of like a impost imp pooser syndrome
back then because I was really not sure
if I was actually good at thinking
because a lot of my my my classmates
were like very quick thinkers and like
doing like logical deductions in the
head and coming up with like quick
answers doing arguments and so on and I
was never really good about that I think
I tend to associate very quickly but my
thinking is kind of slow
and I think what I found out is that
maybe it was because of this interplay
between myth and lcus because what I
found is that when I try to whenever I
try to deal with some mythical
narrative it takes like two seconds and
some or several philosophical Concepts
will weigh in and the same thing goes
the other way around I I look at
something so it could be it could be
something that maybe G said or it could
be like I think Marx you've also covered
him uh on your podcast something about
like the Spooks in the head or or
something like that uh and then
immediately some or several mythical
narratives weigh in and I thought this
was just me mixing things together and
not being able to like think straight
and then what I found is that that that
could be the case of course but there
actually is a lot of commonalities are
differences between Mythos symbolical
thinking or approaching the world and
then a more conceptualizing
philosophical way of
reflecting but looking at it
historically there actually is
a uh common ground in the act of
wondering and the concept of the Wonder
um which we might get into in a bit
there's a whole like prehistory in the
mythical literature about that so when
Aristotle or Plato says that philosophy
begins in wonder which is reiterated by
of course by Whitehead later on it's um
it's not something that comes out of
like the blue ER it is something they're
speaking from a literature that they
knew of course by heart I well there's
pretty much everything we need to go
going forward there I think um but I'm I
am really intrigued by something you
said there so you said the fact that we
we cannot not think and this moves
through to also something that maybe is
a bit of a curse of the philosopher is
um this as you define it Association
you've actually made me realize I'm very
much the same my my actual thinking
sitting dwelling thinking through is
excessively slow sometimes years until
something what what is the actual deeper
layer bubbles to the surface but
associations are thrown throughout you
know just sort of ceaselessly and I
wonder that are you suspicious then of
that quick thought which is really
associative are you suspicious that it's
um in the terms I mean we're already
sort of drawing on clar what the problem
clas is trying to deal with are you
suspicious that that quick thought that
comes in is really the Guist that is
trying to control trying to say oh
you've got this new Mythos you've got
this strange perhaps strange other thing
but the associations come in to say look
you do understand it and it's a you know
a logos or a Guist of control
maybe yeah perhaps I I think at least
this
um I think what's interesting about the
kesian concept of the understanding of
the Guist and this of course a a word
that is very hard to to translate
because what does he really mean by that
is that the intellect the spirit the
mind what is it it it's it would seem
like that's not really what it is per se
it's not the intellect per se he
actually does say that uh at the end of
his uh like like really Monumental work
the spirit said was of the Soul and if
for anyone who who bet the been landed
by spingler then the clar's main work is
longer which says something I think it's
I think the Spangler work is 12200 pages
and taken all together the uh the main
work of clarus is um it's 1500 pages
something like that I actually I have it
the uh like in several TOS with his
signature on the front uh page actually
which is quite something I can't quite
it something like with the friendly uh
greetings uh remembering some meet up
with someone yeah this is so so I just
want to interject was you mention
signature yeah and now this isn't
something intriguing if you look up like
uh cloggers and things you can buy of
cloggers right there's not that many
obviously but one of them is a picture
of cloggers with his signature cut out
from somewhere else posted on and he has
a he has a really janky Jagged signature
is that the same as
yours not really actually no so when I
see I just the only reason the only
reason I mentioned that right is because
if you look up like clar's signature
there is actually one you can buy online
that apparently is his but it's the
worst handwriting I've ever seen which
to me is a great irony considering
considering his uh I just wanted to and
you mentioned that you've got a signed
edition but I'm glad that maybe it was
in his old age or something I'm glad to
hear that his actual signature is nice
yeah sorry to oh yeah no problem and
it's um yeah so so the thing about the
the Guist is that that he does say in in
like the concluding remarks is called
the r break in jour that then after
after thought or something he it takes a
bit of like people to task who said yeah
you're irrationalist and says well yeah
if that means that I'm against the
defecation of all the idolatry with
reason then yeah of course you can call
me like an irrationalist if that does me
however that I'm like subjectivist or
something like that then no thank you
I'm firmly on the side of of a
rationalism he actually does say that so
that's quite interesting and he says
that that Guist is so the essence of
Guist or the nature or character of gist
is not located in the intellect but in
the human will which is interesting and
I think there's something there because
it's what I what definitely resonated
there's several things with clarus that
resonates with me but the Guist thing is
one thing there's also a lot of things
you could criticize about his concept of
the Guist or you could at least you
could question that but the I think
so one thing it it does highlight the
difference
between like thinking like real thinking
and like the highering like deep
thinking and
overthinking like I think just on like a
personal level and I think I'm a person
whove always always been like prone to
overthinking and I know what it does to
yourself your personal life and then the
Guist the kesian guys is also that
phenomenon but just like on a worldwide
scale something that actually ends up
being being unreasonable so reason
ending up being unreasonable and
destroying everything around it he has
this this picture with with the B he
uses like several places also in from
konos um do that splits life apart and
destroys and kills everything in in his
way and I've seen that and experience
that with myself so I think that's one
thing
and like when
you when you couple
philosophical reflection with
mythological narration you get you tend
to get this this like reason or this
this capacity for reasoning in a human
being anchored in something that is to
me is life with this myth which is
actually something that is not speaking
about life but is life itself so it's
not something speaking from over here
about something over here that's of
course not something I can prove and I'm
not saying that it's speaking that it is
di speaking like in an unmediated way it
is of course through human or at least
humanly colored narratives but to me
that really that's really what it is and
then the other way around you could say
could like this free like subconscious
or pre reflective
Association this labben storm stream of
life that that myth uh uh
encompasses could that be just like too
blind maybe maybe but again
I'm not really sure that I I I see that
as something that's happening so yeah
like that was a long talk no no no no
that's really good it's really good it's
intriguing so I mean I want to ask you
sort of I guess it's probably a fairly
obvious question because we can in terms
of mytho philosophy you know philosophy
I think can be we can leave the
definition of that aside fairly
straightforward but myth myth to you are
you do you does your mind immediately go
you know to the Greek myths or are you
thinking perhaps more in modern pance
more something more uh Union in the
terms of Mythos of something you know
unconscious Collective unconscious as
you said a pre uh pred descriptive pre
or
preal States it's not spec is it
specifically myths or is it something
broader oh yeah that's good that's a
good question so
um so it maybe I I think myth to
me is actually several things it could
be approach from several angles and this
this goes back to me being I'm kind of
like hesitant to like box myself into
some like
ISM because I think I have I've done
that a lot when I was younger too much
and found that that was so again clarus
he has in the from coson of coson is
work from the 20s he he does have this
image
of of the it's like the Ecstasy and we
can maybe get back to what that is but
something that liberates the
incarcerated God and and when we put
oursel into like isms and try to box
ourselves and we're actually going like
the opposite direction I think and I
found that I did that a lot when I was
younger in a kind of like a way to
trying to like forcefully order the
world uh and that is perhaps exactly
what gist is about um and and found that
that didn't work that didn't really lead
anywhere um but I think maybe we could
try to to get to approach myth by saying
what it's what I think it's not okay so
so I
think how to put it I think it is a myth
that myth is a
Miss like in in the modern
sense got it yeah yeah okay yeah yeah so
so you know when you say yeah well James
it's a myth that you know this or that
what we really mean is is that is not
true
but like if you if you look into like
the ancient Literature Like the ancient
Romans had this conception of missas as
what they call a Vera laio so that's a
true story and you also have an
expression from I think it's it's
mentioned uh at least in the
odsy I'm not don't quite remember what
song but it in Greek it's and to all the
like the the fluent Greek speakers are
there I'm butcher in Greek right now
probably but but it it's called Al mu
which means something like to tell the
truth or nothing but the truth or to
stick to to the truth or to tell the
events as they
unfold and and that's what I think that
myth is it is it is not explaining the
world so this is not like a so this is
not a
primitive pre mechanical work way of
explaining the world how it works like
cause and effect and so on at least I
think I don't think that was actually
ever but I can't prove that but this I
don't really get that sense when I read
like the ancient MTH I don't ever think
that was like the main
like the main reason for for having myth
or for telling myth it might have been
something like later on that that that
came to the four but I don't think it's
about that it's
about participating in existent as it
don't as it onf falls it is almost again
if you look at like the myths they are
driven very much by of course symbols
but also by like by by verbs so you have
this action it's something that it's it
speaks to like a great becoming I think
uh where maybe if we look to if you look
at philosophy it's a bit more conceptual
Centric on that nouns which is different
and then of course you have like very
early Greek philosophy which they didn't
themselves call philosophy so the preach
of CR so they called like they're called
philosophers by Aristotle and they were
called called natural philosophers kind
of not sure they are natural
philosophers I kind of get a sense that
they're more like at least not in the
sense that we think of them I think they
are more maybe like existential
philosophers actually which might s
sound weird but when I read like imp
pedist the fragments or herly and so
on I don't really see them trying to
explain like cause and effect no and in
a way I see them kind of like showing
reality as it unfolds um as a way of
like contemplating and and navigating
and participating in it that's
interesting I mean this is something I
thought about recently because um to
jump I guess to more modern myth you
know myths very much in I think myths in
the way that you're thinking of them is
more palatable to actually how myths are
still alive uh today like we don't
really have modern myths to do with Gods
but we do have myths and you know one of
the common ones is the myth they're now
sort of accepted I think academically
the myth of disenchantment but what you
said about the myth is not a myth or the
myth is not a myth not a myth I can't
remember how you said it yeah you know
it's realer than it's realer than real
or trer than true you could say it is
speaking a truth is that there's this on
an individual level there's millions and
millions of people who are religious
Enchanted practicing whatever it might
be in a spiritual sense mystical sense
and yet this becoming of the guys that's
probably infected on a grander scale the
myth of disenchantment or disenchantment
as this idea actually is very true so
it's at one and the same time it's okay
you can look into the specifics perhaps
in a more conceptual sense and say well
when we look at the
contexts all these people are religious
still and yet there's still an
acceptance of a prevailing myth of
disenchantment which comes from like the
death of God so there yeah yeah does
that make sense yeah yeah it does
because it it it tends to be some yeah
it tends to be something that we just
like say we live in in like a
disenchanted age maybe but what does
that what does that mean it's the same
thing like we live in like late
modernity well how do we know
no who says so who said so so there's
like a lot of like you know ideas that
we're just taking for granted um there's
also like the
the maybe times are different now I
think we have been shaking somewhat
during the last few years existentially
most of us and maybe we're going to go
into that also because I think the
Wonder is connected to that or I see
wonders connected to that like the the
something that is a rift in the ordinary
uh but um but back when I was in campus
like in the mid 90s
um there was a lot of people it was kind
of like this hegemonic idea that like if
you're looking into like myth or
religion you kind of yeah we put that
behind us this is something and and and
yet there was a lot of like stuff taken
for granted by people who said that and
people speaking of Science and if this
was some kind of
like hypothesizing it as something which
is really like scientism I guess which
is like a big if you had to stick to
like the modern idea of Earth as
something that is not real then that's
absolutely a thing and modern Miss like
s
scientism what so for you this I guess
what we yeah I think you've mentioned it
there I mean what we're sort of
tiptoeing around with this mytho
philosophy that isn't on either side but
it's trying to understand something is
broaching this topic what you define as
wander as this this area of difference
something different of did you say a
breach a rupture in the ordinary yeah it
could be like a a breach a rift
something in the ordinary and and it's
um so I think maybe
like wonders can be greater or smaller
at least in like perceived Dimensions
but then again A Small Wonder could be
like a great wonder when you look at it
uh we we get into what what wonders
might be just in a moment but but the
the stoics I think at least senica is
one of the of of those who use this um
idea about the circle where they say
that so you know if if if something
important happens to
you it doesn't matter if this if
something that's apparently small or or
like a lesser thing it could be a great
thing even so uh and and he uses the the
image of the circle so he says that the
the smaller circle is in no way lesser
Circle than the greater Circle and I
think the same thing about the Wonder
but are some Wonders that are harder to
ignore and I think with the Wonders
again and then so slowly opening up to
to to to this
topic the Wonder in Greek is is taum and
it's um and you have the verb of course
tum sign to wonder at something or be in
a state of Wonder or the act of
wondering is um often times connected
with the Divine and it can of course be
beautiful it can also be terrible and
what is interesting about it is that
most often it is very hard to recognize
so it often times comes in Disguise uh
if you look at like uh the homeric
literatures that would be the ilad the
odsy so the the two great epics but also
the homeric hyns I think it is in the
homic to demor the Goddess demor that we
are told that the gods are hard to
recognize and they usually
disguised but sometimes they arrive in a
way where it's hard to ignore and I
think so even if you're like a a modern
person and and and if we have people
that might find it a bit like
Troublesome to speak of the Divine what
they could might then do here is just
envis something that is greater than
themselves something that surpasses them
it could even be themselves because I
think
we we are still like we we collect we
contain greater depth than we know or
will ever get to know as persons also so
so it could also be like this inner
Wonder but a really great wonder and and
actually something that helped give
birth to
my project for L of for lack of a better
word was the covid
crisis because I think what happened
there was and I I really remember this
like it was yesterday I think a lot of
people have somewhat forgotten it but I
haven't and it's I think it was on it
was Friday March 6 in 2020 I was um I
was out there for for dinner with a with
a very good friend who's also very
interested in mythology and it's
interesting we we we had a burger then
we went out for a small walk uh to a
small Cafe in the neighborhood and just
on the way there it's just a few minutes
there was a construction area and then
this was evening so so all the uh the
workers had gone home and the area was
sealed off and it was dark or it was at
least Twilight and in Danish that's
interesting also it's called Tous m in
Danish and Tous is it related to T
thirst it's um like a giant th in
ancient uh nor mythology so so you have
this this uh approaching Darkness where
yeah different forces awaken and I
looked at this area with the sealed off
you know fence around it and you had
these big like uh lifts cranes standing
there like like really tall athletic
Giants just completely standing there
just silent
just as if they were like almost like in
like an undead State and
thinking so here we have these like
great human Creations but they are
created from material that we didn't
create what
if they decided or were able to at some
point just unleash their powers on their
own
terms and then we I didn't think think
about that anymore just like an image I
had we went down which talked about
philosophy and a few few weeks later
everything was changed the
you know the the world was changed was
put like upside down and that I think
was a Wonder because what what happened
there was something that completely
changed the everyday of all persons in
different ways of course because I have
like a small family so in some way my
everyday life became more noisy and at
the same time less noisy than what when
I was at the office because all the like
the endless chatter that the office the
endless creating of like new projects
that that's kind of ceased mhm uh there
was of course a lot of noise Dem had me
my daughter my wife had to be like under
the same roof um but it was different
and then when you went outside and
Denmark is a small country and what
happened is of course that quite quickly
people locked into nature and out of the
the greater cities I live in the
Copenhagen area called Fredericksburg
and um then what happens there is that
that actually nature in Denmark became
like the habitat of the humans and kind
of scared the animals away the cities
however became like the opposite and you
could tell by when you smell the air it
was cleaner you can hear there was a lot
more like uh tiering of the birds like
this is ours now so this completely
turning around of everything and and
I've been trying for I've been quite
frustrated for at least like a year of
feeling there was something in in me
that had to like be given birth to and I
couldn't get it out this and I was uh I
had like ideas about like projects that
should and websites and was it only one
website but then was it to be mainly
about philosophy or was it to be mainly
about mythology and then these lockdowns
just made it possible because it made me
and we had one Lo lockdown we were kind
of released from that a bit for a few
months then we were lock down again then
released then lock down again and then I
think was the second or the third time I
had my like eure movement it was I was
rereading the Theos by Plato M and there
is actually a Mention Of A God Called
thas which I uh took as the name of my
my prodct is is a it is a god whose name
is hard to say how exactly we should
well we might translate it but it might
be translated as the one who produces
wonders or the one who wonder who
wonders um and I just thought okay so
there it is there's actually a god being
brought up here in connection with what
socr is called the AR philosophia as the
the foundation of philosophy like the AR
like the arch enemy you know the arch
there the the the arcade the the the the
prime matter of philosophy so to speak
is thas sign is the act of wondering and
you have this God being connected to and
that's kind of where I was led into it
um yeah so do you think in a in a
Clarian sense then that actually what
claras would understand as uh maybe
Guist but also reason once again this
problem translation is antithetical to
wonder of that form that Wonder seems to
you don't have as much of a decision
because when we're talking about at the
start this this Association associations
always seem to come in and control and
they want to guide you whereas Wonder
The Wonder of this form seems to not
really have that sort of you don't have
as you don't have the the will
engagement that you you might like in
the reasoned
world yeah yeah I think defitely if you
look at how clarus would describe or
or the Guist uh the concept Guist is
absolutely aesthetical to this of course
because it's about controlling and even
over controlling to the detriment of
everything including control itself um
however I'm not I'm not really think
sure that that it is opposed to reason
as such it's but it's pre
reflective and I think we shouldn't be
too quick to
conceptualize it it's better to just
wait it out just a bit just a bit more
if you're thinking dealing with myth and
you're starting to conceptualize and you
think maybe I should um maybe I
shouldn't box it in to the concepts
maybe just yet then that's probably
going to be gooda just get it like a
week or two more um but um but yeah
definitely and it's it's interesting
because clarus doesn't use the the word
wonder wonder in in German really that
much he does use it a bit it does use it
in um so that's a ction of essays called
mention ad that's also of course man man
and Earth it's also like a lecture he he
did uh way back when just before the
outbreak of the first world war actually
and it was over Hur by by Val Benjamin
of the Frankfurt School was completely
taken back by it and he read so much
clarus that da was I don't yeah maybe
you should read any more of that stuff I
think that was of course MOS though that
that he was completely like Enchanted by
it Andor became a bit um he he actually
found himself found clar is quite
interesting he became a bit concerned on
behalf of V Benjamin but but leaving
that aside but he does there is an essay
called brief
tic that's a letter on ethics and it
does mention that like the like the
Ambrosia of the Soul uh how do how do
you nurture the soul and he mentions
that there is um love or leaper of
course related to the Cosmic
cosmogas also there's like the example
and he think he's thinking of like the
mythical examples mythical figures and
uh then wund wonder and he also
has in his main work the Sak he does and
it's between a few of the books you have
like this front page we we has like a
small aphis and I can't really quite
remember it exactly in the H but it's
something like what couldn't just be a
Wonder became a work and what couldn't
just be a work became a deed and I think
what his maybe implying there maybe is
that wonder is something that is to be
that carries its value in and of itself
and then it can also have like an effect
which is like the work V in it would be
in German back in Danish and then what
once it becomes like a tat in German it
is maybe something that is very
instrumental in in a nich sense
something that is human all to human and
I what I think clarus is about so his gu
conception is what he's against what
he's fighting what is's really his what
is pro is I think is of course the
cosmogonic and I think his
his as Shin sha is what he's calling it
so that's really like just a German name
for phenomenology so Shin is in German
is something that shines forth which is
what phomen on in Greek means something
that is shining forth um is about like
like an updated version for the 20th
century of uh what the ancient called uh
sooma which means let us save the
phenomena so something like not
dissecting them or at least letting them
be for a while so they can speak for
themselves and there is a really really
good uh of course there's a ton of like
mythical examples of this but at least a
good one and one that that shows what
happens when we try to control is from
the h to dionisis there's actually
several but this I think this is the
longest one and isn't that long but it's
the one where dionisis appears as a
young
boy and he's standing like beside the
ocean just as if he just like came in
from the ocean and he's spotted by a
pirate
ship and the captain is looking ah and
they look at him are this guy in
there on the shore he looks like
something like some maybe some Highborn
person let's kidnap him and get a and
then collect The Ransom of course and
then they and and if you know diis in a
MTH you know this going to go worry this
is going to end like in a bloody way
this is not going to end well because it
it doesn't take light that lightly is
and so they kidnap him
and they try to bind him and that
doesn't they
like the the chains won't really hold
and then one of the crew uh becomes
concerned and say I think we should let
him go I don't think this is like an
ordinary person and and you know the
captain and the rest of the C yeah yeah
yeah no no no no we've got this this guy
this is clearly clearly like an
aristocrat we're going to collect the
ransom and then it says in the text that
I think in Greek it is
if it means and we have like a
collection of a lot of interesting words
it means um wondrous events came to
light and if I to is again is that's the
verb is connected to like finest ey
shining forth of something and you have
Tata that's like wonders and ARA is like
event or
effect and what happens is that the ship
is overgrown by wines and Ivy and so on
and they get scared because you don't
say see that every day and they try to
to get into one end of the ship and then
a big like Lion appears which is the god
they try to run at the other direction
at the other end of the ship and a big
like bear which is also the God Appears
which just immediately kills the captain
and then the rest of the crew jumps into
the ocean and gets transformed into
Dolphins except the one who recognized
there was something there he gets to
live and and so here they're trying to
kind of like bind the wonder and maybe
instrumentalize it for like their own P
purposes and I think that is maybe one
of like the main issues I see
like existence in the mod world that's
what we tend to do as humans I tend to
do it but we do so to our own detriment
and of course we again in the clares
inance we kind of kill everything around
around us all life yeah I think I think
in in binding in binding the in binding
wonder even if you wanted to look at it
in a psychoanalytical way I think in in
believing that one has binded the
unconscious or is controlling an
archetype or fully understands an
archetype you have Es at the very least
es skewed it but at the very worst
destroyed it so it's actually
incomprehensible um but this this does
bring up a sort of tough question
because when I was reading your work I
did sense that there is an element of uh
well there is a clear element of um
practical engagement of of something
maybe that's leaning more towards like
uh in a word like something alchemical
right a changing development uh or
catabasis is is explicit in your work so
yeah in what sense do you think
that in understanding Wonder in that way
of the Clarian or the mythical wave you
cannot bind it and the one who just
understood there was something there
that was wondrous lived how how do we
have how do you see us as being able to
have that practical relationship with
wonder where at One and the same time we
leave it be and yet it still transforms
us somehow yeah yeah yeah and it yeah
and that's of course like that's a
thousand question and um and it's
um so I think I think it at least part
of it has to do with like the the
sequence of how we go about it so where
do we start do we start up uh by trying
to conceptualize or overly
conceptualize or do we start with the
listening heart or the kind of like the
letting the Wonder appear and it's
um so again to take like a mythical
example of this there could be several
one of them that clarus is kind of like
keen on he's using it at least twice in
in his main work is uh the story of the
Old Norse god Odin sacrificing himself
on a great tree it's usually taken to be
like iil that's actually not explicitly
explicitly stated in the text and we
only have like one source for that uh
that narrative which is from the HOV
that is the sayings of the high one and
it's an an old tic poem and then there's
a part of that called runatal which mean
like the Run song or the the narrator of
the runes and that is where we get the
the story of him hanging on a winds swep
tree for nine whole
nights we never told the name of the
tree only that it it is wind swept and
that it has roots that are unknown or
that reaches down into the great unknown
or that Springs out from somewhere that
no no one has ever seen which is
interesting and and so he hangs there
and this is interesting also because he
is he is not in the active here he's not
activ doing some he's just hanging there
exposed to like the elements and I'm
thinking like elementaries and eras in
the uh in the in the kesian sense like
Elementary errors the Raging elements
and he's also
and and that is coming back to like this
um the Wonder as a rift in the ordinary
he is pierced by a
spear as is Christ actually also after
he he dies uh at least one of the
gospels but it's it's interesting that
if you look at into the the words
there is
that so so in Greek we have t meaning a
wonder when you when you say that in
Danish and of course this is not how it
sounds in Greek but you say tum and then
you say tauma which is or trauma they
they tend to kind of like s like the
same they are not theologically
connected in Greek at all but that might
just be the case this is not uh
something that we are like 100% able to
verify but in Germanic languages it does
seem that there is a eological
connection between wound and wonder in
German that would be wunda and wund and
in in Danish you have so if you ask a
Dane today so the he would use like for
w it would be S but there older it's
kind of like used more poetically today
in this which is W this is the same as
in German basically and you can almost
hear
that
w w wound wonder and so on and when Odin
hangs on the tree so it says in Old
North that he hangs there
uh and is wounded by a spear and that is
gy in Old North so
he's perforated or wondered perhaps by
the spear and then what happens is that
just at the nin at the end of these nine
nights he looks down again like sem so
he's lifted up he's looking down but but
there's a lot of things about this up
and down and you know hertis said those
s me for saying that the way up and down
is the same whatever he meant by that
probably he meant different several
things but he looks down and he takes up
the
rooms with a scream uh and we can ask
from from where but we know that he
hangs on a tree that has its Ro down in
the great
unknown so he's taking it from some like
the great unknown variable in the great
equation of Life which I think is like
the great Abyss the great deep and and
the interesting thing is that
R most people will think of it as
a letter from the pre Latin alphabet in
Old ancient Scandinavia which is true
that's it's also that but it does mean
something like a secret or in Latin you
could use the word
mysterium uh so and it's also connected
to the modern German Ren which means a
whisper and what is interesting is that
when someone Whispers to you uh that
that that the thing that they whisper
about is usually quite important and is
something intimate and it requires you
to listen carefully not just in your
usual but you had to listen extra
carefully to hear the whisper and that's
what I think the Wonder is about is
about wh listening in a in a particular
way and again accidentally about
interesting thing again about the rooms
to see just how it was used later on in
the first translation of the Bible into
a Germanic language made by Bishop WF uh
of translation of the Bible into Gothic
when he translates Timothy uh letter to
Timothy the first letter I think it is I
remember exactly where that is nine
something I'm not sure but it's the
mystery of Faith
mysterium he translates that that as
Runa Gala ni and you can always hear the
Runa and Gala ni you can hear Gala faith
in German so so we have to do with
something that is mysterious and we have
to listen carefully and we have to be in
a
state of receptiveness passiveness and
not trying to control in order to at
least get access to it then later on
what Odin does is he receives some R
songs and he teases them to others and
they start to have an effect but that
comes like down the line it also does
put him in uh so when he falls down from
the tree he gets a a drink of the med of
poetry which is called sometimes it's
The Cauldron where it's contain
sometimes it's the M itself it's
called in Old North it means the thing
that Ste the Mind stir up the Mind
something like it STS up the soul and
and it's um and again the name of Odin
is connected to a a voot in modern
German like rage and it's we had to
think like maybe not being like mad in
like a modern sense or angry but maybe
more like tham Mania it's divine Madness
as his dionis which also connected with
the bear which is Odin is too um and so
I think there's something here also
about the Ecstasy because he hangs there
and he mentioned the purpose of hanging
there is that he hangs there in Old nor
shelf sh meaning myself given to myself
but but that word in old mouse means as
a human
sacrifice and so he's there we have a
self being sacrificed to another self
that is perhaps both because his son it
threee that reaches up into like you
know to the clouds and down deep into
the Earth so it's he is probably
sacrificing his usual everyday self to
another greater self that is
both higher and
deeper and that's what I think is going
on when we are in an act wonder when
it's like true Wonder that's what
happening I would I would perhaps say
that what what intrigues me most there I
I guess also with claras is that um the
Intriguing element of that myth in
particular is we rarely
we maybe we F we rarely focus on the
cthonic downward routes that go down to
the underworld we might try and maybe
we'll a skew it the Shadow and Y or
something like that but the fact that
that element and not just the upward
element you know this light shining down
which is usually quite pleasant but the
roots going down to the cthonic
something coming up yeah that's uh
that's not something
we give much time to uh nowadays I would
say so that's you know this great deep
this chaos for claras and for yourself
what do you think
is what do you think is there that's
transformative that we don't get from
that usual logos
Centric
um
Transcendent
idea yeah yeah so I think so so at least
if we to to interpret like the great
deep
in maybe like in a phenomenological
or way or in the way of like existential
philosophy or using an existential
approach I think it's it's kind of like
where it's the place of both like the
birth but also like the rebirth and the
going under uh and and the like the
great existential reboot uh you you
could call it and it's um it's also
interesting because at least in in in
some source
it's described by way of like the Via
negativa so it's described by mentioning
what it's not that happens in the old
nor poem vpor the serious prophecy and
it also happens in the inish the
Babylonian uh the Epic of creation or or
one of them at the one that we have uh
uh uh that is carried over to us but in
in both of those start with starts out
so the the the serious prophecy is like
first it's it's it's a command to listen
so hear me all like higher and lower uh
uh uh descendants of heimdal they said
and then uh you and she's addressing so
this like a vver here probably like an
undead ganst is mostly something again
Undead from the underworld he's probably
in the underworld in in a a state of
catabasis waking up someone there and
she says so I
remember the earliest of time
which makes her quite old then probably
with like at least one foot in chaos or
it would be the name of that would be
gin in the old North mythology and and
she remembers that there was no Heaven
no Sky no beaches no grass and so on so
we start hearing what is not and the
same go that's also how the en starts
back then there was no no Heaven there
was no that's actually the first No
Heaven no Earth and so on and so
it's clearly about something that we
cannot
conceptualize once we does it's not that
anymore um and we do get some Concepts
but they tend to be at one point
swallowed up again they have to return
to the great deep and that goes for like
whole worlds it also goes for mythical
items so a famous example would be the
great stord Excalibur like of the the
the wondrous uh tales of the British
Isles and and also of course of France
and yeah and European and like the
athuan Roman says it it's told I know
the version I know best is from suas
mallerie
Lort from
the it's around
1480 something I think and at the end of
it you have Arthur and Mort killing each
other and he's L laying on the down
ground dying I think it's a better we
approaching trying to find him and he
and he's lying there laying there like
morly wounded and he says to um to B be
so you see this Excalibur this the sword
of the Kings which came from the lake
given to him by the Lady of the Lake
after the sword he get he got from this
the stone broke so it's not the same
sword at least not in mallerie um you
have to to uh do a great service to me
now yeah yeah anything my le anything
and you have to take this sword you find
the biggest lake you can and you throw
it as far out as you can and he like
horrified no you can't do that it's like
the the greatest sword in the world like
the whole order of the world it depends
on it yeah but this is the right way to
do this is something that has to be done
and also the the Lady of the Lake did
mentioned at one point early on that I
have to get it back and and he goes out
there and he's just to throw it in and H
no and I think he he hides it in a tree
he go back to Ala and says do you do it
yeah so what did you see yeah I saw like
Waters and and waves and said well you
didn't do it
now go go go go and do it yes I will and
he goes out to the lake he's just about
to throw it and well I can't do it and
he hides it under his saddle goes back
Arthur ask him did you do it yeah yeah
what did you see I saw like water and
Mist but you didn't do it now go and do
it or you are a traitor to me and then
he goes he he wraps his belt around it
and he just flings it out there as long
as he can and it is caught by a
hand who waves it around tree times just
brandish it and push it down so um and
then of course we hear Arthur dies but
then it is
said that he's taken to some mysterious
island and where he is buried but then
ballery writes yeah but there's some who
say that on this Tombstone it says hiyak
reand which means here lies Arthur he
who was once a king he who will once
again be a king
but maybe only because he has to die and
the sword has to go into the lake so I
think it is the the the place of like
existential death and rebirth and which
brings us back to philosophy because one
of the things that Socrates talk about a
lot is he calls his art of like
dialoguing uh he calls it myotic that is
uh mid wiery MH and uh and that is
giving birth but before you get born you
get put into to a tomb kind of in the Bo
and it even Rhymes a bit there and and
and again how many nights are Odin on
the tree like nine nights mhm again
there's actually even from like the the
gospel Stories the darkness falls upon
the Earth on the ninth night also so and
in the ninth hour that is not n night
he's only there for so long so so
there's something there with like with
like the symbolism of the nine and
there's again inhes I forgot if that's
the theogony or that works and days it's
one of them you hear that if you take
like an anvil and you drop it from the
Olympic Heights it take like nine days
for it to reach Earth and then if you
drop it from Earth it takes like nine
days for it to reach into
tacas so there is something there and I
think that definitely alludes to this
death and rebirth uh theme it's also in
the the humic demit that I mentioned
earlier where it starts out with the
daughter of Deiter pan called prur in
and Latin walking in the meow with a lot
of like beautiful flowers there's one of
them that's more beautiful than the
others in our
sissors related to narcotics and falling
asleep so on and she reaches out for it
and the again catabasis the Earth opens
up and Hades drags her into Hades um and
then de searches for her for nine days
and it is said at some point that she
has to go there and be there for like
the whole winter in order to be able to
return as what is a Greek is called here
in the text A megaa A great Wonder for
both The Immortals and the uh Mortals
mhm so she can only become a Wonder a
wonder if she goes goes into the
underworld to come back again and and
the same thing happens on like a cosmic
scale in in a serious prophecy nors
mythology you have so we have of course
the big cataclysm at the the destiny of
the Gods I what it doesn't mean like and
it doesn't mean like a a destruction it
means the destiny but the destiny is
going under and
it's so a lot of things happens Giants
and and and gods killing each other left
and right to almost no one's left the
the great giant swart I think we should
think of him as means black the black
one because he's burn probably probably
looks kind of like a bck from toan uh
comes and burns down the whole world and
then you also hear that just before the
Earth sinks into the sea the firmament
is Clift in two again like an a giant
astronomical extraordinary WR in the
ordinary happens and then everything is
gone and then at some point you have the
Earth reemerging from the waters but now
it's everything is growing by itself not
being solded by any hand and a lot of
things happen a few Gods will come back
but the gods find something that they
apparently lost which are some golden
pieces for playing board games and
that's interesting because what
characterizes games it is that they are
what GMA H GMA in his truth and Method
bah he he he speaks about the
phenomenology of of playing or games and
he says something that characterizes
games is that they are they're serious
of course it's not just for fun
necessarily but they are also
theological they have their own purpose
in themselves like their worth in
themselves and
these uh perhaps it's kind of like a
sort of Chess perhaps we have to imagine
these chess pieces are described in the
old most text as un that is wondrous
wonderful or akin to a Wonder but they
are only rediscovered after yeah the the
going under of the
world that's super that's
that's fascinating I Ian we was when we
were speaking before we started
recording we both agreed that there's
this problem with the modern definition
of existentialism where no one seems to
really be able to do I wonder if uh the
problem is that a lot of modern ex
existentialism especially of the sran
type does doesn't engage with that going
under that death and then that that form
of rebirth maybe that would be too um
too mythical for him
but see it seems them that what arises
from that in terms of these golden
pieces this ability to play games with
something that is symbolically golden is
a sort of a the the death of something
that is actually the Living Dead and the
arrival of a leing philosophy an arrival
of a self that can now truly live in the
sense of a serious game uh a mythical
enjoyment maybe does that make sense
yeah yeah it does because there's
definitely something there because I
think one maybe there's kind of like
like two polls that one should like
avoid when dealing with myth at least to
my mind so one thing is like or or just
wonder The Wonder of life I think the
two of us speak being able to speak here
you're you're in the UK I'm in Denmark
just like coming across each other like
in this like weird digital world is kind
of that is a Wonder to me being able to
sit here and um not treating that as
something to be overly like
instrumentalized that is one thing but
also I I I think that the Wonder and
myth is not like entertainment either
because that's something you just use
for like fast food or for like enjoyment
and you leave it by the
wayside uh I think it should be
something that in some way transforms us
which is also which it will at least in
my experience if we let myth like let
the Wonder work it's magic um
and yeah and it's um
and really a Wonder could be like
everything it could be so I think again
going back to like the covid crisis what
that thing did to me at least was
that it's not that that I was oblivious
to all like the Small Wonders like dur
in everyday life before that it just
become much more became much more
apparent to be where they were and what
they were just like meeting with like a
there like random guy that uh walks at
his door like when I go to the office I
usually I'm usually the first one there
I'm really really early only meet like
one or two people which are the same
people and we almost didn't see each
other during that period And it I
actually I really missed talking just
just shooting the breeze for a few a few
minutes and thinking just I did I
actually to this day I don't know his
name I don't don't know what it's called
but you know that is a wonder you you
talk with someone on your past like some
random stranger or some people that you
passed
by we we tend to take that for granted
but there's nothing to take it to be
taken for granted at that me sitting
here with you that is to me something
that is extraordinary wondrous and I
have the same feeling every time when
just maybe like remembering the myths
but also reading them so you would think
and I think a lot of people who are not
like in Miss would think that this like
ancient boring Dusty weird
stories well that's not to my mind or my
experience is not what happens once you
once you look into like the the The Well
of U or what you call it and you look
into this mop partical well you would
think it would be like you have like
this like centuries or Millennia Dead uh
dead stories and then what happens is
that they just leap up at you like they
were born like two minutes ago and and
fills you with life and like the meaning
and what what come to me every time is
like a deep sense wonder that I can't
believe this is happening and it's it's
interest interesting that I would feel
that because maybe it just happened
yesterday also but it's kind of like it
happens and new every time and then I'm
filled with a deep sense of gratitude
mhm that it's I can't believe it's there
I haven't done anything to earn those
stories being there anything I haven't
made those stories but they are there
and once you just press the button they
just start unfolding just like just like
that
now that is a wonder that is something
to be grateful
for is there anything you'd like to add
about myth philosophy or your work that
you feel is key that we haven't touched
on there's probably a lot but but
sometimes
a sometimes the story doesn't get
stronger just by adding or piling onto
it so uh yeah I'm probably going to
think of something like in two minutes
but uh but we've been uh far around so
uh so probably that's uh at least the
most essential things I think I think we
touched upon
here and where where can we find most of
your work is uh is not in English but
whereabouts can we find your
work yeah that's um yeah it's true that
that actually I think all of it but just
one thing is actually in uh in Danish so
far I I might be publishing something in
in in English uh somewhere down the line
I have one thing but I'm not really sure
if people would understand that it's
it's the the Small poem a fire dancer
it's it's actually a a small poem that I
composed at least a skeleton of it was
composed like how how long is that is
this 30 years ago maybe back uh back in
my campus years when I was a heavy metal
drummer and it was supposed to be to be
the lyrics for a song that we never got
to publish before we disbanded so so
that's the only thing I have in in in
English but but otherwise
I do have the the thas DK website but
it's only so far in Danish people can
find me on LinkedIn of course I have a a
LinkedIn profile in both Danish and
English so there's a bit about me there
and and then I'm on a platform also
called the era that's the enriched
realities assembly it's a a newly
established um accent research exchange
platform uh again it's established by Dr
Lis de Miranda of the University of turu
in Finland and um I'm also going to be
doing some counseling in uh in like in
realm of this platform but that's a
short description of me there also uh
what I'm about very short so there's
most of it and sorry to the rest of the
world and the the non tiny part that
that is that is speaking Danish that but
that but you can't really find anything
uh as of yet apart from that okay there
is also actually an interview on YouTube
with me by Louis deir called uh I think
it's called meth philosophy and
philosophical health so there's that
we're going into at least some of the
things that we've been talking about
today also so so I think that's it for
now where people can find me but
hopefully more is to come okay well mmer
thanks very much it's been a really
great
conversation yes thank you also uh James
it was a pleasure of being here and
thank you for inviting me
