today's eerily impressive artificial
intelligence writing tools present us
with a crucial challenge as writers do
we unthinkingly adopt ai's time-saving
advantages or do we stop to weigh what
we gain and what we lose when heaing its
siren Call today's guest the linguist
and educator leads us on a journey
connecting the dots between human
literacy and today's technology it's
tempting to take the easy way out and
let AI do the work for us our guest
cautions that this efficiency is not
always in our interest as AI piles us
with suggestions or full-blown text we
risk losing not just our technical
skills but the power of writing as a
springboard for professional reflection
and unique expression it is an honor to
welcome Professor amera of linguistics
in the department of world languages and
cultures at American University in
Washington DC author of 10 books and
another one on the way and the focus of
today's episode is her book who wrote
this how Ai and The Lure of efficiency
threaten human writing Naomi as Baron
welcome to the show thank you so much
Aiden I'm delighted to be here it's
great to have you on the show Naomi I
have so much so many questions you
inspired so much thinking which is
actually the point of all this in the
first place
and I thought I'd start with something a
little bit off the Beaten Track here I
was going to do this as the intro but I
thought people would actually go am I on
the right show so I fed Google's
notebook llm with a number of your
YouTube interviews and I got it to
generate its own interview about that so
I'm going to play a little bit of that
and it will inspire us to have a little
bit of a chess about what came out of
this and indeed your own experiences
with this today we're diving deep into
her work her insights because she was
looking at this stuff way before chat
GPT was even like a twinkle in some
coder's
eye he doesn't talk about long if you
seriously yeah so we're going to try to
unback you know what she has to say
about AI changing how we communicate
like the whole landscape of language I'm
excited this could be good me too and
honestly what strikes me is how
Professor Baron gets at this core
question like what even I language she
digs into research from way back like
teaching chimp's sign language really
yeah and how all that helps us
understand you know Ai and language
today it's really fascinating yeah CU
it's not just about AI spitting out
words it's about meaning you know intent
even like emotion maybe totally and
that's enough for that naom let's get
back to the humans you had your own
experience it's really good it's
absolutely incredibly good a dean of a
college I know said to me he said you're
in trouble with your podcast now these
guys are better than you we don't make
the same mistakes you make and I was
like oh I think people like my mistakes
I heard about Deep dive deep dive being
the audio option in Google notebook LM
this audio option just came online in
September I believe mid-september and
there was a whole rash of articles in
the New York Times And The Washington
Post and the MIT technology review and
so forth saying wow do you know what
this is so I thought well let's find out
what it can do and what I did is I took
um a chapter that a colleague and I had
written for a book that's just about to
come out and then I and I put that into
notebook and said please generate me I
just pushed the button that was my way
of saying please to generate this
roughly 10 minute long deep dive that
creates a podcast with a he and a she
voice based on the material that's in
that in that notebook namely my chapter
or my book proposal the when I first
listen to the book proposal I literally
had tears in my eyes not because I loved
hearing about my work but because of the
incredible ability of AI to do things
that a year ago probably even six months
ago we could not have imagined
possible not just the quality of the
voices and and the she voice is way too
chirpy and eventually great on you
eventually
May totally totally totally um 15
seconds and I've had various people have
listened to this comment and I can't
listen to this anymore the content for
the book chapter was actually pretty
accurate and it was eily
accurate then came the book proposal and
I actually
having just sent the written proposal to
my editor I sent the link to the Deep
dive and I said so now you don't have to
read proposals anymore all you have to
do is
list and she immediately got back to me
and said but what's totally missing
totally from this podcast is your humor
the Nuance the literary examples that
you included the Bes sides the the
character of your writing is totally
missing so no I'm not going to use this
for proposals because i' have no idea
how this author could write the other
thing that happened is that the first
half of the podcast was accurate in
terms of the content that I had in my
proposal but then it started veering
into things that might have been nice
for me to do but were not part of my
work and it reminded me of what's
happening with the company perplexity
now which is being sued by a number of
news outlets and what perplexity is
doing is taking as training data a lot
of news information which it may not
legally have the right to the courts
will
decide and generating what's is
accurately in the original news source
and then spinning its own information
that's not in the news source and that's
not accurate so anyone who tells you
well if you feed in the data to an AI
and only the data that you want
discussed in whether it's a written form
or whether it's an audio version because
the audio overlay these days is
comparatively
simple and and and we're not going to
have any hallucination of the sort of
stuff that's false we're not going to
have any bias and all that kind of stuff
do not believe it because I heard it
with my own
ears it brings up something and I have
to apologize to our audience as well I
am definitely not going to be a iable in
today's show because I gonna go all over
the place and I'm just GNA spark off
things that you say Naomi because one of
the things there is authorship so if I
for example played a clip from a movie
in this show or I played some music that
I didn't have the rights to what happens
on YouTube is you can't have any
monetary gain from it so it's exempt
from having any type of advertising and
it's flagged to the owner of that and
when I played that piece from the llm
from notebook I was like oh who owns
that and I know you talk a lot about
this because this is something that's in
the minds of many people maybe somebody
has used an AI heavily for their book
maybe somebody has written music with it
maybe somebody has created music with it
or visuals and often times they'll think
is like who owns this is the fight that
at least in the United States is
aggressively being waged right now
perhaps the first lawsuit more than a
year ago now came from the New York
Times when it said to open Ai and to
Microsoft Thou shalt not have this data
unless you pay for it and that case has
not been settled but other kinds of
things are now happening that are
terribly worrisome it's not just the
news outlets that are at least in the
states signing licensing agreements with
a number of the companies so let's start
with openai and and with Microsoft and
with Google and with
meta but it's also
Publishers of books and Publishers of
Journal articles so one of the most
recent things that happen is Taylor and
Francis which is a huge publishing
conglomerate it publishes lots of
academic journals I have articles in
Taylor and Francis journals I have a
book in a Taylor and Francis company
rled and that licensing agreement was
signed by Taylor and Francis with
whichever of the large big tech
companies it signed with and the
licensing monies go to Taylor and
Francis now for Journal articles Taylor
and Francis like most academic Journal
Publishers Taylor Francis holds the
copyright you know you're not allowed
will have copyright for most Journal
article academic Journal articles but
for books thank you I hold the
copyright which means in principle I
should be getting some Revenue I mean 5
cents you know two P you know a shilling
it takes whichever level a Euro penny
but whatever you want it's not for the
money it's for the fact that if I hold
the copyright but I have no control over
how my copyright material is being used
and that is extremely Troublesome in
some ways this is reminiscent of what
happened when Google Books started
scanning books in order to make
information free right and then there
was the question of how much of the book
is exposed on Google Books and some
pages were available some pages weren't
some authors allowed all of their bards
to be there and then a number of
organizations in the United States the
author's Guild and I think it was the
American Association of Publishers sued
and said wait a second you are taking
copyrighted material and making that
available for a decade the lawsuits went
back and forth and eventually they would
be settled and then they were reopened
and it took 10 years to finally say I
guess this is fair use Google you may
post what you want as long as it's
Snippets but Snippets can be huge
amounts of text so it's this it wasn't
for the money that the authors wanted to
have protection of their copyright it
was because they were the authors and
they wanted the rights to control what
was done with their work and they lost
it with Google Books and I don't know
what's going to happen nobody knows
what's going to happen with the suits
that are going to come either from
individual authors or um groups of
authors who are having their style
stolen from them because you take all
the books of name your favorite author
living because it's easier to sue if
you're alive and eventually the
copyright does run out both in the UK in
Europe and in the United States but
before then if you have a live author
whose work is being taken there many
lawsuits currently going on saying you
know to the likes of open AI you may not
take my work and open AI is saying I
didn't take your work all we do this
took words and we clipped some words
here but we also know your writing style
no we're not talking about that the
lawsuit and we can create something in
your style there was a case where the
writer gay toiz had a number of his
pieces was a journalist for the
Washington Post it was a legitimate
experim took the work and fed it into an
earlier version of an a I and generated
some new gay toiz text and when played
to gay toise or shown to him because it
was written text toise said it's not me
but it's bad it's sort of close and now
in the end of
2024 it's going to be darn close and the
only thing missing is the particular
plot or
storyline that thing about it's good
enough
this worries me a lot I I was telling
you before we came on a I'm a lecturer
and I'm just coming up to lecture season
and for years I mean I started this
module eight years ago and I've always
had AI in it and how AI was going to
rewrite the rules of society and you
need to be more adaptive you need to
have more resilience because you will
lose roles very very quickly and one
time a
student has a joke made a tin foil hat
and left it on my left on my left so
which which was brilliant I thought that
was great creativity with a big city but
my point was always that this was coming
and that I think they're they only
started listening last year that last
year was the big shift but one of the
things I was telling them always to use
was tools so a tool came out called ESS
bot and it's still available it's still
really really good and Essay bot
actually has a button that goes D
plagiarized and a warning comes up and
he goes don't worry if this is going
through a plagiarism Checker it won't be
detected if you press this button right
so I was telling them this I and the
thing was they thought it was like
entrapment and like I I will know if
it's written by the AI but today I don't
know today I checked it today before we
came on air to see how good and how
advanced it has become it's amazing and
it actually comes up with stuff what I
like using AI for is to come up with
stuff you just didn't know about or
some outlying piece of information that
you just didn't think of but I'm saying
all this to say and this is how I found
your work and I'm so sorry I didn't
discover your work earlier but I was
writing an article and I was writing
about the fact that part of
the gift of writing or creativity is the
struggle it's the you have to go through
as you all know or would say the the
desert of boredom that sometimes is the
case it's like for me it's like going to
the gym going to the gym you do the work
you show up you just keep doing it and
eventually something will happen for the
better either you'll get injured or
you'll get in good
shape but but the same for for writing
for me and I say all that to say that
that's how I discovered you because it's
was like surely if you're not exercising
this muscle this mental muscle I know
about digital dementia but I was like I
surely you're going to have some type of
atrophy in the brain and this is at the
heart of your work the understanding of
this and I'd absolutely love you to
share this because if anybody gets
anything out of the Today's Show please
listen to this because this is the point
you will lose it if you don't use it you
will lose it you have given me about an
hour and a half worth of things to
respond so I'll take them in sort of the
order if I get it right that she's that
you raised issues tools that can spot
plagiarism well DPT zero was created
about a month after um Edward Tang I
think created it about a month after
chachu came out just saying I wonder if
there's a way to figure out if something
was written by a human or not and that
tool has gotten incredibly better over
the last two years I'm impressed with
the work that he's doing and he's doing
other kinds of things that are helping
people people become better writers
themselves rather than just a tool for
faculty to say gotcha I figured I you
did this but almost every text
generation tool has some kind of
plagiarism spotter in it and whether
they're accurate or not who knows in the
United States before chat gbt came out
probably the most popular text
generation tool was called
pseudo and it was using
gpt3 that is what open ey has done is
licensed first at license gpt3 then GPT
3.5 and now it's licensing GPT 4 we it
license GPT for oh I don't know we'll
find out but there are lots and lots of
companies that are using the technology
that open AI has available and we doing
so before chbt came on the scene um so
grammarly a tool used heavily in the
United States not just by students but
by lots of people in the workplace and
used around the World by people who are
writing in English particularly people
who are not native speakers or fluent
speakers um of English are using it and
it has had a plagiarism um tool within
it
so Will
plagiarism always be
spotted no and the reason for that is
the way that AI generation works is
sometimes it will take whole
sentences rather than just individual
words when it goes to predict what the
next most likely word is going to be
which is the way that llms work and
sometimes it's more word salad and you'd
have incredibly difficult time saying oh
this came from so and so if you're a
really good writer and reader of
literature you may be able to sense the
voice of a writer but if the prompt has
not been right in the voice of so and so
you know make it sound like Charles
Dickens make it sound like Shakespeare
make it sound like because you can do
that and do a fairly good job but if you
haven't said make it sound like so and
so then probably you won't be able to
tell the author's
voice okay so what does this mean going
forward you talked about mental muscle
mental muscle was a theory put forth in
the well in the 19th century in
particular and I can speak for the
United States I can't speak for other
countries but it was a theory put forth
as to why it was really important to
learn Latin and some Greek would be a
good idea too now were you going to be
in your daily life after you graduated
from college were you going to be using
were you going to be Reading Writing
Latin
orations no
did you really need to suffer
through memorizing all those um
conjugations and declensions and reading
um uh Shar gallic Wars and so forth that
you have to do that the rationale that
was given is that it built up your
mental muscle to be used in other kinds
of
activity so it was the journey that was
important not that which you were using
that Journey for while you were in
school so as you come to writing the
question is what's the relationship
between writing and thinking I'll get to
the atrophy in a moment but first let's
talk about the relationship between
writing and
thinking if I were to take both hands
and both feet I we use the fingers and
toes I would still not have enough
digits for writing the writers who for
at least three centuries have said
there's a connection between writing and
thinking you know there many versions of
this ferel Conor is the one most often
cited in the United States Joan didan is
often cited and what is it they're cited
as saying I only know what I think when
I see what I say and say meaning hear
what I write I only know what I think
when I see what I write or I only can
think when I write and what they're
telling us is that the human mind is a
miraculous I they're not saying this but
they're presupposing it there a
miraculous
organ but one of the things the
development of literacy did is it made
possible new ways of
thinking and people have written about
this Eric havlock wrote a book a
classicist wrote a book called preface
to Plato in which he argued and I agree
with half of what he said he argued that
the development of the Greek alphabet
which was the first alphabet where you
had one symbol for each sound and it was
derived from The Phoenician Phoenician
being a Semitic language um Greek being
a an Indo-European language um um so
they work differently in terms of their
sound system the Semitic system has a
so-called consonantal alphabet we only
represent the consonants with a symbol
and you sort of have to know when you're
reading which vowels are going to be and
this is still the case with something
like Hebrew but what happened with Greek
is you actually developed it was around
800 BC individual symbols for H sound
and the argument that havlock made is
that it was the alphabet that made
possible Greek philosophy well I don't
think I I don't agree with the alphabet
part but the writing part for darn Shore
there are other things going on in
archaic and then Classical Greece that
made for the Plato and the aristotles
and the Socrates the time okay but what
we do know is if you can write something
down you can look at it and
reconsider you can say is this really
what I mean is this what I think it's
interesting when I was writing who wrote
this and I was working on the chapter on
creativity I didn't know what I was
going to conclude I knew the research
that I wanted to go through how I wanted
to begin the chapter with talking about
the birthplace of Leonardo da Vinci and
how we we honor him as much as we do his
work and so forth but I didn't know what
I was going to conclude until I was
about 3/4 of the way through the chapter
and I said now I get it and what is it
that I
got that human beings care about human
beings being creative they care about
their own creativity levels which may be
fairly
minor or they could be pretty good you
could win the booker prize for your book
you could win a Nobel Prize for your
book but we do smaller things as well
you could get a a blue ribbon at a state
fair for your apple
pie state fairs are big things and
county fairs are big things in the
United States where there's still a tad
of Agriculture left um so you feel good
about that you feel you have created
something does the world care well not
particularly but creativity functions at
many levels and the conclusion that I
came to in the chapter on creativity was
that I don't care how good AI is at
creating
art at creating music and it creating
writing what I care about is whether
human beings can create and what it
means to us as individuals and as
societies to have created something the
example I I was giving a lecture I was
part of a penel discussion a couple of
days go and the example that I gave was
this you walk into a
museum and I was talking about the
National Gallery here in Washington DC
and I see you see it all the time people
walk up to a painting they see uhuh this
was a Leonardo a da Vinci and then they
step back and they look at the
painting but they only interested in the
painting because they saw who created it
now you may say this is not a good way
to appreciate art but it's a good way to
be part of a society that has said for
right or for wrong this is a great
artist when the Impressionists started
out and they were given this nasty name
impressionist this is not actual
painting you know Van Go stuff is junk I
mean I don't even see a real cypress
trees
but we changed our minds over time and
now we come up you there's a big
impressionist exhibit going on right now
in the National Gallery and I promise
you there are people going up and
reading the tag and then standing back
and saying yeah that's a really
impressive I'm impressed with the
Impressions painting so why do we do
that because creators are part of our
culture and AI is not and never will be
part of that human
culture beautiful absolutely beautiful
so I was thinking about this that a
couple of things the the first is that
idea of value attribution you'll only
give it value when you know who created
this that's I mean we we see that on
this show is the Innovation show we see
that in Innovation all the time it's
it's not an idea meritocracy it depends
on where the idea comes from which
actually should have no impact act on
the idea the idea should be the idea
that's one thing but the the thing that
I really I set out on with all this
Odyssey of your work it was I remember
when my older son when he was younger
was terrible at sport like I was as a
kid I was all and last picked he he was
absolutely that kid and they did a
school sports day and he did the race so
they did this big long race around these
football pitches a few times and he was
so stressed doing it and I just said
just finish it that's all doesn't matter
if you realize just finish and so he did
he finished and loads of kids gave up
but when I as and I went off I had to go
to work so I left I waited till it was
over went to work came back later on and
there was a medal at the door just on
the ground and people think that I'm a
terrible dad I came in I what's the
medal for and he's like oh they gave us
all medal really proud that you finished
but you didn't win
and it was one of these moments that was
I think I think it was so important I
hope it
was so I I said to him that that's not
how the world works you don't get a
medal just for being there and he he's
and he didn't care about the medal that
was the point he didn't care about it
and I was like oh maybe we should just
throw the medal away and he threw it
away right so I bear with me here so
years later today he's very good at
Jiu-Jitsu and MMA and he won his first
gold medal a few years ago he Treasures
that medal and I treasure that medal
because I know how much effort went into
that years of toil and effort and
failure went into that medal and I say
all that say for me when you're when
you're a piece of art particularly in a
piece of art like in the Leonardo days
the struggle of the artist to create
that with the tools they had in place is
incredible and I I think that's what
you're valuing is the struggle and
that's where this all came from for me
is that if you deprive a child or a
student the the Journey of the struggle
they don't build that mental pathway
that neural pathway and that therefore
the future of humanity is going to be
making poor decisions if they can make
decisions at all I mean it's that piece
that I thought was so fascinating about
your history not just this book but the
echo in the past of all your other work
and how that's all accumulated to give
you this unique lens to comment on this
all right but there a couple of comments
and some
will agree with you for throwing away
the medal and some will not all right I
didn't by the way I didn't throw the
metal I I may have HED that it should be
thrown
away it doesn't matter whether it
physically was F away or not all right
so one of the problems in the United
States right now is great
inflation so you have a child who's
seven or eight years old who's getting
all A's well they shouldn't be getting
grades at that age but they are you have
colleges and universities the kind that
I teach in where the the average grade
Once Upon a Time was a c you know a is
best and E is not so great
at and the average grade at my
University now is an A minus there's
something wrong with this and this is
typical across the United States so it's
sending a weird kind of message to
students that you're just doing well and
then there reasons for the grade
inflation that I won't go into at the
moment unless you want
to similarly if you go to um and there's
some kind of petition you know you're
having an archery day or you're having a
swimming whatever and everybody gets a
medal of something I remember my son was
in a camp and the phrase used by the
Athletics counselor at the end of
competition was we're all winners at and
the name of the camp now interestingly
it was a music camp and they didn't do
this for music so if you wanted to play
in a Solo recital you had to work really
hard and you had to get selected and
there were different levels of Orchestra
and if you weren't that good you were in
the middle level Orchestra and if you
were really good you had had to work at
it okay there are are ways of telling
people we're all good and did my son
think he was a winner no he was sort of
like your son and that he wasn't great
in athletics then but he has been to
come since then including in
MMA okay but then there's the question
of does everything that is creative
require struggle
I think of some of the things that I
write and some of them are really hard
and they're a struggle and I end up
doing seven eight nine drafts before I'm
even quasi happy with
them and other times we've been writing
the same sorts of things I to sit down
and write and you know I clean up the
language and I get rid of repeated
vocabulary words and I try to make it
more friendly because for you know first
time out of the gate my writing tends to
be very formal and I come to write more
informally over time but in terms of the
idea and the structure sometimes it just
comes and that is true I think you'll
find with some other writers it's true
of some painters in term um you know
take classical music and I'll talk
specifically about
classical um you look at how much
music BOS wrote
and I promise you he didn't struggle
over every piece he would have been long
dead had that happened and you look at
Mozart and Mozart died young but he has
a huge UA okay
so was he a fantastic composer yes was
there struggle in every piece no they
couldn't and I mean he had his own
struggles he didn't have enough money he
had kids he couldn't feed them you know
and he had health issues but sometimes
you you just do your thing so do you
have to learn at some point surely it
take Picasso for a moment um
interestingly when you look at Picasso's
early work and Picasso talked about this
a little bit as well it's very
classically trained he learned how to do
art and then he decided that not how I
want to do
art and I suspect that a lot of his
later works didn't take a fraction of
the time that his earlier Works did
because he had become
himself okay but the new things that he
was doing weren't using the techniques
of the classical style that he had spent
I'm sure here's perfecting so what does
it mean to say it's the struggle for the
newer Picasso I don't know he has since
died so we can't ask um but I think it's
it's a more Nuance
story
um developing a craft is critically
important you're not going to get a gold
medal in in mixed martial arts unless
you have trained your body and your body
has changed and it's become a new you as
it
were but you know Grandma Moses
did
paintings and she didn't have a whole
lot of training and her paintings sell
for a great deal thank you so
it's it's a more complex story I think
and it's it it it's going to vary by
individuals and even for those
individuals it's going to vary by the
time in their life and whether they just
feel I can sit and write this piece I
mean I have written op EDS before which
means get about 700 to 900 words and
Rewritten and Rewritten and Rewritten
Rewritten and then sometimes I'll just
write it read it twice and send it off
and the editor says GE love um and the
thing that I spent time on uh I wanted
to share this with you because the guest
on the show shared Me This brilliant
quote a guy called Peter compo was on
the show his book is here the emergent
approach to strategy and he was talking
about Innovation and he was saying how
Innovation is a highly
disciplined skill while people think
it's messy you know it it can be messy
but it starts with a discipline so
what's the challenge I'm trying to solve
trying to what's the problem what's the
bottleneck I'm trying to get through and
he shared a quote by Charlie Parker and
it was like master your music master
your instrument then forget all of that
and just play and that's where I was
going with the the struggle that you you
can have moments where you get into the
Flow State and you nail it but it comes
from all the work all the reading all
the struggle of that that's that's what
I'm trying to get at that you mentioned
in the book the Norwegian system when
trbt came out there was a huge outcry
against the government that this is
going to destroy
education and that would be one of my
concerns for the society is that if
students do this more and more and they
Outsource the thinking the reading the
the YouTube video like we did with the
llm for your interviews that's parsing
of the knowledge is not me doing it and
yes that can be absolutely a pain in the
bus but I need to do it in order to be
able to let this marinate and it's the
marination like when you wrote those up
EDS you thoughts marinate for a long
time fusing maybe discussing with other
people trusted advisers partners and
there before you kind of hone you chisel
away that idea and you eventually come
out with something and if you don't do
that at all you miss all that and that
that's where I'm saying that's the gym
work that's where you're building the
muscle but let me make a little
distinction here for some things I have
been thinking about the topic for a long
time when chatu PT came online on the
30th of November 20
22 I started writing a piece that
eventually ran in the
conversation in January now I had not
been thinking about chpt because chbt
did not exist before then I've been
thinking about thinking I've been
thinking about writing but here was
something new that I was writing about
and I had to ask how is it potentially
going to have an impact on our writing
and thinking and I hadn't thought about
those things until I sat down to write
this piece saying I know it's going to
have an impact let me try to figure out
what it might be so I had written lots
of things over the years but not on this
particular topic right so talk about use
it or lose it skills and whether that is
a foreign language which is one of the
areas where it's pretty clear if you
don't keep honing those keep practicing
those skills you're probably going to
lose them we know that there are lots of
AI tools being used by law firms now
now increasingly they can write the
briefs for you they can pull cases and
there have been some famous examples in
the last two years of lawyers using chat
GPT to pull cases but actually those
cases didn't exist and it was the judge
who figured out they didn't exist and
these are big problems but if you put
into your llm only real cases and you
can do that and that's been happening
actually for several decades they been
ways of putting them into it wasn't an
llm before it was just a database so you
know there the cases are real you have
your brief with all the cases cited
automatically generated the lawyers
remember how to do this anymore there
are law firms that are saying well we
have to let our lawyers practice every
once in a while doing it the
old-fashioned way because
otherwise they're not going to know how
to do
it I probably put in the book cuz I cite
it when I can uh myself saying to my
students what do you know when the
internet is down what do you know can
you write by
hand can you
spell what do you know and I would ask
the same question what do you know when
open AI is not charging in US Dollars
$20 a month for the latest version of
GPT whatever it's going to be or you
didn't have that money or they upped the
price or whatever it is and you can't
use that tool and and meta doesn't have
llama for free and
whatever what are you able to write and
I'm not even asking are you going to get
a job compared with someone who has the
skills on how to use this what's in your
head an example that I'm very fond of
that is not mine but it is from
something about 30 mil down the road for
me namely the US Naval Academy in
Anapolis
Maryland the Naval Academy decided a
couple of years ago that it was going to
train the students in the Naval Academy
how use old-fashioned navigation
equipment and the reason they did that
was not because they were worried the
satellites would go down or get because
there's a lot of fear of of cyber crime
they wanted the the mid shipment as they
became officers to be able to navigate
at se if they had to the oldfashioned
way so the same is true of why I believe
people need to write themselves I don't
care how good chat BT gets or the other
equivalent LM I don't care I care who we
become so this is in in essence a
version of the creativity argument I
care that we have the skills
I care that we have the will I care that
we're willing to and this goes to your
put forth the effort that we're willing
to P forth the effort to do writing that
represents who we
are so part of the question
is do we care that the writing is an
expression of us I wrote a lot in who
wrote this about um the importance of
personal voice of whether that which
comes with your name attached to it has
an essence of who you are of of what
your style is of what's in your head of
what anecdotes you have because you have
this lived experience when you interview
students about how they feel about using
these kinds of
tools a larger number than you might
predict will say things like I don't
want to use these because I don't want
my writing to sound and I'm quoting them
a survey that was done in the United
States a couple ago um of what do you do
you use these tools do you like these AI
tools and so forth I don't want to sound
like a box of mechanical
pigeons I want the research I want the
ideas I want the sentiment to be mine
and in other kinds of work I've done and
there was a little bit of this
represented in in who wrote this on
handwriting versus on a digital key I
surveyed students in the United States
and in Europe heavily in Italy but other
European countries crypted and what the
university age students told me over and
again was when I write by hand it's me
writing it's real it's an expression of
who I am I think better I concentrate
better and all those kinds of positive
accolades simply by looking at the
physical connection you have with a
writing Implement and some kind of we'll
call it paper because that's mostly what
we write on by people know the
difference they notice the difference
they feel it's an encapsulation of them
whereas putting fingers on a keyboard
overwhelmingly is not and if you think
about what AI generated text is like
it's your fingers on a keyboard putting
in that prompt oh these days you could
also use voice I I know that but
everything is digital and there's no
there's
no reality it there's a move in
Psychology embodied cognition that says
to know and to use your brain to come to
know or to come to think or to come to
feel is not just something that's
happening in your cerebral
cortex it's happening in your whole body
body so I see the way that you're
sitting right now with your you know
just sort of I don't have the fingers
quite right okay so there's this
thinking of feeling that I'm assuming
that you know maybe I can think about
what she's saying more if I if I just
rest a little bit when we read we sit in
particular positions and that becomes
part of our reading I've done pH with
particularly middle and high school
students in Norway and in Amsterdam and
international schools and they will tell
you that when they are
reading and when they're writing that
the physicality of it matters so the
physicality of holding a real book
they'll tell you reading is real I mean
that they're use using the word I dig it
up uh when you are holding um 20% of all
the responses to the question of what is
it that you like best about what's the
mo let me get this right what is the
most important part to you of reading in
a physical book reading in print 20% of
it was 400 and some answers of the
students were something about
tactil something about the haptics about
the touch it's the feel of the paper
it's holding the book in my hand it's
being able to put my fingers in and
saying I've read this much put it this
way I've read this much and I have this
much more to go it matters to
readers that something is real so coming
back to this question of how much we are
are consigning our thinking to an AI
it's not just the issue of the AI doing
the analysis for us and not and are not
having to learn how to do it and to
personalize it and to keep doing it it's
also our involvement with
thinking is a bodily involvement and
that doesn't happen with digital devices
which is how for better for worse we're
going to access AI we're going to come a
little bit back if you're okay on time
to talk about some of your earlier Works
you've been mapping this for years which
is why you know I was going to say I
know you didn't prepare to write about
jbt but you had built that mus over
years it was just a different exercise
now you were talking about screens
you're talking about digital you were
talking about Audi books and now we
absorb information how we read
essentially right but um I I wanted to
share you know that study of the London
taxi drivers you know the famous study
about yeah so maybe I'll let you share
it and because I think it's what what's
so interesting about this and I'll te
this up for you to maybe share with our
audiences that you use it or you lose it
that's clear from that study and it was
Robert zapolski who told me about this
study first that it when I first
discovered it but I I often pass by when
I cycle I'll pass by trash vans that are
carrying the trash yeah and I was
wondering to myself I was wondering do
those guys have an enlarged whatever
part of the brain deals with smell or
turns off I'm sure they do you know I
was like that would be an interesting
study to do because I'm sure they're
just immune to it after a while but I
share all that to say you talked about
that this part of the brain and I'm
going to butcher the name the codat
nucleus is lit up when you're going
through the learning process and again
students and and we talking about more
students that have autonomy so not
Primary School here in Ireland primary
school or secondary school students who
were have oversight but the students
that go through the struggle are
building that neural pathway versus when
they go to college then just like you
said about languages that you lose it I
used to speak fluent German I speak
fluent French still but I lost my German
because I never practiced it and it's
that piece for me is just it's just a
shame to lose something or to never have
it in the first place okay so you raised
the
London Black Card taxi drivers this was
a famous study done and there have been
other iterations of it but I'll talk
about the original one done by Elanor
Maguire and uh in London and what they
did is took people who had officially
gotten the knowledge as it's known of
going through arduous training of
learning all the streets all the sites
how to get from place a to place B and
by the way you might want to know that
the British museum is here um
and those taxi drivers she um put into
MRI scanners and found that an area of
their brain and particularly was the
hippocampus which is responsible for
navigation and it's responsible for
other things too but particularly for
navigation and she found that the
hippocampus was larger in those taxi
drivers who had gone through the
training to get knowledge and
particularly had then been driving for
some number of years now we know that
certain parts of the brain do in llarge
depending upon what you were doing them
um a simple example is with musicians
they all take string musicians and
particularly violinists because they
played the violin um and the hand that
is moving the
bow is changing your brain if you go
through the arduous task of practicing
over and over and over and over again
you can do see it in the
MRI
okay now what happens with mental
abilities you know does Einstein have
did Einstein have a different brain from
me and they indeed looked at A's brain
there was a whole book written on
Einstein's
brain it's really really hard to
pinpoint where in the brain intelligence
is so let's say you take um an IQ test
if you believe that these actually
measure anything worthwhile and you've
got somebody who measures an IQ of
250 which is off the charts really
wonderful looking at that person's brain
are you going to see any difference you
know let's let's assume they're not D
you know that this really smart person
is not a black card taxi driver and is
not a violinist okay you going to see
any
difference there's a mage of evidence
that maybe people who uh read books in
print versus digitally have slight
differences in their brain we don't
really know this people who are good
spellers are they smarter is there
something in their brain we don't have
data on that to my knowledge anyway so
it's going to be a long time incoming I
predict know who knows but um it's going
to be a long time coming I suspect
before we can can say well because the
lawyer used the software rather than
writing the briefs himself or herself
that lawyer's brain is not as whatever
because you have lost your German
although you kept your French as
something change that somebody can see
in your brain I don't know that's um
being bilingual by itself is great and
it changes the way that we think we know
that but is that measurable in your
brain I don't know so it's it's it's
nuanced what I do know is because I'd
much rather we be living beings moving
through time and space living Our Lives
thinking writing reading creating in
other formats I'd like to believe that
whatever the MRI scan show we are
becoming better people for ourselves and
for our family is and for our societies
as a result I love the idea of you were
saying when they write with the pen
people write with a pen and I often
think this I've I've one book pale in
comparison to your 11 almost 11 but the
I write every week and I I feel
sometimes
that it takes a while to get into that
brain wave state that you feel like
you're ready and I have to have certain
conditions Etc but I I genuinely feel
that if I actually write from that from
a different place sometimes it it it's
just different it it's it's got me it's
just got something in there and it and
it doesn't mean that it's going to be a
great article or a great book or
anything like that but it's just it's
it's what you're trying to get out it's
what you're trying to get across right
so I think and having gone through that
I would love people to also go through
that experience and be able to do it and
not miss out on it and it's that that
they worry about but I wanted to change
a little bit now and this is probably
something that dawned on people which is
with all this AI that there has to be
some impact on society there has to be
some impact on jobs and this story of
Queen Elizabeth getting presented with
the knitting machine
1589 and she denies the patent and this
was the days when patents was gold and
this guy who actually created it was a
clergy man he went to France eventually
got the patent but what it really
highlights is Elizabeth whether she was
right or wrong saw the impact that this
could have on jobs and for me that's a
metaphor for regulation that you go okay
this is going to we're not quite ready
for this yet and I'm going to link it
then to something that you said that the
US Department of Labor estimates that
American Writers ad copy writers grant
writers speech writers and more
collectively earn and I could not
believe this figure
$675 billion dollar every year that's a
huge amount of taxes paid to the
government but it's livelihoods for so
many people and that that doesn't
include people who write or in there as
well the gig work that you can't account
for so easily
and this speaks to the idea that you're
talked about paral legals if I'm working
in that those jobs are just being wiped
out and I'm less of a tech Optimist than
I used to be because I used to see that
in the past each technological jump of
each Revolution created more jobs now I
hope one thing I hope that I am like the
person not like a lite but I'm the
person who's who's just not seeing how
this is going to create more jobs but I
just can't see it because the businesses
that are dominating today are platform
businesses and platform businesses are
measured on Revenue per employee and if
that's high so they have less employees
per higher Revenue they're valued more
wall Street's happier so the only way
people going to make money from that is
if they have got stocks in those
businesses so it's it's a it's a real
concern but also a dilemma and I
wondered what you thought about that all
right the first thing I will say is you
talked about how much revenue according
to the the US Department of Labor is
generated by people who have the
classification writer look at the year
on the
data it is not
2024 those data will take a couple years
to run so I will change from earn to
earned past tense okay so this is making
me sound as if I'm pessimistic am I
pessimistic well I will take as an
example someone who just won a Nobel
Prize in chemistry by the name of Demis
hbus who was co-founder of Deep Mind
which was first known for creating with
uh game Alpha
go which bested a go master that the
ancient game of
Go and then he created something called
Alpha fold and it was for Alpha fold
that he got the Nobel Prize now it
wasn't that specific item but Alpha fold
is a program that was created in order
to determine the structure of
proteins and what he said
after Alpha fold was shown to be so good
is this is why I did the games not
because I was interested in
go and be able to best a human being
that was fun and hasus knows a lot about
gaming he was producing video games from
way on early but he wanted to do
something that would change the
capabilities we have in the field of
medicine and health in order to better
understand the structure of proteins
because deciphering unfolding
proteins the old-fashioned human way
took years to do a single protein but
now if you can do it with AI there are
all these new kinds of drugs you can
invent there are all these new kinds of
diseases you can figure out a way to
attack in the sense of so it seems to me
that one way to think about the promise
of AI is not to ask how can it do the
things that humans can do so you don't
know if a human did it or whether an AI
did it but to ask how do we really turn
this on our head which we started
talking about after chat GPT came online
namely how do we augment what humans do
well the problem for the augment
discussion for the last two years is
every time we said but now the only the
human can do such and
such well the AI caught up so we don't
know right now what it is that humans
should be looking to do themselves but
it seems to me that the most important
thing we can do in education the most
important thing we can do in industry is
to ask what is it that only humans can
do that will also benefit them so if AI
catches up fine what else is it that
only humans can come up with what kinds
of ideas we know that AI can be really
useful for brainstorming and there are
lots of people who have said from the
beginning when chat gbt came online you
know use it for brainstorming that's
great don't have it do your work we to
add to this an ethical
component that people have to care to
create for themselves and to know for
themselves and to express who they are
in their writing or in their other forms
of creativity it has to matter to them
when it comes to writing and I've
written about this a lot in the last two
years and if higher
education and I'm speaking for the
United States more than anything else
the higher education doesn't care to
devote the resources of the faculty to
work individually with students to talk
about their ideas of what they might
want to write to look at a draft to go
through it together to then hone it
together and that's very labor intensive
and it costs right and most universities
and colleges in the United States have
one or two English comp classes and then
it's over and then the students quality
of writing traditionally has declined
after that because the teachers don't
care about the writing they're not
grating it anyway if we don't care to
nurture writing why should the students
care okay so there's there's a larger
puzzle here it's not all on the learner
to motivate himself or herself there has
to be an infrastructure that cares as
well I think that's a a really nice way
to conclude today what do you think
I'm
done I mean this this has been a lot of
fun but I think I've given you enough
food for
thought and an AI would never say that
Naomi AI would keep talking AI would not
be asked its opinion in the way that
there was a mind that could decide it
was absolutely brilliant let's share
where people can find you your books
where can people find you my American
University web page is probably the
simplest way I'll link to that now me as
well and when will the new book be out
my hope is that a year it'll at least be
done what happened with the older book
and I think I told the story of the book
I don't know I had submitted the final
manuscript for who wrote this in mid
November 2022 two weeks later chat gbt
came out and I am incredibly grateful to
my editor and to Stanford University
press because the plan had been for my
book to come out
in late in in Spring
2024 for who wrote this and they said
you know what it needs to come out now
and I rushed the revisions and they
rushed the production and they got it
out in September 20123 and how that
dance I can do with the new book we'll
see we're going to link to where to find
it again and I hope to have you back on
when you have the new book it's been an
absolute pleasure author of who wrote
this Naomi es Baron thank you for
joining us thank you for having me it's
been fun talking
