I woke up and said oh I get it there's
no God and there's no free will I wasted
my first 20 years out there showing that
if you were high ranking you had lower
levels of stress hormones lower blood
pressure and it took me about 20 years
out there to begin to realize your rank
is nowhere near the most important thing
it's what does your rank mean in your
particular troop if you've got a choice
and you want to have nice low stress
hormone levels and live to ripe old age
don't choose to be high ranking choose
to have a whole lot of social
affiliation where you actually can gain
psychological benefit from it I spent 20
years thinking while I was learning
about was like go be a big successful
capitalist baboon or something in the
hierarchy but the good thing is it's not
that hard to change your categories or
to change it in somebody else
so I always start my interviews talking
about the early days and you know we're
going to ultimately get into a
conversation about how there's no such
thing as free will that's that's the I
think the foundation of your your latest
work and um and how everything that
we're experiencing in life right now
individually and maybe even as a society
is predetermined based on a million
variables So to that end would you would
you do us an uh the honor of of just
telling us how your upbringing sort of
predetermined where you ended up now in
life I know that I know that you're from
Brooklyn and I know that you were you
grew up uh as an orthodox Jew but now
you're an atheist and there were some
things that happened 12 13 14 years old
that were very pivotal in in that uh in
that shift in your in your life so can
you can you talk a little bit about
that yeah it was you know the usual that
kind of does in somebody's religiosity
when they're like looking at the details
and extending them and seeing that
there's all sorts of
irreconcilable uh sort of conflicts that
come up in it
um the the the key thing for me was
you know more more people have lost
their faith during reading about Exodus
because what did the horses do why do
they have to drown the horses why do
they have to drown the first borns um
and that usually is is the problem that
comes up there um my version was Moses
goes to Pharaoh after one of the plagues
and Pharaoh says Uncle I give up okay
you guys can go and then God hardens
Pharaoh's heart and Pharaoh changes his
mind and say no you guys can't go so
another plague on Egypt and Moses goes
to him and Pharaoh says okay this time
except God hardens his heart and wait a
second he's like forget the horses and
the babies like anyone there is getting
punished because of an external thing
controlling his behavior and then God
judges and
you know the usual sort of none of this
makes any sense and um that and some
more sort of personal aspects of all of
it just kind of combined to one night at
two in the morning I woke up and said oh
I get it there's no
God and there's no Free
Will and the universe is this big empty
and different place and that's kind of
where I've been at ever
since so you were only a teenager at the
time um were you vocal about this new
understanding of the world at that time
and did you get pushed back from your
parents or from your teachers or whoever
you talked to about this or or is this
something you kind of kept to yourself
um mostly kept to myself um my parents
pretty much went to their graves many
years later not knowing I was an atheist
because you
know why bother they're they're all all
that's good to do is upset them you know
it's not that important
um you know the rest of the world I was
pretty soon surrounded by a sufficiently
sort of educated left leaning cynical
crowd so that none of that stuff seemed
very surprising it certainly wiped out
my capacity to listen to teaching from
rabbis
and your mom took you to see uh to the
Natural his history museum I'm assuming
to see some primates and that sort of
lit up something inside of you H how did
that how did you explain that with this
this sort of
atheism's belief how do you how did you
explain that sense of excitement or
inspiration well I sort of uh fixated on
primates uh you know was my goto what do
you want to do for your birthday take me
to the Museum of Natural History that
was just Heaven um I kind of imprinted
on primates quite a few years earlier
than that and I don't know what it was
something about like these animals and
these African diaramas like I just
wanted to live inside there I did not
want to live in my neighborhood in
Brooklyn I was not having a good time
um suddenly a place like that seemed
like the most like wonderful place to
escape to and maybe even be a non-human
primate in the process uh so I happen to
imprint on mountain gorillas and I I
still remember the you know the diarama
which is probably a0 years old now that
sort of I looked at it and said ah I
want to be there I want to be with them
that that mountain bag that's Silverback
mountain gorilla there that's that's the
nearest thing I'm ever going to have to
a grandfather there we go that's what I
want to do you also wrote in your book
your recent book about depression and
how you first started experiencing that
as a teenager so was there something
that
happened maybe in unassociated with any
of this that yeah um I would say it had
much to do with deciding there's no God
there's no Free Will and 's no purpose
to anything that sort of sent me in a
downward spiral that I've been sort of
mucking around and ever since that that
seemed I don't know that
that sort of struggling in a book where
I'm hoping to convince people there's no
free will whatsoever um that's the
pretty dangerous outcome because if
we're just biological machines the
search for meaning is pretty damn
challenging and all of that and and I
did not particularly have the
psychological means as a 15-year-old to
kind of handle all that but yeah that
that is readily where that takes one and
just give us a little montage and I'm
working my way up to your work but just
a little Montage of of how your life
sort of unfolded from there you
obviously went and got educated you
became an academic and Etc and you went
to the to Kenya you know 21 but just
give us a little idea of how all that
happened or maybe the motivation behind
all of that because it seems like you've
been very focused since you were you
know a teenager on this one thing and
I'm just I'm just curious how that
played out pretty focused I I uh when I
was still like 15 I called up this
professor at University of Chicago who
was a major primatologist like at home
saying hi I love your stuff if I be if
I'm able to come to your uh University
can I work with you um and they seemed
very puzzled and ironically 20 years
later I spent a summer working at their
field site um I was writing fan letters
to primatologists I wrote one to Dean FY
who never answered but just imprinted on
that I I managed to get my high school
to agree to give me a language credit
for a self-paced Swahili course because
I knew I was heading for East Africa uh
went to college to study instead of with
the the the University of Chicago baboon
Grand puas the Harvard Grand puah and
worship at his feet um and I sort of
brown noosed with him from the day I got
there sufficiently so that four years
later he said what the hell let's let's
send you out to this field site he had a
a grad student who's finishing his
thesis there uh with the baboon so I
kind of overlapped a bit and inherited
The Troop um I would say the biggest
complication that came up was freshman
year somewhat arbitrarily I took an
intro Neuroscience class and got blown
away by that and
suddenly uh it seemed equally
interesting to try to understand
behavior and volition and who we are and
search for meaning blah blah all of that
from the standpoint of brains than from
the standpoint of evolutionary biology
so ever since I've been kind of being a
half-ass neurobiologist and half-ass
primatologist just oscillating between
the two um because it was kind of clear
by then
intellectually Neuroscience was more
interesting to me uh getting to just go
and like lived with wild primates for
three months a year um there was no way
I was giving that up so sort of a lot of
my effort over the years has been trying
to tie the two ends
together hey so a lot of you all have
been reaching out with your guest
suggestions and look I appreciate it I
do and to help make it easier for those
guests to say yes to my invitation I
need you to subscribe to this channel
just hit the Subscribe button below and
that's literally the best way to help me
get you that guest on my podcast all
right thank you so much for helping out
and back to the show when it comes to
primates can you talk a little bit
about the difference in baboons chimps
monkeys Apes like why did you choose
baboons as opposed to any other primates
yeah I kind of got stuck with them
against my will I really wanted mountain
gorillas um who with the most amazing
animals on Earth and they're phenomenal
um but I W up with baboons because
they're vastly easier to study the
department had a grad student doing
babony uh the main person doing mountain
gorillas was very psychiatrically
unstable famously so uh Dan
FY
and uh everybody told me do not go
anywhere near her and that site um
that's wildly unstable um but but I was
initially bummed out with a baboon
mountain gorillas probably if I had like
hung out with mountain gorillas for 30
years I would become some sort of
Buddhist monk by then they're
incredibly some projecting on my part of
introspective they have very low levels
of aggression they're there're these
ruminating wonderful and baboons are
these like hysterical backstabbing sons
of all they do is
like have major conflict and betray
their coalitional partners and bite
somebody who did nothing because they're
in a bad mood um and that actually
turned out to be wonderful baboons have
these big troops 50 to 100 animals uh
males who all grew up elsewhere and
showed up in adolescence to transfer in
females who spend their whole life in
the same troop so females these
complicated lineages and who you're mom
is and matriarchs and males just showing
it up showing up and just punching it
out savagely with each other uh
thereafter and it wound up being perfect
because sort of this was my bridge
between the lab work and the field work
studying stress um I W up being
extremely interested in what stress does
to the brain and what it has to do with
brain aging and dementia and depression
and things like that and that's kind of
where my lab stuff went
um and the field stuff went in the
direction of trying to understand see
you got these baboons they got different
social ranks which is incredibly
important they got different patterns of
social affiliate they got different
personalities all of that so given that
who gets the stress related
diseases and what does it do with how
their bodies are working where I was
able to Dart anesthetize them and do all
sorts of clinical tests why were they
perfect
because like baboons living out in the
seretti this is like the greatest place
on Earth to be a baboon there's like
tons of food you only have to forage
about three hours a day to get your day
calories the Predators don't mess with
you much because you're in these big
troops infants usually survive all of
that and the key implication was if you
only have to spend three hours a day
getting your food you've got nine hours
of free time every day to devote to
being total jerks to each other and just
generating psychological stress and
social stress and for 99% of beasts out
there what stress is about is somebody's
trying to eat you or there's a famine or
whatever bab wounds were just like
westernized humans they've got the
luxury of sitting around and they can
generate spend all day long generating
psychosocial nonsense with each other
and overwhelmingly
like if you're a baboon and you've got
elevated levels of stress hormones it's
not because a lion is chasing you it's
because some other baboon has been
working really hard to make you
miserable they're totally schemy and
backstabbing and awful and while that
made them kind of hard to turn me into a
Buddhist monk um it was perfect for
studying a model of like westernized
stress none of us die of famines anymore
and the privileged West we all get these
diseases of lifestyle of you know slow
accumulation of damage reflecting stress
and so do the baboons they get high
blood pressure they get problems with
ulcers their immune systems don't work
as well as a function of who they are in
the hierarchy and what their
personalities are and what their
patterns of social affiliation are and
so they turned out to be great sort of
model for us yeah I've read one your
book um that they're very obviously
social creatures can they have a casual
exchange like you and I are having right
now or or how do they communicate is it
mostly through body language and
gesturing and GRS um body language
gesturing the thing that trumps
everything in terms of baboon Paradise
is when they're grooming each other uh
social grooming is like not only gets
rid of like parasites in the guy groom
and you gets to eat it then gross um but
more importantly grooming is like
socially calming you know they get a a a
close scare with a lion or something and
then immediately afterward everyone
spends 15 minutes grooming each other
just to kind of calm down um and what
winds up then being interesting with
that is who's grooming who and who's
getting groomed back how much and is it
being reciprocated and that's where you
see the baboon inequality coming through
big time um there's all sorts of
gestural stuff where somebody like rubs
somebody else's nose in their low rank
just because you can you force them into
some sort of subordinate gesture thing
while you're doing a dominant
vocalization thing that you know they're
going about their business all day a lot
of it being social interaction social
comp competition social support some
nice altruistic stuff amid close
relatives some miserably aggressive
stuff between individuals who aren't
related um yeah we you'll get is an
example of this sort of the
psychological stress of it you get a
low-ranking female she's sitting there
and she has to spend 30 seconds digging
some root thing out of the ground to eat
it and now she's digging another one and
Along Comes the highest ranking female
in the troop walks over to her glares at
her and the low ranking one has to get
up and move 10 feet away and our high
ranking matriarch sits down there for a
minute and the low ranking one now finds
a new spot and starts digging in there
and the high ranking one comes over and
boots are out they will spend an hour
just booting her around there's a
hundred billion Blades of grass
everywhere you look it's not resource
acquisition it's just I think I'm going
to hassle her and that's what's going on
all day there when this is happening
where are you are you sitting in a truck
with some binoculars or yeah basically
in a notebook doing that whole chain
good all scene um you know this was a
troop fortunately that was habituated so
you could be uh you could hang out in
the middle of them without them being
disturbed you you were some sort of
large mobile Boulder or something uh it
was even possible to do some stuff on
foot with them which you didn't do a ton
of just because of uh danger of other
animals and such but yeah they'd just be
going about this I mean as a great
example of like the misery in their
society the majority of baboon
aggression is displaced aggression
which is to say you are number three you
just got in your head to challenge
number two he is just trashed you and
you spin around and you attack number
five who spins around and chases number
10 who spins around and bites a female
who spins around and knocks somebody
else's infant out of a tree all in 15
seconds just rolling downhill like that
and what that means is like huge
elements of psychological stress are
lack of control and lack of
predictability and you're sitting there
minding your own business and somebody
else is having a bad day and without any
predictability and warning and without
any control you get your rear end
slashed um so it's like it's an amazing
landscape for just grinding
psychological stress because they got
nothing else to do because their
stomachs are full and like they can't go
predate something because they're not
very good at that and no one will mate
with them so why don't I go just hassle
someone because I
can right and you went to Harvard right
so I I I I read I read a lot as a
meditation person I've read a lot about
Herbert Benson's work Dr Benson's work
and I know he studied uh he was one of I
don't know if he was Walter Canon's
Protege or he studied in the lab the
Canon lab but apparently Walt Dr Walter
Canon was the guy who coin fight flight
reaction and he studied I'm not sure
which primates he studied but from what
I could tell he studied some primates in
a laboratory setting yeah and exposed
them to Electric shocks or something
like that so what my question is your
research obviously is in the field and
you're studying primates in their
natural habitat how what what what
Revelations did your work um
due to further Dr Canon's initial work
on the fight flight reaction or the
stress response yeah he's one of the two
gods of stress physiology the other was
this guy Han cier um there's sort of two
branches to the stress response there's
the sympathetic nervous system and that
was Canon's deal and then there's these
glucorticoid hormones like cortisol
hydrocortisone um and that was so's
contribution and ever since the canites
and the cellulites have been fighting
over which branch is more important um
and I'm definitely of the uh the gluc
corticoid branch but I thought initially
what I was going to go out and show was
like if you get a choice in the matter
you want to be a high ranking baboon
because you got all the psychological
advantages you've got control you got
predictability you got Outlets if you're
having a crummy day you can always get
somebody to groom you and you don't have
to groom them back because you're high
ranking that sort of thing all sorts of
psychological advantages there and I
wasted my first 20 years out there
showing that um showing if you were high
ranking you had lower levels of stress
hormones lower blood pressure your
reproductive endocrine system worked
better all sort so it seemed like okay
what's the big lesson go out and compete
and winwin win and be dominant and it
took me about 20 years out there to
begin to realize your rank is nowhere
near the most important thing it's what
does your rank mean in your particular
troop different troops have different
cultures and that's not like a oh my God
Disney Bambi sort of termed it's that's
like a legitimate term these days terms
of how readily do you get dumped on if
you're low ranking some troops it
happens all the time and others it never
so what's your rank what does it mean in
terms of what kind of culture is it in
your Tru how stable is the hierarchy
what's your personality do you see
threat
everywhere are you type a and in a very
literal way or are you able to tell the
difference between a threatening
circumstance and a neutral one and it
turns out more of the physiology the
stress physiology is explained by that
one variable than your dominance rank
like if you're sitting there and your
worst rival on the whole planet shows up
and takes a nap 50 yards away if that
makes you crazed and agitated and you
stop doing whatever it is you were doing
and you're all anxious
and you're GNA have like two three times
the cortisol levels in your bloodstream
as somebody of the same rank who can sit
there and say the guys snapping this is
not a big deal this is I if you see
threat everywhere you've got a much more
active stress response independent of
your rank and it was a bigger predictor
a bigger variable of that um could you
get some control and social
circumstances that was a predictor as
well did you have social affiliation how
often was there somebody you could go
like lean next to and it turned out that
all of that stuff
personality cultural context of the
group uh situational stuff is social
affiliation all of those were more
powerful predictors than rank itself
like if you've got a choice and you want
to have nice low stress hormone levels
and like live to ripe old age if you're
some like male
baboon don't choose to be high ranking
choose to have a whole lot of social
affiliation and of the type where where
you actually can B gain psychological
benefit from it like you're agitated
because somebody just did something mean
to you and if your most likely response
is you go displace aggression onto
somebody else that's not a great Outlet
if it's to go sit down next to somebody
you get along with and maybe you're even
in physical contact and maybe even one
of you Grooms the other that's the far
more effective way of doing it and it's
showed in their bodies so so I spent 20
years thinking all I was learning about
was like go be a big successful
capitalist baboon or something in the
hierarchy and like it social affiliation
and cultural context had so much more to
do with it well I would say also you
were learning about the fact that uh
Free Will is not as simple as we we like
to think it is and and you know you put
a lot of emphasis on the prefrontal
cortex which as anyone who studied
stress knows that if you don't have
access to your prefrontal cortex then
everything reroutes to your Amala which
gives you basically two options to run
away or to fight and when we look
at how outcomes happen we can usually
trace it back this is the from what I
understand this is the essence of your
work we could trace it back to access to
that part of the brain so that plays a
pivotal role in this idea of of of uh
Free Will right so you've written you've
written like eight best-selling books
and this your most recent one is called
determined and I guess it's it's good to
Pivot to that to to that um work now
determine a science of life without Free
Will which is very triggering for a lot
of people this idea that there's no such
thing as uh as free will so I guess we
can start with just talking about that
like what do you mean by Free Will and
what do you mean by there's no such
thing as free
will I think where people get into
trouble is two Realms where they decide
they're seeing free will because it just
feels like it and where they're not and
where that gets you into trouble the
first one is when you actually make a
choice you form an intent and you choose
something you're choosing between Coke
and Pepsi you're choosing between
invading this neighbor or that neighbor
neighbor whatever it is you're make and
you form an intent you're consciously
aware that you're making this decision
um you got a pretty good sense what the
consequences are going to be most
importantly you know nobody's holding a
gun to your head you've got Alternatives
available to you and for most people and
the criminal justice system that's
necessary and sufficient to say that's
it there's free will there's
responsibility there's culpability which
gives me app plexy at that point because
that's like a tenth of 1% of what you
need to be paying attention to because
you look at somebody who just had this
intent and They carried it out and they
knew it was going to have this effect
and they knew they could have done
otherwise and you're learning zero
unless you ask the question how did they
turn out to be the sort of person who
would form that intent at that moment
and that's 99.9%
of what goes on and we have this this
intuitive trap of it feeling so tangible
when you've just chosen between this or
that when you've decided what you want
to do and you choosing you that most of
the time we're not thinking how did I
turn out to be somebody who would have
that desire that intent at that point
and that's where all the free will
disappears the other domain which is the
the quick sound for everyone is like you
look at someone who's had some lousy
luck and adversity and all of that and
somehow they reinvent themselves they
pull themselves up by their bootstraps
they show incredible self you know these
these heartwarming stories or you look
at somebody who has had every possible
advantage and they just piss it away
with self-indulgence and there's this
huge huge huge Temptation there to think
that when it comes to self-discipline
and backbone and gumption and all of
that that's not made of biology that's
magic that's free will like biology may
have something to do with you know
whether you're good at playing LaCrosse
or whatever weird sports are happening
right now in France you know but that's
that tells you nothing about who's going
to push through the pain and do it
and that's where we get back to the
prefrontal
cortex what you the attributes you wound
up with are purely biological
interaction with environment and what
you do with them purely
biological self-control self-discipline
all of that is made out of the same
biology yuck as is anything else in your
brain and it's all coming out of the
prefrontal cortex like every time life
has you in a position where like you got
to make a choice and there's a smarter
one but the other one's more tempting
the choice that you wind up making is
entirely a function of how do you wind
up getting to that point how do you wind
up with a prefrontal cortex that would
have the power or not that would have
the values or not as to what counts as
self-discipline all of that and what we
know is that's the realm in which for a
billion different reasons you had no
control over what life handed you in
that regard it's starting with being a
fetus like a mother's socioeconomic
status is already influencing the rate
of cortical development in her fetus
like o use some free will I'm G to pick
to be in the womb of somebody of high
socioeconomic status so I get born with
already the starts of a great
prefrontal at the moment of birth all of
this
you had no control over the
circumstances that produced the you who
you are at this moment was already in
effect and where that plays out most
dramatically is at those junctures and
where you got to make a choice and if
you do the
impulsive disinhibited one it's going to
seem wonderful for three seconds and you
may regret it for the rest of your life
just at every juncture where we have
that moment what we're doing is saying
what kind of prefrontal Cortex did our
cumulative bad luck and good luck
starting with the time that we were a
single fertilized egg have to do with
like what I'm dealing with here in that
moment when I was eight or nine years
old um the experience that sort of made
me start questioning these kinds of
things as well is I was on a we were on
a family vacation
driving from Alabama where I'm from to
Chicago and we took this detour in
Kentucky to go see uh there were these
Billboards saying come and see Abraham
Lincoln's log his birthplace and it
showed a picture of his log cabin on the
billboard and it was like 10 miles in
the opposite direction so we took a
family vote we decided to go and see
Abraham Lincoln's Birthplace because why
not and we get to this parking lot and
there's a warehouse in the middle of the
parking lot looks like a Lowe's building
or Home Depot or something and we walk
in and there's a log cabin that's roped
it's cording off in the middle of the
warehouse and it's got all these little
artifacts inside of it and I started
asking questions you know so how did you
all get it did you just buil this
structure around where the lock cabin
was or they go no we actually we
relocated it to the structure I said oh
that's interesting um so all of these
are this whole thing is from you found
it in the woods well actually no it came
from the same place that his cabin would
have existed and anyway long story short
none of it was the original anything and
that's when you noticed it was made out
of
Legos well I I noticed that everything
was all these stories that we
tell ourselves about anything you know
if you look in quotes history and you
ask enough questions and you dig deeply
enough you'll start to see that hey
somebody just made this up one day
somebody just made up the calendar
somebody just made up this religion
somebody just made up this this belief
system marriage the marriage construct
you know so I started asking those kinds
of questions at that age and I've I my
my personal philosophy on this is that
people you just have to choose something
that serves you and so this idea of
choosing to believe that there is Free
Will doesn't make it any more real than
choosing to believe that there's not
free will but I I find it that as a
scientific mind you know things
obviously have to make sense and so
you've you've kind of drawn this
conclusion or this connection between
this idea between of no free will to you
know having access to this part of your
brain
and I don't think people appreciate how
much not having access to that part of
the brain actually leads to certain
outcomes in their life that are not very
desirable exact and how much of what
you're going to do in that moment is a
function of what was happening to that a
minute ago and an hour ago and a year
ago and back when you were an adolescent
and that whole deal there because you
know you have like every single part of
your body you have a completely unique
prefrontal
cortex um and it happened it happened by
by good luck and bad luck which don't
balance each other out each one tends to
amplify the other um each one tends to
amplify itself um and yeah that's
exactly it in that moment um I'm
impressed you had like a five it
reminded me of the Fable of the turtles
that you open your book with I think
that'd be genius if you could share that
Fable of the turtles because I think
that perfectly illustrates the essence
of the
book I start the book with like this par
that I thought was totally great in
college um and it's so ingrained in me
almost certainly I'm you saying it word
for word from how we used to say it so
it seems that the philosopher it seems
that William James was giving a lecture
about the nature of the universe and
afterward an old woman comes up and says
Professor James you had it all wrong the
world is actually on the back of a
gigantic
turtle and to which he said oh well
Madam in that case where does that
Turtle stand and she said on another
turtle and he said oh but Madam where
does that Turtle stand and she said it's
no use Professor James it's Turtles all
the way
down which you know as a starting point
in the book is that's totally like
ludicrous ridiculous all of that it's
much more ludicrous and ridiculous to
decide that somewhere down there there's
a turtle floating in the air and that
floating in the air is that you can do
something free of your history you could
be an uncaused
cause vague definitions of you could be
showing Free Will whatever it is you're
doing it occurred because it's Turtles
all the way down there is the idea
behind making this case for no such
thing as free will is it to lead to an
egalitarian society or what is what is
the
idea yeah in a sense I mean after
after people well I should point out
that I'm I have about as extreme of a
stance on this as you'll get anybody in
sort of the the brain Sciences type
stuff there there's other people who are
at the same point but there's a whole
lot of people who would kind of say well
you know there's maybe some
circumstances where there's exceptions
I've staked out an extreme stance here
and saying that there's none whatsoever
um
so what do you do with that um what do
you do with that and like what's the
world supposed to look like if oh my God
people actually started believing that
and half the book the second half of the
book is that and that was the much
harder half for me to write of working
through like what's how are we supposed
to function what should Society look
like and what I have to spend a lot of
time there is the things that are not
going to happen as disasters everyone
immediately say oh my God you're just
gonna have murderers running around on
the streets obviously not there's a way
to protect Society from dangerous people
without telling the dangerous people
they have rotten Souls it's a quarantine
model and it's straight out of Public
Health sort of stuff oh my God okay that
but then everybody else is to run them
up because you can't be held responsible
for anything everyone will just become
antisocial and there's a whole
literature of research on that showing
that in effect for the first five
minutes you're going to run a muck and
once you've had the chance to think
about it and especially grow up with
these ideas you will have just as
ethical of standards as somebody who
believes we should be held responsible
for our every action um in the exact
same way that sort of par
people who are atheists people say oh my
God they're going to run them up and be
so immoral because they don't think
there's anyone who can hold them
responsible and that's what people do
for the first five seconds or the first
five years and them deciding there is no
God but you give them enough time and
they are exactly as ethical in their
behavior as people who are highly highly
religious you've just found your meaning
through a different route there okay so
that's not going to be a problem then
people freak out and they saywell if
everything's determined nothing can ever
change don't bother and that's like a
critical point that like of course we
change massive change occurs but we are
not choosing to exercise free will when
we suddenly form a new opinion we have
been changed by circumstance and we've
been changed by it as a function of who
we turned out to be at the moment that
we experience that
circumstance so with all of those like
things in place of things not to panic
about and change can actually happen but
it works very differently than people
think it does if you believe in free
will we're not going to run a muck we
don't have murderers running around
everywhere we can get through that I
think what you're left with is exactly
what you were alluding to which is if
you believe in Free Will it means you're
okay with some people being treated way
better than the average human for
reasons they had nothing to do with and
other people being treated way
worse and if you really go for this
there's no free will stuff blame and
Punishment are intellectually and
ethically
gibberish praise and reward are as well
feeling as if you have earned anything
that anyone has earned anything that you
were entitled to anything that there's
such a thing as Justice being carried at
that there's such a thing as Justice
none of that makes any sense at all and
you got to navigate stuff from there
which is where the oh my God how are we
supposed to function with
that and what seems clear is like you
know I I haven't believed in this Free
Will stuff since I was a kid and most of
the time my first reflex is to op
operate like an
entitled like westernized American what
you know I think this way and I can't
function this way most of the time it
takes a whole lot of work to say wait a
second think about like what it is that
you had no control over that got you
into this like wonderfully advantageous
Place think about that person you were
just having a judgment about all of that
and you know what we're left with
is it's going to be Mighty hard for
everyone to decide there's no free will
tomorrow and thus Society just takes off
from there with no more prisons and no
more meritocracy and no more CEOs with
Corner offices and no
more yeah it's going to be incredibly
hard um but what I try to
hammer through in that latter part of
the book is over and over
historically we have identified Realms
where turn turns out we don't have free
will people do stuff that they had no
control over and each time we figure
that out and come up with what would be
a biological explanation not only
doesn't Society fall apart the world
becomes more Humane we figured out that
old ladies with no teeth don't have the
power to control the weather by casting
witch crafter whatever and so it's not
the 15th century anymore and burning
people at the stakes when there's sudden
a storm in the middle of July good you
know we figured out witches don't exist
they don't have the power to control the
weather and it's a much better world
that we don't burn old ladies at the
stake anymore we figured out at some
point that having an epileptic seizure
is not a sign that you were possessed by
Satan and that's good we stopped you
know stop burning epileptics at the
stake as well we figured out at some
point mothers don't cause schizophrenia
in their children it's not their fault
because they unconsciously hate their
child it's a neurogenetic disorder and
as soon as that was sorted out hundreds
of thousands of mothers of people with
schizophrenia were absolved from you had
no control it had nothing to do with it
you it's not your fault and then we
figured out you know chronologically in
my own lifetime after I was like a
school kid some decades later like some
kids don't learn how to read very well
not because they're lazy or stupid or
unmotivated but they got this screwy
neurological thing called dyslexia like
you can actually look in a microscope of
like somebody's cortex and you will see
the abnormal oh they're not lazy they're
they got screwed in another way some
people are screwed with it this is
this is the bad luck that they got
handed and not only like was that a
great
realization because you could get some
insights now into how to teach somebody
how to read more effectively if they
have a learning difference and you know
efficacy all of that but mainly you're
not raising people thinking that they're
stupid unmotivated like that you get all
these 40y olds who say yeah I I got a
dyslexia diagnosis last year God if I
could only have gotten that when I was
in in fifth grade I've spent my whole
life hating myself thinking that I'm
just lazy and not smart if only I could
have found out then and every time we
figure out one of those we're I don't
know 20 years into figuring out that
people are not exercising free will when
they decide they fall in love with
somebody of their sex or the opposite
sex people are not exercising free will
when they decide they've always felt
like they're a different sex than their
body says they are like okay that all
we're doing with each one of these yeah
we're not going to figure out tomorrow
how to completely get rid of a sense of
free will because it'll be like sheer
utter chaos but we're doing this step by
step and each time the world becomes
more Humane and it's like a much better
world not only is the world not falling
apart it's much better that like
Southern Baptists don't try to do
conversion therapy on their like gay
teenage Sons anymore or like you know
beat Satan out of them for that you know
in all these cases it becomes better so
we got to just keep pushing and doing
more and more of that because all sorts
of Realms where it seems intuitively
obvious right now to us that somebody
chose to do they could have done
otherwise people in the future are going
to look back on that and say exactly
here's the pathways by which that person
turned out to be who they were and why
they had no control over what they did
at that
point and oh what barbarians people were
back in the early 21st
century imprisoning some people and
punishing them based on not
understanding this or telling other
people that they are better more worthy
humans because they turn out to be smart
at something and thus can do a
successful hostile takeover of
somebody's Corporation or you know
they'll look back on us with that same
sort of view so we got to just keep
pushing against it and keep assuming
anytime you think you know why somebody
has just done something anytime you
think you understand what the
attribution is you're almost certainly
wrong and you're almost certainly
looking at it way too Blinder because
you got to think about stuff way way
unexpected and below the surface and
subliminal and ancient and nuanced and
all of that and you probably don't have
a clue the things that went into making
them who they are at that moment and why
they did what they did just playing
Devil's Advocate I I actually personally
agree with everything you're saying for
the most part but let's say you have a
you have a spiritualist someone who
believes in Karma and Dharma and and
life purposes and sacred spiritual
contracts and these kinds of things what
if they said the same about you that
you're looking at this idea of life from
very narrow bandwidth and that you
probably have some blind spots and
things you're not seeing I'm sure you've
encountered this because you've been
talking about this forever you've been
written about it in all
your yes yes just just put a dime in my
right ear and you'll get a 30 second
lecture about this once the the gears
start
moving yeah you know when how do you
defend yourself against your own
argument
of
well I don't have to invoke a notion of
free will to try to explain how I wound
up the way I am I can see where a lot of
the gears and levers were I can see some
of it having to do with my brain
something having to do with my
upbringing some with the culture some
with my genes you know I can you know
there's all sorts of pieces I don't
understand but I can kind of see how it
turned out this way
and how I had nothing to do with it and
am not particularly worthy of praise and
am not particularly worthy of blame for
the things I'm crappy about um yeah I
could turn that on myself and it's all
within you know a very mechanistic
framework which as you say puts me a
gazillion light years away from a sort
of spiritual approach to thinking about
this stuff um
you know I turn into like you know dead
white male scientist when saying show me
the nuts and bolts of how a spiritual
phenomenon works in your head and you
know there's all sorts of Neuroscience
we know now that we're all cocky and
arrogant about that we couldn't begin to
think about 50 years ago so maybe this
will get explained also in near-death
experiences there will be a neurobiology
of all you know that may come but at
least for me it's all in the context
that we're these biological machines
we're really complicated ones we're
really vulnerable ones we're really
sensitive to environment that we
interact with um but like that's kind of
all we're made of you have some Concepts
in the book and and by the way I I
really enjoyed the writing I found it I
found it um
refreshingly um
self-deprecating and just I mean it had
a little bit of a text book academic
component as well some of the diagrams
and stuff but the way you write is very
irreverent self-deprecating there there
are plenty of times where I'm
insufficiently self-deprecating and my
wife could probably give you all sorts
of examples of that but that's nice that
you decided that
um it just makes it easier for someone
like me to read like I'm not interested
in getting a degree in this stuff you
know but you want to try to understand
it well enough and and you talk about
some really relevant Concepts especially
relevant with everything that's going on
today and I wanted to just uh double
click on the joy of punishment section
because you talk about Justice and I
think this can really bring it home for
a lot of people especially a lot of
black people hearing about these kinds
of of of Concepts you talk about the the
hungry judge effect but but you also
talk about lynching and all kinds of of
things so I would say just pick your
favorite example from that section of
the book and and let's let's talk about
how that relates to this idea of
determinism you take people and you put
them in a mock jury and they are trying
to decide whether or not somebody
committed a crime and it's all about
their prefrontal cortex
activation they decide they did commit a
crime and now they get to decide the
punishment and that's all about the
limic system the emotional parts of the
brain that's where the froth comes out
that's where you see emotional brain
regions have made a decision when you're
doing brain Imaging before your cortex
is catching up to give an explanation
for it and sort of the backdrop to a lot
of that is you know mammals like to
punish like when a
rat you know when a rat get lever
pressed to get another rat a shock if
the other rat has bitten it um not only
will it lever press not only will it
work to punish that rat but you can show
there's activation of dopamine reward
pathway is when that's happening the
same exact thing in us like an
incredibly powerful stimulant to the
whole dopamine reward part of your brain
is not only getting to punish somebody
but feeling good about yourself when
you're doing it feel as if Justice is
being served and you are you know and
anytime you try to unpack people's sense
of what counts where is retribution
appropriate and my view is it's never
appropriate but what that is always just
pickled in is people like to punish
people like to blame people prefer to do
that decreases your stress hormone
levels you know we it's a bizarre
feature of us almost certainly
evolutionarily what it's about is um
what's called third-party punishment in
Game Theory you get two individuals and
one of them is crummy to the other and
this one has an option to take revenge
and that could pull for cooperation a
great way to get for cooperation is if
you have a third- party individual as an
objector outside or viewing it who's
able to punish the one who is a jerk as
soon as you bring in third-party
punishment into sort of economic gains
that really pushes for cooperation
what's third party punishment that's the
police that's your school teachers voice
in your head all of that but the trouble
is in formal Game Theory it's costly to
punish I mean in all of these scenarios
you were willing to give up a certain
number of points that you have in order
to take points away from that creep you
have to pay it is costly to be a third
party Punisher so where have we in
evolved the the uh reasons to actually
select for it first people who are third
party punishers are trusted more when
you observe people being third party
punishers you're more Cooperative with
them but the other thing is you evolved
a system where it feels good to be a
third-party Punisher that's
exactly like that's where it came from
punishment is costly detach third party
punishment which is one of the most
effective things out there to get
organisms to start being cooperative is
costly to this like
objective bystander sort of thing how do
you make that work evolutionarily it had
to turn out that punishing especially
when it is like in a sense of tremendous
selfworth and goodness and all of that
feels
good and anything we think about a
system of supposed
Justice um has to not only incorporate
all the ways in which we are irrational
when it comes to considering someone who
we unconsciously consider to be a them
rather than an us all that sort of thing
and then superos on top like the final
frosting is we like to punish and we
have a cortex that's very good at coming
up with supposed rational explanations
for why our affective emotive yic
pleasure in punishment actually makes a
great deal of sense after the fact and
even little seemingly intangible things
like whether or not the person who's in
charge of this has eaten lunch is going
to determine the degree of the
punishment yeah all of this stuff going
on
subliminally like there's all these
levers that are being turned on and off
or buttons being pushed pushed or
whatever in the biological machines that
we are due to totally unexpected
influences but yeah if you're uh if you
stand before a judge in the United
States and they're hungry the whole
literature by now shows they are going
to be less
merciful if you stand before a judge in
Saudi Arabia and they're hungry because
they haven't eaten yet they're going to
be less merciful to you if you stand
before them and they're hungry because
it's
Ramadan they're going to be more
merciful to you the longer they haven't
eaten culture and values and how much
your stomach is gurgling and what that
means and does that mean you should be
able to just throw this guy back in jail
so you can go get a you know McDonald's
or does it mean that your stomach is
gurgling because you were reminded of
your piety and like all of this stuff is
playing out whoa you get the exact
opposite results depending on if you're
in a court in you know Kansas City or in
Mecca the exact yeah stuff like that
plays out in it also all of that matters
talk about coincidence you had a section
on coincidence and I wasn't
clear about the diagrams but what is the
the No Free Will perspective on
coincidence oh that's just kind of
getting at the nuts and bolts of when
people say okay if you say there's no
free will it means nothing can ever
change things can change and when you
look at the mechanisms by which
organisms including us change their
behavior not only do you realize change
happens but you come away with seeing
not only is it telling us about our
Machin when you look at how it actually
works under the hood but it's the same
basic blueprint of Machin this when any
other like organism out there is
changing its behavior in response to
experience and one of the key things
that happens with it in terms of
conditioning is there's whole circuitry
in your brain that's very good at
noticing when two things tend to go
together as a pair when they tend to
coincide you have very good coincidence
detectors whether you are a human or you
are a sea slug or anything in between
and quines like that there's a whole
neurobiology as to how you begin to
connect the two and where one of them
will trigger the other you've been
conditioned to do something or other and
when you've been conditioned to do
something that way by something that
actually had nothing to do with the
other thing we say you're being
superstitious you see causality that
isn't there you you you have decided
that wearing your lucky underwear is
what like causes this outcome and
there's neurobiology to how it is that
those went together enough that you
decide that one does to the other that's
part of the what kind of brain you have
during this moment how readily did you
wind up with a brain that links together
two events how much is your brain w that
respect sort of critical thinking to say
okay is this really the case let's let's
look at this closely how much emotional
Comfort do you get when you see Co
incidences that help you explain the
world how much of an in how do you turn
out to be the sort of person you are
where two things come together and How
likely are you to Yoke the two of them
together that somebody says oh I had the
election stolen from me and you yoke
that with the notion of that is truth
and
Justice different sorts of ways you wind
up being the sort of person Where You're
vulnerable able to that or not versus
saying hey we can deconstruct this in
about 3 seconds and show that that's
nonsense you know all these ways in
which you know we're very good we we
animals are very good at detecting
coincidences and inferring causality but
we're very vulnerable to seeing
causality that isn't actually there in
circumstances where we're stressed and
we're angry and we're tired and we're
hungry and we're afraid and we're
resentful and we're have outgroup
hatreds and the all of those make us
much less effective at doing this but
the underlying machine area doing it
it's the same in Us in the sea
slug and
basically what I'm what I'm getting from
this is you don't want to be the baboon
who's freaking out because the higher
status baboon is taking a nap 50 yards
away you want to be able to perceive
life in general as
objectively as possible and and what
what I'm thinking of now is I don't
remember if I read this or heard it in
an interview with you but you talk about
how racism is a very natural phenomenon
we're all essentially racist but what
you're really saying is we're all tribal
we identify with other people who look
like us and who behave like us and who
agree to the same cultural and
doctrination as us and whether we have
access to our prefrontal cortex or not
really is the determining fact Factor if
we are going to display an act of racism
or if we're going to keep ourselves in
check um it's getting at this whole
business that we're really really
automatic and distinguishing between us
as and thems we other primates do as
well it's incredibly automatic you see
them really like 10mon old kids already
we do it in a fraction of a second and
it's always in the direction of someone
who counts as a them we're not very
predisposed toward treating them nicely
kind of thing but at the same time it's
incredibly easy to manipulate us as to
who counts as an us and a them and you
could change those categories in a flash
of a second you can shift those around
and you say well are you left with the
conclusion there that maybe some of
these categories are more baked in there
that they're harder to get rid of race
turns out to be one that is not very
baked in there and it makes a lot of
sense when you think about human
evolution races I don't know they're
maybe 20 30,000 years old which is an
eye blink in terms of homin and history
um and most of all for 99% of human
Hunter gather history the nearest person
you the furthest person away you would
meet in your life was somebody from
three valleys over someone who looked
just like you nobody started
encountering people of other races until
I don't know colonialism got its start
and that sort this is not a deeply
ingrained thing this one is is
surface uh surface deep and it's totally
easy to get people to switch from
unconscious racial categorizations of
people to switch them to different ones
in a fraction of a second that's one
that's easy the one that is totally in
their big surprise is sex differences
because that one's only I don't know a
couple of billion years old instead of
20,000 years old that one is much much
harder like it is way easy when you
switch like sports team uniforms for
people to switch people from
categorizing the players by race to
categorizing them by team do the same
thing with male and female players and
now you switch them around and you can't
break through that with simply putting
different color Jers on people that
one's the one that's really
fundamentally in there but racism amid
all the reasons to be like
unbelievably like despairing about it is
it's really not deeply wired into us and
reflecting the fact that race as a
biological phenomenon is is a pretty
flimsy concept anyway of that as sort of
entities in and of themselves rather
than being on biological continu
so bad news is we really quickly decide
that there's thems out there we don't
like them and we're awful to them we
have all sorts of great cognitive ways
of making it seem like we're much better
people than they are but the good thing
is you know it's not that hard to change
your categories or to change it in
somebody else and maybe what that means
is like the goal is not to get rid of us
theming because I think that's kind of
automatic I think that's virtually
inevitable in a social primate but to at
least get people to use more benign
categories like people who really really
don't like broccoli and people who do
probably lot not a lot of Earth's misery
over the centuries have been caused by
in-group outgroup differences about
opinions about broccoli go build your
view about the world and types of people
as to whether or not people have more or
less than six cavities whether or not
they you know find benign domains of
doing that or just very objectively
doing it between people who are nice and
people who are crummy and like that's
kind of a good thing if you can get
people operating that way and that
usually makes for a better Society I
don't think you can get rid of us them
dichotomies um but I think we can defang
them much more
easily than people normally assume it
sounds like what you're advocating for
is having an open mind right so again
having more access to the part of your
brain that's in control of having an
open mind so what are some practices
what are some ways that people can do
this if you've identified yourself as
you know I'm a little bit closed off in
certain areas I I like this conversation
I love what he's talking about I want to
read the book
what is there anything we can do in in
the
immediate time to kind of open this up I
I guess there's all those mechanical
things of like there there's a whole
science of as you get older like as you
get late teenage years how you begin
closing to all sorts of novelty um so
that you're like 95% of the way stuck in
this domain this doain by the time
you're 25 by the time you're 30 uh so
the realm of all those when's the last
time you did something completely new
learn a new language go travel to a
place you've never wanted to see you
know all of those sort of very
heavy-handed
interventions um just operate with the
assumption that whatever you've come up
with is your easiest easiest explanation
for what's going on is probably not
what's going on and just have that as a
general rule and try to take it from
from there all that being said you know
being able to think clearly about this
stuff and use your prefrontal cortex and
overcome your implicit biases and
understand the world as it is and old
women don't really cause hurricanes and
oo let's let's just be rational beings
some of the time you're screwed with
that some of the time like knowing the
truth and understanding like
circumstances and where control is and
isn't um some of the time that's a
disaster if you're like one of the major
hav knots there um in circumstances like
that fostering self-deception is a very
good therapeutic thing um you don't want
to make somebody feel like they were in
control over something I had no control
over if the outcome was bad like they
never got higher socioeconomic status
they
never you know if the outcome is good
you Foster somebody's selfworth if you
give them a sense of control when they
really didn't have it when you give
somebody a sense of control when the
outcome was bad and they couldn't have
controlled it or even if they could have
um decrease somebody's sense of control
their enhance their self-deception and
their rationalizations like it's a
fairly narrow do domain in which reality
and facing reality is actually a helpful
thing um you know it's not a get as much
control as much predictability as much
information in your life as possible
um understand which things you could
control and not control you know
straight out of knore sort of thing um
and when the outcome is bad maybe you
should in fact tell yourself you didn't
have control over that after all um that
could be very beneficial psychologically
yeah determine reminds it reminds me of
the scientific version of 48 Laws of
Power by Robert Green you know where he
just talks about the different aspects
of human behavior from a political and
power Dynamic but you're actually giving
scientific rationale and citing research
that helps people
understand why they may be behaving in a
certain way or why you may be getting
upset like you talked about in an
interview sitting in those Stanford
faculty meetings and you could see the
whole it was like you were on the you
know serengetti or whatever the baboon
Reserve was you could see the whole
power structure playing out and I think
being able to see that and having
language for it and having reference
points for it helps you to be more
objective in it or not take it
personally or you know whatever the case
anything that keeps you rooted in the
present moment where you can then make
better I I don't know if this is the the
right language for but better choices
for you or for your students or for
whatever whatever you're advocating
for I mean all that understanding just
to fall back into mechanistic biologist
that I am the more understanding you
have where everyone's buttons and levers
are the more you understand how those
buttons and levers got made um the more
you do that the more accurate of you
you're going to have about the world and
and lots of domains that's going to be a
very good thing because you'll see the
extent to which people had nothing to do
with how they turned out hey really
quickly if you like this content or if
you don't like it let me know down in
the comments because your likes and
comments are going to help me learn what
you want more of and then that way I can
keep bringing you the good stuff all
right thanks so much for your feedback
and back to the show what are your
what's your thinking on
success is it about self-preservation
it's obviously not about making as much
money as possible whatever but what is
what is the the terministic idea of
success oh that's a very tough one and
about three minutes after the book went
off to the the printer so I couldn't
change a word in there anymore I
immediately had the oh my God I can't
believe I didn't spend more time on this
we have no free will that's terrible are
you g to have just criminals run around
free no no no you could construct a
world in which people are protected from
dangerous individuals without invoking a
sense of culpability on the part of the
dangerous individuals good that one's
easy that one's easy getting something
to completely replace the criminal
justice system but it would have to be
something like a a quarantine public
health model so that one seems hard
enough but then the flip side oh my God
we need to do something about people who
feel like they really do deserve as a c
o a salary that's a thousandfold higher
than the workers there you really do
need to you know meritocracy that's got
to go also because praise and reward for
things you didn't really earn that's
just as damaging but that one's a harder
one exactly for what you're bringing up
okay that person is dangerous for
reasons out of their
control just keep them from being
dangerous that person has the potential
to be very very beneficial to people um
but they're going to have to spend a
hell of a lot of time learning how to be
a good cardiothoracic surgeon they're
GNA have to like stay up late and study
they're gonna have to skip a lot of
parties that's a much harder one you
know we want Society to be protected
from dangerous individuals we want
Society to be protected from incompetent
individuals when it's time to take out
your brain tumor you don't want to pick
a random person from off the street to
do that because meritocracy is damaging
like you got to find a way to motivate
people to do the really difficult
process of getting very good at tough
helpful things without having them come
out the end feeling like they are a
better human than other people as a
result that's a much harder one and
that's where dangling Notions of what
counts as success that's that one I I
haven't made a dent in trying to figure
out because you know you really got to
get a special mindset in somebody if
they're going to work 80 hour weeks for
a decade or two to come up with a
vaccine for
something like and there's got to be a
way of doing it other than there's going
to be all sorts of suspect versions of
success and reward that one Taps into in
the way humans operate um like I don't
think I could
convince like some grad student to work
80 hour weeks in the lab to come up with
one little factoid gear in a whole
scientific study by telling them you're
doing this for the common good yeah
that's not going to work quite as well
when their damn roommate is going out to
a party and they're deciding to sit
there and work more the motivation for
that and what will count as success
that's I have so much less
insight into that as you know just keep
people safe from dangerous people but
don't make the dangerous people feel
like they're rotten humans in the
process and don't punish them because
punishment makes no sense and be on
guard that it feels good to
punish so it sounds like we're more like
we're more like baboons than we probably
imagine and having studied baboons for
decades um and you'd be if you could
communicate with a baboon and talk about
the concept of free will they probably
would think is ridiculous as well right
but what does what does studying baboom
reveal about where we're going as a
human
race well they're just a good model
system um for trying to understand the
levers and
buttons in a system that's based on the
same blueprint as us but is simpler in a
lot of ways it's the same basic
biological blueprint your brain is doing
the exact same thing when you're being
an aggressive human and an aggressive
baboon your brain is doing totally
different things when the baboon is
slashing somebody right in front of them
and you're pressing a button to operate
a drone on the other side of the planet
like that's where we have the exact same
blueprint and we're using it in
completely novel unprecedented ways um
yeah sometimes it's useful to see just
how
fundamental taking it out on somebody
weaker is as a way of reducing stress
seeing just how protective social
support can be rather than getting into
humans is this person actually a friend
or are they just an acquaintance or are
they just a
pass you know baboons don't meet
somebody at a bar and the next morning
they have to decide was this a
meaningful interaction or not it's a
it's a simpler landscape built on
nonetheless the same basic blueprint
it's just easier to get insights into it
that way I guess what I'm wondering is
is this is this supposed delusion of of
Free Will is it is it ultimately
self-destructive for us as a race or is
or do you think that um we're leaving
the world better just like the baboons
are um oh absolutely worse and it's just
an issue of like how does the center
hold when you got a world built
on
justifying a small subset of people
being treated way better than Irish
reason data and most people in some
domains being treated way worse than
yeah you you can't if you're running
stuff on that you're going to get into
TR trouble and the world has no shortage
of like examples of why that gets you
into trouble and the US's an amazing
sort of venture in the last 50 years as
to how much like easily Justified
inequality makes for a much worse place
and inequality is completely built on
Notions that Free Will is for Real it's
just different outcomes are just justice
has been served
and as a final statement right I think
saying there's no such thing as free
will is it's it's not as inspiring but
as maybe something more like um everyone
has something to contribute was that is
that would that be a statement that you
could stand behind or what what's what's
a final statement or what would you want
on a billboard for people to understand
in order to create the kind of society
that you think is more sustainable
well may be that not everyone that does
have something to contribute which would
be kind of a bummer but may be the case
maybe in a broader sense
um every time you're pleased with
yourself or displeased with another
human remember neither of you had any
control over how you turned out to be
who you are in that
moment okay
beautiful I think I think that
you know again to me the idea of of
reminding ourselves of these things is
to
stay present because you get into
comparison comparison is the thief of
Joy um or you get into past regret or
you get into future worry you're the
baboon worried about the higher status
baboon so anytime you can be more
present to whatever it is you're doing
you will be able to find more inherent
Beauty in whatever it is that you're
doing and for whatever for whatever
benefit that
has and to have a more accurate
picture beautiful well thank you so much
for for coming on and and sharing your
perspective are you already working on
the next book or thinking about the next
book or you just kind I am assuming I
don't have it in me to generate another
book but that that happened after you
probably say that every time after all
your books you're like I can't it's
about a one year lag and before I
suddenly sit up and say
aha now this one will actually be
interesting this is the one that'll be
worth spending five years on well thank
you for your contribution to our culture
and our society it's been an honor to
have a conversation with you I've I've
you've been on my short list for a very
long time so I'm glad it finally got to
happen oh great thanks thanks for having
me on this was uh a total pleasure be
well if you like that video you're going
to love the next one click this
thumbnail right here and I'll see you
over there
