thank you very much it's really nice to
be able to uh share some of my work with
you I've kind of put together different
things here to see what sparks interest
and almost all of these things I have
lots of like papers and other things
connecting them so if you want to know
more just let me
know wait need
to okay
so I'm a professor of anthropology
science technology studies and uh chair
of a PhD program in performance studies
at UC Davis and I'm also a professor of
interdisciplinary data collaborations at
the interacting mind Center in arus
Denmark where I am right now and as an
anthropologist I study L science and
medicine change and I'm especially
interested in the co-creation of
language metaphors and grammar that are
invented when existing metaphors are
recognized as inadequate to the material
processes being explored I've tracked
how scientists especially craft and
Engineering oriented ones recognize the
need to play with language alongside
experimenting with instruments and data
analysis and I'm particularly interested
in research where the researchers are at
a loss for words like right now in AI uh
one of the directors of interpretability
at uh anthropic said we're just
beginning to even find the right words
to talk about what's happening
and so this is a way I think of studying
embodied research realizing that all
research is embodied by the metaphors
one starts with if nothing else and so
one part of my research has been into
the ways in which scientists come to
train in being curious in their capacity
to be surprised in my work with Natasha
Myers we traced the ways in which
scientists were taught to look and then
look some more and then to look again
like through an egg to look at an egg
through a microscope for half an hour
and then for a whole day and one of the
biologist said you just start noticing
more things and philosopher Alfred North
Whitehead wrote that knowledge requires
this in science as well as anthropology
that by due attention more can be found
in the world in nature than that which
is observed at first sight so I'm
interested in these kind of practices of
attention and oh I don't know why
there's sound on this uh one biologist
spoke to this issue of learning how to
haptically see during a lecture in a
course I gave on scient ific
visualization when I first saw him
present this he used this looping video
to tell a story about the cell as a rock
climber but here he started redefining
that cell as having sticky feet when the
cell moves he said parts of the cell
move forward and in order to move the
cell has to adhere to something and so
we can infer some forces but the only
way we can see this is by Imaging and so
he said The more you look at these
pictures the more details you see and so
by rescaling his seeing he's able to
tell new kind of story and this is
especially the case in 3D and process
exploration where metaphors are often
embodied and the practitioners have to
use their bodies to Grapple with
understanding what is happening in the
data or the situation so here's a
graduate student at a 3D cave at UC
Davis navigating through the MRI of the
tendon structure of a
horse and other researchers trying to
figure out conf confocal microscopy
images of neurons affected by a virus
it's when they can actually like see
with their hands how the cell walls are
deformed that they start to think about
how damage
occurs and protein crystallographers
often describe their work as dancing
their molecules as a practice toward
understanding the living breathing
structures and other developmental
biologists have described having to get
a feeling for the
organism so in working with researchers
in these different kinds of environments
it's really interesting to note how much
they start playing with the data in
order to understand it
and so again with Natasha Myers we've
worked on how researchers play in order
to understand and according to one of
them she said the ease of measurement
means that the measurement is limited by
the decision of where to measure rather
than the mechanics of actually making
the measurement and this can be seen by
the user's hesitation in this
example and so we draw upon artist
performance artist Susan coel who said
purpose of decision making covers a
certain range of actions of an
autonomous agent but is a construction
of agency generous enough to include
other states in actions so the acts of
listening prevaricating Meandering
stumbling thinking reassessing and
hesitating confusion uncertainty
frivolity and intimacy and what Kel is
trying to do is help us make a
distinction between the intentional
control in which one knows the outcome
in advance and an AOE of Engagement that
takes more time one that embodies a
relation to time that doesn't seek to
reduce it to a minimum this wandering
wavering and indeterminant form of
experimentation is what she calls
responsivity it's a slippage of control
and an unequal exchange of activity and
passivity that she talks about
as a prolonged and iterative initiation
and response and response and response
so I like this in performance studies
this uh sense of responding to another
response and what we find useful is this
insight into the in activity of
improvisation that the that the
excitedness of the researcher creates an
Insight so when we look at how
experimentalists talk about their
experiences of responsivity we notice
that even when it's the core of their
Insight they have trouble communicating
their insight to others they speak in a
voice that's often interesting to
decipher the early 20th century medical
researcher ludwood Fleck described
Discovery as a relation of active living
intervention reshaping and being
reshaped in brief a creation so it's a
strange voice it reveals something other
than the active voice I moved it or a
passive voice it was moved by me in
these voices the subject is exterior to
the action whether active agent or
passive non- agent by contrast these
researchers and many reach toward what
has been called uh middle voice which is
a voice lost to our languages it's from
ancient Greek and ancient Sanskrit and
it's where the subject is interior to
and affected by the action of the verb
and there are many terms invented by
social scientists and other scientists
to talk about this like interactivity
co-production and so on and in all of
these what's interesting is the actors
are themselves at stake entangled with
their objects and
instruments so I connect this to work by
Anthropologist and feminist researcher
Donna herway in which we can notice that
it matters for science the stories we
tell stories with and I think your whole
Lab does this
uh the images we imagine with the
metaphors we analogize with and the
kinds of practices we practice with so
I'm interested in also the intentional
practice of doing thinking writing
reading noticing and
learning so if now I can kind of jump to
another part of my work stepping into
history uh the neuro existentialism is a
term I started playing with while
researching the early history of
computing and the work of Lauren
mccullock the chair of the Macy
cybernetics
conferences and I'll leave a lot of
these details but I want to start with a
sign on the door to mullock's lab which
was experimental
epistemology so among other things molic
work with Walter pittz and what became
the first paper on neural Nets it was
called a logical calculus of ideas
imminent in nervous activity and they
took the nervousness of the Nets quite
literally pittz had used Rudolph
carnap's logical calculus of the world
but he doubled it adding temporal
markers to the calculus to create
temporal propositions that could be
formally equivalent to idealized neural
activ
so in the top left diagram if neuron one
Fires at time T minus one then neuron 2
Fires at time T and with this technique
they Prov that neurons could be Turing
machines in terms of calculability like
and that was enough for the paper but
the conclusion I think is more startling
and little disgust to understand such a
neuronal circuit one cannot just look at
it and this is crucial and mccullock in
a lot of his work insisted one must take
the perspective of the net itself one
must enact it as discret live time as a
psyche who moved from neuron to neuron
and he often called these
psychons for instance one of the Key
properties of a nervous net is that when
looked at from the outside they're
deterministic forward in time but
undetermined backward that is given the
state of a net at time T the state at
the net at time T plus1 is predictable
but the state of the net at T minus one
is not in the case where two different
neurons Like A or B could have caused an
action the previous state might have
been either one and he always points out
a third possibility is that there was a
misfiring as a psyche if you were in
such a circuit enacting it as you must
then you could find no difference among
these three possibilities and so at the
end of the paper they suggest that you
could not know the definite ringing in
your ears is truly happening outside or
not you could not know if what you
really saw is what you remember here
they suggested was a logical basis for
understanding ttis hallucination
delusion and confusion my colag thus
came to call these existential devices
to the extent that our brains have
structures like these nets which they do
our brains can be structurally and
logically delusional hallucinatory
confused and so on and to the extent
that mechanisms have subjects they too
must be thought through as neurotic
diluted haunted and so on and mullik was
a psychiatrist as well as an engineer
and philosopher and he thought
continually through the example of
patients I think today we might say he
is someone who thought with
neurodiversity of humanity not every
person a psychiatrist sees is to be
returned to normality if such a centroid
existed rather they were seen by mullik
as part of the space of possibility for
psychological and sensorial functioning
that might be helped by thinking through
functional forms of circuits so we coin
this term this process of Investigation
experimental epistemology and it
involved asking about the existential
being of mechanisms and the mechanistic
being of
subjects in one paper he explored a
topology of circular preferences if you
are in it and at this moment you prefer
a then the next moment you'll prefer B
over both A and C and then once you have
B you will prefer C and so on in an
endless loop he pointed out that these
neural topologies are easy to build with
circuit materials and they've been
identified in brains and then he
wondered in this paper whether such a
circuit should it be at the heart of our
motivational structure would put us on
an endless Trend Mill preferring love to
Leisure Leisure to work and work to love
in a never ending yet always motivated
cycle so I was interested because
mccullock started drawing these circuits
that included the environment as part of
the feedback loop and then he kept
noting that what was inside and outside
of a circuit depended on the perspective
one took each cut between two neurons
potentially defined a self-world
relation of feedback a perspective from
the inside and the outside each one
creates the possibility of the question
is this the same self is this signal
true for
me so from this perspective each neuron
is in an existential relation to
previous ones he said quote be because
light falling on the rod in the eye may
or may not start a signal that signal
implies but only implies the light thus
what goes on in our brains implies but
only implies the world's given in
sensation his point in this implication
is that trust and doubt psyche in
general is constitutive in life because
it runs in circuits and Trust for us is
more than physics a signal is both
physically on and off but it's also
semiotically true or
false he thus suggests that one must
take an engineering approach to this
neuropsychology quote the signal is just
as physical as ever but because it arose
in the wrong way or the wrong place it's
a false signal thus is just as false as
a ring on a telephone when lightning
strikes the wires it's because
communication engineering deals with
signals true or else false that
neuropsychology is part of engineering
and not merely of physics I think he's
referring to Shannon
here to give one example in 1949 mullik
delivered a paper on psychon Neurosis to
psychiatrists explaining to them how
Engineering Systems with certain kinds
of Loops have what the engineers call
Gremlins and that this is similar to the
way a a problem in an automobile's
carburetor can cause a problem in the
engine block that can then cause a
problem in the exhaust and knowing that
it started somewhere doesn't help you
figure out what to do about the problem
now in humans he cited this example of
calgia a condition in which snake bite
on a finger causes tremendous pain first
in the fingertip then the hand then arm
spine brain where it persists
interminably he showed a circuit AR
range such that kazala was not a
misfiring but rather a form of action in
the circuit created by the snake bite
that sustains itself then on as a
circuit action it causes the nerve to
fire too much but that causes the next
nerve to fire too much
so he suggested viewing this as a
self-sustaining demon that doesn't have
physical existence except as this
temporal repetition a soul that starts
at one point of a large circuit and
travels through it mol's Insight was
that this was not a flaw but part of how
nerves worked adjusting their
sensitivity to local conditions and that
the Venom was making an unexpected use
of this property to create a chain
reaction even a circuit action could be
agential in Levan's terms it was hacking
the
system at the same time he tolds
ologists that they need to ask
engineering questions he gave a lecture
to Engineers about the need to consider
certain types of electrical systems as
suffering from neurosis and benefiting
from considerations of psychology so I
like the way he poses to each discipline
the need to attend to the problems of
time feedback and agency that arise in
others so now I want to flip almost
completely to thinking of our sensorium
as agential
materials and shift to Social and exper
itial experiments now to describe work
I've learned from practitioners of
contact improvisation this is a
community of people since the early
1970s who conduct what could be called
practices research intentional
experiments with embodied attention
where classes are Labs of inquiry where
everyone learns together and where the
idea is usually not to learn how to do
something but learning how to be curious
about
something one form of it is this joint
improvising where when you're
improvising with someone else
oops what counts as your signal is
playfully confabulated by your
partner and as with jazz improvisation
even so-called mistakes can be turned
into fantastic riffs when the others
refer to them and you iterate on them so
new moves that are referenced in future
dances are developed all the time and
old ones deconstructed and put into
variation bodies become through this
practice ever more sensitive and
sensitized to subtle movements and I had
a video here but I didn't turn off the
sound
so Asaf bakra and I have just written a
paper about one person experiments in a
similar
Vein One basic simple practice starts
with a stick and if we had more time if
we had a workshop I've done this uh you
take a stick close your eyes and explore
the world with it the stick becomes this
kind of sensory extension you this you
and the stick sensing the
world then with the same setup and
activity you now attend to how you could
be exploring the stick with the U world
and you're now learning about the
properties of the stick or with the same
setup you could attend to how you are
exploring your body through the stick
World your palm at first but then you
can notice how even that involves a
fixation or habit of attention or
perspective in which your hand is
separate from your arm your shoulder
your balance your mass so I'm really
interested in these practices where with
a flicker of attention you shift your
learning shifts the experience
experiment and Reflections become
altered we do this for hours some
practitioners like Lisa Nelson have been
practicing in this way with a stick for
over 20 years it's one variation on all
embodied practices of movers Crafts
People athletes scientists and Engineers
the world we experience is shaped by how
we hold our attention and how our
attention holds us holds our shape for
Learning and exploring and
playing physicist and artist Flor can
pce and I have been thinking about and
running workshops in this vein as visco
elastic attention noting the relative
weirdness of vocabularies for viso
elasticity even if almost every part of
our living being is viso elastic she was
a Quantum physicist of visco elasticity
in
proteins so in the paper that Asaf and I
were working on on the stick scores we
discuss them as practices of curiosity
and we connect these to the work of
feminist physicist Karen barad
who extended Neil's B's analysis of
physics insights bore claimed that the
apparatus itself was a prospective
choice in one of the fundamental
experiments proving quantum theories it
was because a younger poor
experimentalist stern was smoking cheap
cigars that his breath contained very
high levels of sulfur and the smoke in
the room allowed them to discover that
sulfur was necessary in order to make
visible the several traces of the
experimental
manipulation and more importantly they
came to notice that the apparatus they
were working with was actually larger or
different from what they had had
intentionally
designed as barad writes apparatuses are
not static laboratory setups but Dynamic
sets of open-ended practices iteratively
refined and
reconfigured and I'm interested in the
playfulness of these moments the
accident of smoke revealing Quantum
moments and how that becomes noticed for
how ground can become figure and then I
want to ask can we train in
accidents so thinking about
improvisational research within science
our sensorium and agential play so I
want to go to this surprising moment of
surprise and play in this Neuroscience
lab in 1959 neuroscientists working to
understand the Frog's eye and finding
quite something quite surprising crazy
even this was uh Duram Leen machara
mullik and pits trying to figure out
what particular neurons cared about they
said we analyze the activity of single
fibers in the optic nerve of a
frog it said their method was to find
what sort of stimulus caused the larg
activity in one nerve fiber and then
what's exciting about
it through lots of creative trials they
found neurons that responded to small
things that move like flies and large
ones that move like Hawks so it's an
amazing paper but in a follow-up paper
two remarks on the visual system of the
Frog they were thoroughly surprised what
by what happened when they played with
these neurons
the neurons didn't act like simple
switches at all but like whole ensembles
of neurons like animals they apologized
for having to use this Lively language
and then they offered perhaps we better
say a word about our experimental
procedure this is a quote our stimuli
consisted of silhouettes of different
sizes and shapes moved against the
background by means of magnets responses
of the nerve fiber was measured roughly
by frequency and duration of
firing they say we took no records
except those needed to illustrate our
papers our question was not how great
the response was to one or another
manipulation but rather which visual
event produced the greatest response and
which produced the least we dealt with
our own listening to the patterns of
nerve spikes as the measure of extremes
just as one does with an AC bridge in
electronics so they're listening to the
nerve as they're playing with the shadow
on the eye so for contemporary
Laboratories maybe this is not a method
these neurosci are taking up a playful
relationship to the nerve fibers
themselves asking in a sense what can we
do to the Frog's eye that will maximize
the interesting signals produced by the
particular nerves so rather than staying
with the method they were exploring
whether they could let the nerve fibers
induce in the researchers a nerve
specific
behavior depending on how you define
methodology I call this anti-
methodology by Design so when they say
this we took no records except those
needed to illustrate our papers early in
our work we found that taking records
hindered rather than helped this kind of
research by leading to premature
standardization of method and I love
that sentence they're calling for like a
plastic Neuroscience one whose methods
remain adaptable to what is called forth
by the materials one's studying so it's
an abductive method it's not deductive
or inductive but one in which the method
is invented retroactively as if abducted
or possessed by the object one is trying
to study so it's kind of how to not
always get answer but better questions
and new
methods so it's a quite a nice insight
and I want to kind of pause and think
about what if this isn't communication
or rather what if much of communication
is play experimentation and playing back
and I think it's I just noticing this
thinking about this paper now that the
situation is asymmetrical doing they
were giving light in and they were
listening to sound out and this playing
across mediums I think allowed more
playfulness to enter into the situation
so it's amazing that these perspective
shifts are not explicitly played with
more one site I've been collaborating
with over the last five years has been
the interacting mind Center at Aros
University run by Andreas rorf at the
time and together with Studio olaer
Elias in this large art studio in Berlin
we received a five-year research
collaboration Grant to create a series
of art science experiments that we've
been calling experimenting experiencing
and reflecting Art and Science at work
in the public Realm
using a performative score in one case
called sharing perspectives developed by
performer and choreographer and artist d
be Jensen at the core of it was giving
people first the opportunity to grounds
to slow down a bit even in a busy
setting at the tape modern in London
during a big retrospective to see if we
can invite ways for them to share
perspectives with each other and this
ended up changing the way people met
each other and how they experience art
and
togetherness so first we would ask
people to move at the speed of their
attention and to take 15 minutes to find
positions three positions that they
enjoyed and then to come back find a
partner and share those three positions
with them non-verbally for a minute each
joining next to them after you show them
the posture to get into and just this
little thing was quite surprising on
many levels in interviews one person
said not only seeing it but taking the
same physical position as the other
person it was completely different
so this small gesture of sharing
perspectives opened up worlds for
participants and taking the time to see
or experience another's perspective and
not knowing the sensory modality they're
almost always surprised delighted and
intensely curious how they didn't even
think about such a perspective before
even people who had worked in these
rooms for six months so for many it was
transformative to how they think about
attention and
perspectives I think of scores like this
maybe as treating people as a gent of
materials in pedagogy as treating
students students as agent of materials
what if we trust that they have
perspectives that we can't imagine and
we work to make it possible to share
those perspectives how can we
investigate what might be interesting
about improvisation and ask better
questions about
it and now in my surprising turn of
events I want to talk about lyan
briefly it's a my last bit of research
that I'm obsessed with and slow
improvisation I've been researching the
research on lyen it's wildly unruly it
seems to refuse to be an object of
science at all lyen calls forth poetic
surprise from researchers lyans are
highly successful yet confounding
entities and through this I started to
notice how much the concept of time got
in the way of both my thinking and
theirs slowness emerged as a term to
work with my current hypothesis is that
lyen are slow partying and supportive
napping and I don't have enough time
here to show how much more useful this
language is but I want to point to some
the limits of understanding lyen
slowness I've learned is one of their
superpowers it also makes it really hard
to study some lyen grow one millimeter
every hundred years some lyen are 9,000
years old so we are a
blip so we might start with a couple
observations lyans are the dominant life
forms in about 12% of the earth's land
surface they are everywhere the largest
amount of biomass in the air we breathe
are leaniz components spores of fungi
algae and bacteria much of these are
lighter than air effectively we can say
that lyen potential is always landing
and it's the slowness of a surface that
helps determine whether detectable
visible lyen
appear Turtles trees glass rocks these
are all venue managers for slow partying
in many cases lyan forms where for all
other life there is no environment
leaniz effectively brings environment
into existence creating micro
environments that facilitate more
diverse Lykan and eventually litters or
filters soil and potential ecologies
into existence and if you're a fan of
tardigrades they en liken both survive
in space and hang out together a lot
more than 18,000 Nam species of fungi
participate in Lykan so they're both
super slow and super promiscuous they
definitely forc the researchers to reach
toward a language like hacking though I
haven't seen that language used in their
work so far these researchers are
constantly surprised at the level of
improvisation taking place continually
within lyen quote unlike majority
partner symbiance that provide a
backbone or scaffold the components of
lyen symbiosis do not undergo sulfate
differentiation and subsequent tissue
development although the dominant fungi
and lyan are multicellular every cell is
toy potent the complex
three-dimensionality and structural
Integrity characteristic of many Likens
instead results from component parts
gluing each other into place with
extracellular polymers as the assemblage
grows
one of the most dedicated researchers
Rosemary Haner stated in 1992 in an
overview on the developmental biology of
lyans quote it's important to note that
most lyen are consortia with an unknown
number of participants rather than
individuals neither the fungal biomass
nor the photobi cell population of an
individual phalus needs to be
genetically
uniform as many parts from different
Origins may join in preal and later
stages of development joining up with
other Lykan in amazing ways
almost 10 years later that perspective
hadn't changed quote viewing lyans as
self-sustaining and adaptable systems of
Partnerships however that view overcomes
the need to perpetuate debates as to
particular unchanging Natures of
essential
Symbian so the official term for lyen
now is consortia or
lifestyle lyen pulls researchers into
poetry this top image is from an article
about the cryptogamic crust that forms
in the atakama desert in Chile Where
nothing else grows and the title of the
paper is Desert
breath seeing our own playfulness
regarded reflected in the playfulness of
lyan and I emphasize this since the
evidence seems to point to lyen as
hanging out and slow parting in most of
its formations constantly exploring
possible pattern spaces morphologies and
Partnerships you could say its
nonchalant attitude toward environmental
constraints and
scarcity derived from not viewing it as
already as as an already committed
organism or community
Trevor Gard has perhaps put forward the
closest thing to a Manifesto for letting
lyan lead biology he calls himself a
pattern ecologist and he tends directly
to the ways that the questions we ask
the perspectives we take as researchers
determine the kinds of answers and the
liveliness and intelligence of the
things we study and I love Levan's
notion that it is us who are always
taking the intelligence test when we ask
what's
happening lyans he says but especially
macro Lans exist as a kind of conceptual
doorway a p
when we look out this portal in one
direction through the microscope what we
see is multiplicity the lyen as its
parts as fungus as algae symbiosis and
ecosystem but when we peer through the
same portal in the other direction at a
macro scale what comes into Focus now is
Unity the Lykan as emerging property as
physiologic entity as
organism to me he says the real
conceptual challenge posed by the lyen
thalis deres from its unsettling
capacity for transmutation at even the
slightest shift in perspective some
examples taken from the lyan literature
might include lyan as dietary
strategy of certain fungi as ecological
strategy of certain algae as controlled
parasitism as mutualism as fungal
agriculture as fungal Greenhouse liken
as Gall liken as culture chamber as
symbiotic phenotype organism ecosystem
emergent property and so
on other researchers proposed that
multispecies biofilms and lyen are
coterminous one could even posit that
lyen began as biofilms and through
millions of years of coevolution with
symbion Partners developed into the
highly coordinated and more per
permanent lyan
thalis using electron microscopy and
other techniques Ursula good enough a
few years ago find found that numerous
bacterial species produce structurally
diverse matrices on the lyan
surfaces helping create and maintain a
polyol fog that enables some of Lykan
superpowers a fog produced by fungi and
lyen that the fungi produces nowhere
else hence bacteria provide not only
metabolic products but also physically
participate in Lykan
construction and lyen our slow growing
and long living host organisms that have
been proposed also as bacterial hubs in
these environments facilitating the
survival of bacterial by nutrient and
water supply offering a habitat with
various Micron niches thereby the lyen
could be sources and reservoirs of
benefit bacterial strains for other
habitats I want to conclude by thinking
with Gard as with lyen his
conversation so returning to this
question of hacking playing and
conversing the language with which we
language
agency this is much like saying that the
inner this is a quote from Gard this is
much like saying that the inner workings
of the Lykan have the form of a
conversation between the constituent
parts for the ly and truly is the
conversation of which the constituent
parts are the participants and the
phalus the outward physical
manifestation here it helps to recall
that though they look and behave like
organisms nevertheless operate a systems
this means for example it's not quite
right to say that lyans grow as a matter
of fact plants and animals and fungi Hy
all grow but Lykan thaly elaborate lyans
are more like a good conversation each
following its own internal Logic No two
Thal coming out quite the same so with
that I want to conclude and open up
forver ation
