why journalists don't understand that
they're they're part of a propaganda
system because they're like well I can
write what I want and then I would say
to them well you can write what you want
because they like what you write that's
the point uh and you don't write stuff
that actually exposes the system even
though it's sitting there in plain
sight there's no accountability without
truth so if you want to know how power
really operates in today's world you
can't just look at what journalists are
saying you've got to examine what
they're keeping silent about one big
thing is that we're not actually in an
era of post Empire we live in the age of
American Empire the us alone accounts
for more than a third of the world's
total military expenditure they've got
the world's largest navy and Air Force
and they operate more than 1,000
military installations in foreign
countries across the globe and we never
hear a public conversation about what
this means still less about whether it's
a good thing or not so this week I'm
joined by Matt Kennard investigative
journalist for Declassified and author
of The racket a rogue reporter versus
the American state we talk about CIA
black s sites the Israel Lobby and
whether kiss Arma might be the most
secretive prime minister this country
has ever seen I hope you enjoyed the
interview Matt Kennard thank you so much
for joining us today good to be here
thanks for having me again so I guess my
first question is how did you become
politicized where did you start out
growing up and how did you end up where
you are now yeah that's a good question
because uh I wasn't always political uh
in the sense of um coming straight out
the womb and being like well my dad's my
dad's uh very political and he's a
political artist so I did have that
growing up but I was more into the art
side of things when I was a kid uh and I
used to go to the National Gallery and
other places every weekend with him um
but um and then I I I I went I did I did
badly in my a levels I got BCD and
didn't get into any Unis so so then I
went and I went through clearing to
leads on a course I didn't want to do so
and then I left and went back and did
history and when I went back to leads
was 2002 and then that was that was
obviously after 9111 and then at Le uni
uh I got really involved in the uh the
protest against the war in Iraq and
that's where so I became hugely
politicized started reading
voraciously um and started writing for
the lead newspaper as well what were the
books that you were reading a lot of
Chomsky actually which is I know is a
cliche but he uh I'd read actually when
I in my younger years I'd read a lot of
John pger in the new Statesman uh and my
dad used to have a subscription to the
new Statesman I made him stop after they
became uh funded by ba systems and
others which is such a weird thing that
we just accept I know it's crazy and
also the new States apart from the fact
it's funded by the UK's major arms uh
dealer it's also just pretty rubbish
these days days I won't go into that
because that's another story but um it
was actually not bad back then you used
to have John Pilger front pages there
were other good writers they did really
um critical journalism and
investigations and stuff so I kind of
grew up reading that kind of um not been
super into it but it was in the
background and then when when the war in
Iraq or the buildup to the war in Iraq
started I started reading a lot of
Chomsky and funnily enough when I was at
leads uni and I was writing comment
pieces for the lead student and that was
kind of exhilarating at because i' I'd
be talking to people and then I'd write
a comment piece for lead student and it
had a circulation of like 20 to 30,000
and I'd see my words being printed in uh
in the student paper and I would be like
wow like you can actually have an impact
I mean obviously it wasn't having an
impact it was local and whatever but and
then so I start so I emailed Chomsky one
day uh after I'd read a bunch of stuff
and I sort of wasn't expecting to reply
and I still remember I was S I didn't
have a computer at that time but I was
sitting in my uh friend's bedroom on his
computer my email and I just saw n
Chomsky he came back and he said I'm I'm
I remember it was something along the
lines of I'm really busy but I'll try
and answer your questions I I'd asked
him if he if he had time to answer some
question and then that friendship
developed from that point on for like us
he's quite ill now but up till recently
we were talking regularly and we we he
wrote a piece for Declassified a couple
of years ago but he he's I mean he's an
amazing individual not just the
intellectual side of things I remember
so I was I was writing these articles
for lead student and then I sent them to
him in Massachusetts he was he was at
MIT at the time uh just like remember
this is a student newspaper right so I
sent like a couple maybe a dozen comment
pieces I I looked at them recently
they're very bad yeah you never look at
your old work is is the rule it was
really bad and I'm very derivative and
but and then I got a letter back
handwritten by him like three or four
pages of notes on my articles this is a
guy he's never heard of a student at Le
University anyway so after that I became
super super involved in the politics I
got in I looked into the other side of
the what he looked at which was the kind
of uh psychology and Linguistics and
stuff and uh and then I I went to study
at UCLA on a year abroad and that was
really eye openening in fact it was
really it's interesting in the context
of what's happening now cuz UCLA back
then uh you could not say anything about
Israel uh and I was I was a columnist on
their student newspaper too called The
Daily Brun uh and it was it was just a
complete red line and I did write a
column and it was uh and there was
massive Kickback and now UCLA is one of
the hot beds of the student protest
against the Gen couldn't write anything
was it that you had an editor saying
don't write this interesting yes that's
a good
question I think it was just I think I
don't think it was that I think from
what remember this is like 20 years ago
now but I think it was more just like
the the push back you got if you wrote
anything remotely critical of uh Israel
was just so intense that it put you off
it's like an electric yeah exactly
exactly and it's and we can go on to
what it was like at the financial times
but it's also exactly how it worked
there it's a culture that you just kind
of become part of uh and it's very hard
to stay in that system if you don't
absorb all the what they're saying
anyway so in fact that UCL in that one
of the columns I did a story about Alan
dtz pressuring the University of
California press which was publish in
Norman frl Stein's book called beond
hser and Alan dtz went nuts and
threatened to um Sue dily Bruin very
litigious individual he's I mean he's
insane bear in mind this was an art
again a small article in in a student
newspaper it on the West Coast he's at
Harvard he was a professor at Harvard at
the time and he went he wrote there's
the letter still online that he wrote
about my piece but also the background
sort of threats of suing uh obviously
weren't but it was just insane I was
just like wow but uh and then I came
back to the UK and then um and then the
I guess the big turning point for me in
terms of Journalism was I got a big
story um about a professor being a
racist he was called Frank maybe I don't
know if he's still alive it he was
called Frank Ellis and um he W he
believed in um the bell curve and
believed that uh white people were
clever than black people and a lot of
other awful stuff published that and
that went uh that went that was a first
really big story I got it went national
uh got on the front page of the
Telegraph and and the guardian and stuff
and then at that point I moved from
thinking okay I want to do comment
because I was like Wow with
investigations revealing new information
you cannot just like have an opinion
that people can read and give or take
people can't argue with facts so if you
reveal facts that reveal how the system
works that is unarguable and can
actually change things in a much more
Des love saying people can't argue with
facts I'm like what yeah well you know I
mean like if you look at like for
example what Wikileaks did uh uh with
the US cables and all that and Edward
Snowden revealing information like it
was very hard to for the for the the
most the power centers in our society to
kind of defend what that showed like
Edward snowden's Revelations of uh uh uh
um Mass surveillance of of the
population um and then so after that and
then I did a masters at Columbia
University in New York in journalism
based on the fact I got that story um
and and then after that um I stayed in
New York for a while I wanted to work at
democracy now so I was always on this on
the same sort of side politically but um
when I left that Masters I was looking
around for jobs and I realized and we
should talk about this because this is
how the system gets you I was like where
can I work if I want to carry on doing
investigative work that really takes on
power rather than just uh sort of
covering froy scandals like the New York
Times or the guardian do uh and then I
worked I couldn't find anywhere so I
worked for democracy now for a while for
free which was amazing uh there're
amazing institution um and I'm a massive
fan of Amy Goodman um but I couldn't
stay there because I couldn't afford it
so I came back to London and then just
this is where the book starts really is
like uh I saw a trainee ship advertised
for the financial times and I was like
okay why not give it a try I didn't
think I'd get it right uh I don't know
if any anyone's ever got the training
ship with BCD a levels at the financial
but I I got it so I I so and then I
started the financial times and it was
incredible experience because cuz I was
a trainee I had basically um full
freedom to do what I wanted in terms of
what I wanted to cover uh in fact I
didn't have full freedom but I took full
freedom because I kind of knew I wasn't
going to stay there so I uh and that's
how the book started basically early on
being at the financial times I was like
well I'm never going to get this access
again cuz being at the Ft you can just
call up sent me to Washington so I was
going into Obama's White House if I
wanted to call up an ambassador if I
went to Haiti I could call up the
Ambassador and they talk to me so I was
like I'm never going to get this access
they don't know who I am so that's lucky
as well so I just wanted to collect as
much information from kind of the the
the co face uh to be able to to be able
to use to reveal the truth about how the
system works I mean I definitely want to
talk about your time at the ft and also
the New York Times as well so you come
in you've got this very political
understanding about what it means to be
a journalist and what it means to hold
power to
account how did that go down with the
other people that you worked with
actually it was interesting um I started
with a bunch of good journalists and um
and ft is good as you'll know like it's
of all the papers it's the most serious
and I left thinking the same thing but
how the system works it just shaves off
your uh sort of jagged edges politically
but in an Insidious way it's not active
it's not like they're telling you what
to write it's just that you become part
of a institutionalized thinking and if
you don't uh if you don't do that then
you're going to bang your head against
the wall for the next 2030 years and
that's not a nice way to live so if you
want to stay in the system you have to
become part of the system luckily I
didn't get into journalism for that for
to for that kind of status or career so
it wasn't a difficult decision for me to
think I don't I don't want to become
part of it but the way for me that it
works is that it it especially in like a
Democratic Society where with the Free
Press like there is we do have freedoms
here that are real um within a newspaper
you just slowly stop stop thinking uh
certain things so an example being at
the Ft if you want to write about um uh
um Hezbollah for example you could write
uh Iranian backed militant uh group but
if you write about Saudi Arabia you
don't write us-backed fundamentalist
waby dictatorship why not it's the same
thing right but and and and towards the
end at the FCI I kind of started putting
in those prefixes and they were actually
taken out so it was quite interesting to
see literally that how the control works
but actually no one is thinking I'm
doing the bidding of the US they're
thinking they just I've never seen that
in the F so why would you even think it
you don't even think it did you ever
have that conversation with an editor so
when you're trying to say okay Saudi
Arabia going to say you us back you know
wahhabist fundamentalist uh you know
funer of international terrorism what's
the conversation like between you and an
editor about whether or not to keep that
in there's not really a conversation so
I I'd hand in the copy and then it would
be edited and then go to paper I didn't
really have a say on what was take it
put in or taken out but the other thing
is I think that there is a freedom that
people don't even realize they have
because I started taking the piss
really and I was allowed to do things
that no one would even think to do like
for example there's a house and home uh
I don't know if you've ever seen the
ft's weekends house and home section
it's just like like Rich I've never I've
never had much of a a cause to go
looking at it I've occasionally read how
to spend it yeah well it's it comes out
in the same FD as how to spend it house
and home is basically just a rich people
showing people around their houses oh
sorry journalists around their houses
and talking about I don't know stuff I
don't understand but the there's a
section in that called at home uh and
that is with one specific rich person
and you go to their house and you take
photos and I pitched why don't we do one
going to occupy uh uh LSX London Stock
Exchange which was happening at the time
and they were like yeah go do it and
they published it and I went down and
there was me pictures of this guy in a
tent in house and home and everyone was
sort of saying to me wow we've never
seen anything like that in E I was like
yeah did you ever ask and that's the
thing it's just like no one's telling
you uh but your your your vision of the
world becomes become becomes really
really constrained and actually if you
break out there is no real impediment
except I wasn't allowed to stay uh and
probably that was partly to do with what
I was doing but um it's it's it's really
interesting it was a really good window
into how it operates because I had read
manufacturing consent by chumsky and
Herman beforehand which is like one of
the seminal texts on how the propaganda
system works and their argument is that
five um filters work on what can get
into papers from like Flack from
different groups or advertising or
ownership or all these different and I
think that is kind of true it was a good
way to try and conceptualize how it
works because it is a it is a it is a
filtering system there's certain ideas
just get filtered out for various
different reasons and I think that's how
it works um I think uh it it luckily now
I am still a journalist because and
that's because of the internet and so
and social media same with you guys
right we we didn't have the opportunity
to do what we do now before like I
really boxed myself in career-wise I was
like ah can't become a chef now
yeah yeah well I I thought I wasn't
going to be a after I left EFT I was
like
like oh bloody this is not going to work
like no one's going to employ me for a
start but also I don't want to do I'm
there's nowhere I can do the journalism
I want to do uh and I was and then
luckily I got a fellowship at the center
for investigative journalism which was
great but uh and then we started to
classified but that route is really um
uh is is a really unusual one and I
think that's for us as people in
alternative media like what we need to
do to make sure alternative media uh
sticks and has influence is to create a
structure an infrastructure where people
can leave University or leave school or
leave whatever they're doing to become a
journalist and not have to make
sacrifices they they can go and get a
mortgage and have kids like at the
moment you can't your life has to be
messy for a while and then they're
always going to have more power than us
as long as it happens because people
want to have a normal life so we need to
create the infrastructure funding is the
main issue but Navar have done great
stuff we at Declassified we' managed to
find a way of doing it and there's
plenty of others as well so it's it's
hopeful I mean you talk about the five
filters on journalism and I really want
to talk about how that works in what you
might call Legacy Media establishment
media mainstream media but just thinking
about how it works for alternative or
left-wing media Outlets I definitely
find myself thinking about what online
backlash is going to be particularly
when I'm being critical of what you
might term liberal identity politics yes
and it's difficult because when you
don't have you know High net worth
individuals who are bankrolling you and
you're very dependent on the Goodwill of
your
audience how do you present information
or opinions or analysis which is
challenging to some of the values of
your audience who are also your funders
yeah it's hard I think
that it's not there's no there's no way
around that really I mean for for us at
Declassified the we we are funded by a
combination of liberal foundations
essentially or left foundations and um
the public and I think that's the best
way to do it in my in my opinion we
don't take money from corporations or or
States like I think you guys don't as
well and be fa no states have
offered yeah yeah I'm I'm going to see
how long my Integrity lasts until I get
that phone call from xiin ping yeah yeah
well and also the interesting thing with
the classified I'm sure you guys have
found it like here is how um how
the the system gets Independent Media
because all the incentives from funders
is to cover identity politics stuff like
if you look if you don't and to cover
official
enemies
um one example for that and I'll
probably get in trouble for mentioning
them but Belling cat right Belling cat
is a investigative Group which was
founded in the UK I think it's now based
in the Netherlands
but it's been completely subsumed into
the system and unless you have a some
political awareness to push back against
that you end up being like bellingcat
which is just like you just relentlessly
do stuff about Russian crimes which are
real I'm not saying not real but we live
in the UK and we pay our taxes here
shouldn't we be more uh interested or
investigate what our own government is
doing uh as well um and and I think that
that that has been a real um uh eye
opener for me in that because you can
see it how it happens in real time like
every incentive is to go and do stuff
about I don't know LGBT people in
usbekistan and we'll give you like
£50,000 but if you say we want to do a
story about how MI6 has like been
involved in some operation in Kenya or
something it's like no no uh so uh and
again it's hard to talk about this stuff
because then people say what's what's
wrong about LGBT people in usbekistan
matter of course they do that's not the
point it's just like that is what at the
moment the liberal Foundation industry
wants you to cover they don't want you
to cover stuff that is systematic that
really exposes the system they want
stuff which is cultural or the fro on
the top so scandals uh I mean I was
talking to someone at the BBC about this
um we were having a conversation about
impartiality and I was like look the BBC
isn't
impartial I understand why you have to
Brand yourself in that kind of way to
get a sort of national buy in for the
license fee I get that but you're not
impartial and you know they started
giving it all this of like oh well if
the left and the right are equally angry
we must be doing something right and I
was like don't think that's true but I
was just like you're not impartial on
whether or not the pursuit of of British
interests overseas is good or bad right
you're not impartial on that because you
don't ever think about it being bad you
just go that's a good thing they go well
of course we don't we we're a British
broadcaster I was like well there you go
you're not impartial are you so
how do you you um how did you find an
audience that didn't want that kind of
you know lazy acceptance of whatever
Britain does overseas is good how did
you connect with those people uh well
there there's there's millions of them
there's millions of people that know
they're being lied to um but they don't
really have fact-based investigative
journalism to kind of guide them in in
in the right direction which is why you
see a lot of um there's two two Trends
one is the uh uh people don't trust the
mainstream media uh and but they also um
anyone who's giving factual information
uh that that challenges the system or or
the state is marginalized so they they
don't have access to that information so
in that space you get a wild conspiracy
theories which is what we see I don't
know if you see it all the time but I
have conversations now people believe
some crazy stuff people think I'm an MI6
asset and I was like I've never been an
asset to anybody yeah well
that's it and I we get I get it from all
sides and but I think that is not it's
not just a uh it's not a neutral
phenomenon it's one that's been it's the
fact that people are searching for they
know that the people on TV aren't the
ones with the real power but they don't
have any explanations of and so what we
so when we provide the information that
Declassified and there's a whole swaye
of the state that just no one knows
about and is not covered at all in the
mainstream media people are like wow I
can actually find out if this
information is true uh because we link
it all and we we say where we got it
from and I can understand how the
Dynamics really work and it was really
interesting actually yourself you you
were the first journalist ever asked
Rory Stewart about being in the circle
right which we wrote an article about a
couple of years ago and and that is a uh
that's just one example but it's an
interesting example that it's got this
effectively it's a secret group it's
barely its existence is barely
recognized ever uh and it was said by uh
Thatcher's uh former conservative
Minister uh Alan Clark to be funded by
the CIA I don't know if that's true but
that's what he said and he was a part of
it um and they got up to all sorts of
things during the Cold War uh and he was
on he's he's in he was in that group the
chair of that group while he was on the
Foreign Affairs select committee um uh
um
and and and and and declared it I think
but no journalist has ever asked him
about it and he celebrated as his great
liberal hero and it took and and the
fact is he came in here which was good
that he did that and you asked him what
every journalist should ask but that
that's just one example and that
operates across the board there's a
whole there's just things are left out
that is how propaganda Works in Britain
in the US in Europe things that are not
conducive to the state or to the state
narrative are left out they don't the
main way the propaganda is done here is
not through lies although they do do
that too the main way they do it is just
to leave out everything you need to have
like a tolerable understanding of how
the world really works and that's what I
Declassified our jobs easy easy like for
example I'll give you one really good
example just uh was it last year yeah
last year some Lord uh asked um a
question in Parliament you know the
Parliamentary question system some lord
I can't remember who maybe it was even a
Tory Lord but or or some Lord asked are
you sending depleted uranium shells for
Challenger tanks that you're sending to
Ukraine right and it was answered yes we
are uh and it kind of was on there for a
day no one picked up Phil Miller on my
colleague who's a great
reporter he saw it wrote a story on that
like a short story like within within a
day Putin had it became an international
story Putin get spoke about in a press
conference and then he moved tactical
nukes to bellarus based on the fact that
he was saying depleted you depleted
uranium shs were being sent by Britain
um that story would never have get got
out if Phil hadn't written it because no
mainstream media would have ever written
it and that's up on the government's on
the Parliamentary website anyone has
access to that and that is how it works
you just they and and that's why
journalists don't understand that
they're they're part of a propaganda
system because they're like well I can
write what I want and then I would say
to them well you can write what you want
because they like what you write that's
the point uh and you don't write stuff
that actually exposes the system even
though it's sitting there in plain sight
I mean there's a lack of curiosity
amongst very successful journalists
which I find completely mad and I know
what it's like to want to be liked and
accepted because I too have a puppy dog
inside me just wants a pat on the head
like I really really get that but I was
talking to someone who
um uh I guess was you know was and is
one of the BBC's most like venerable
journalists enjoys a very High degree of
access amongst the British establishment
because for all intents and purposes
they're a part of it and they were
talking to me about attending a dinner
with a former head of MI5 who was the
head of MI5 at the time and I was like
you must have been fascinated by this
person because you know their head is
full of secrets and I would spent all
 dinner trying to get into that
one way or another and I'd fail but I'd
want to I'd be driven mad by the
knowledge that they know that I
don't and this very vulnerable BBC
journalist said no I didn't feel that
way at all they were just a normal
person to me and I thought what a
stunning admission you are sat next to
somebody who you know governs a very
secretive uh portion of the British
State and you don't even feel like
there's something that you want to know
you don't have that feeling in your body
that's the thing I couldn't get my head
around but it's because they've been
conditioned to want the access so badly
and to want to be a part of that world
so badly that curiosity would be
impolite yes exactly that's what they
don't and I don't understand what we do
the classified because I totally agree
I've had conversations like that and it
just doesn't enter their head that maybe
our job is to like find out information
that really challenges entrenched power
see this is the important distinction
because MI5 is entrenched power it's
secret journalists celebrate themselves
uh because they do these every now and
then they do do scandalous story like
they'll cover like the MP's expenses
stuff that's good definitely journalism
should be done but that's that's what
you're allowed to do and that's what's
promoted is Frost stories stuff that is
does not impinge really on people's
understanding of the system and system
is essentially good and essentially
promoting good values um and and
obviously underneath all of it uh it
it's a system that it does not promote
good values it's a system that promotes
War imperialism uh um torture uh every
every bad thing you can think of is done
in secret by the British and the
Americans around the world and we if we
had a press that revealed it it would
the system would change that's why they
that's why they don't really care that
we have a free press the state like it's
like that whole Tony Ben thing if if if
voting changed anything they makeal make
it illegal it's same with journalism
right like they essentially the system
is allowed to operate uh off the books
and and the media doesn't touch it and
and that's fine fine it works fine if we
if you start doing things like revealing
what the truth was about what we do
around the world you end up where Julian
assigned is which is in Bel Marsh
Maximum Security Prison uh so uh and but
we need to change that and they they
have a problem because um the the the
the means of um intellectual production
or or the have been moved away from the
big uh businesses or or state power by
the by the internet so there is a way of
us diffusing information now that is
outside of those power centers which is
really really good uh and I think we're
having an impact so they're going to
have to come up with new strategies on
how to shut us you guys all the rest of
us down um but I'm quite hopeful about
the fact that um uh the the information
has been has been taken away and also
like they're exposed that's why they
hate Twitter mainstream journalists
right uh or they they often talk about
the fact that people aren't nice to them
and stuff is because they've had
literally for centuries just stood up on
a pedestal and we can't touch them we
all have to respect what they this
Guardian columnist said this then it
must be true and he's so clever No One
Believes that now because we're all
we all know that uh most of them cheat
 and we know a lot more than they do
and we can uh and we have an Avenue to
kind of pick apart their work uh so it's
great I I think uh I know Twitter gets a
lot of rubbish but uh and people hate it
but I think it it's revolutionary we
wouldn't exist without Twitter
Declassified it's the way we get our
information out is there a part of you
which has more respect for out andout
right-wing bastards than hand ringing
liberals because I remember talking to
um very hardcore right-wing journalists
and I was saying look I don't see the
moral difference between a Russian
backed death squad and an
american-backed death squad and he just
look me in the eyes goes the difference
is there're our death squads and I was
like okay you're clear ride about this I
think it's morally abhorent but you're
clear ride about it whereas if I were to
talk to someone who works for the
guardian or the Observer there'd be all
of this sort of moral
superiority packaging what is a deeply
aoral position that just kind of makes
me feel a bit sick yeah no I totally
agree um I think that realists and the
people who like the sort of you the
imperialists in the US and UK who say
look we're doing this for these reasons
that are honest about it I have much
more respect for that because uh
although I disagree that we should have
a system where where you can unleash
violence on people for for for for your
own purposes at least be honest about it
because as you say the whole
infrastructure propaganda system is
based on the fact that we do uh good
things around the world and that is much
more toxic and that's what you call the
racket it's the sort of delusion well
the racket actually comes from um a qu
it's a quote from G uh General Smedley
Butler who was a uh uh who died the most
decorated Marine in US history and he
but he he he signed up for the Marines I
think when he was 16 in the Spanish
American war in
1898 and he fought in various different
us Wars uh and he was like a big big guy
there was actually he said there was a
business plot to overthrow Franklin
Roosevelt um and he was uh so people
should look into that it's quite
interesting um uh but he but later on in
life he became disillusioned with what
with the US Military and the system that
he he' fought for and he said and the
book opens with the quote that he he
wrote a book called the war is AET and
he said I was when I was in Honduras or
wherever it was I wasn't there for
national security reasons I was there
for brown brother's Bank in New York and
he said uh I I was bigger gangster than
Al Capone he could he could operate in
like four districts I was operating in
four continents that's what he said so
that's where so that so the book is
about how the US imperial system is a
mafia system and it's a it's an Empire
Empire which runs in the interests of
American corporate power and if and it's
a it's a form of Empire which is
different to previous ones and that's
what's called informal Empire or Open
Door Empire which is like if you open
yourself up to our corporations and
investment then you're fine if you don't
we'll take you out and there's various
mechanisms you do that the military
which was what Butler was talking about
but also subversion by the intelligence
agencies and it's a massively important
issue for everyone to know about because
this is the most important Empire in the
history of the World by far Paul Kennedy
the academic who's like the hit um
expert on comparative um uh Empire
studies he said nothing comes close
nothing to what the US is like even the
British Empire was kind of run on a
cheap it was uh that its Army wasn't
even the biggest in Europe its Navy
which was like its big asset apparently
was the S size of the next two combined
the US military is just off the charts
they have 800 bases around the world
they have uh 11 carrier battle groups
which are these huge battle groups which
can just go anywhere with aircraft
carriers they have um uh obviously a
military a military presence in
132 of the 190 uh UN member states so
they're everywhere and then obviously
the CIA on top of that and all the rest
NSA and so it's everywhere and it is the
major Dynamic governing world affairs
but you can't talk about it that's my
problem with it so the stuff in the book
which I saw when the Ft sent me to Haiti
after the earthquake um and various
other places you saw uh a system which
was just basically backed by the us or
designed by the US to facilitate the ex
extraction of wealth and resources from
all over the world yet we can't use the
term us Empire you can't you never ever
see American imperialism us Empire
you'll never see it in the Ft or the
telegraph or whatever it is you will see
China Chinese Chinese uh Imperial
Ambitions or Russia or Putin's Imperial
Ambitions but you can't talk about the
USM but so we have a dynamic which is
the major governing Dynamic for
international Affairs which is
unmentionable amazing I mean one of the
things that a friend of mine said to me
the other day is that if an alien came
down to earth and had to describe back
to the galactic Council like how is
Earth run they'd say okay well there are
two continental superpowers one makes
all the stuff and it's called China and
the other one just has loads of
bombs and could kill basically every
other country on the planet and those
are the two governing forces in the
world and it seems that if you were to
state that boldly in a journalistic
context you'd be called a conspiracy
theorist yes of course
and or you wouldn't be able to say it so
the mainstream no one says it uh uh
basically is it's impossible to talk
about in that sense um and I think that
it Go and the conspiracy theorist
um uh epithet is a really powerful one
for for um for guiding The Narrative
because I get called a conspiracy
theorist all the time although at the
classified and previously we got out of
our way to to reference everything
because we know we're we're liable to
get attacked by that and we've never
published a correction but what that
does is it it stops people wanting to
talk about uh entrenched power or secret
power or the Deep State um uh agencies
which are completely Secret
uh and that's what they want they want
people to be scared of talking about it
they want people to have they want a
deterrent for people to stop talking
about it and there's a whole area of the
state and our politics everywhere uh
which is sometimes called parapolitics
which is the secret agencies and they
have huge amounts of power and we know
they do um and we need to talk about it
and and that's how the US Empire runs
effectively it runs so many of uh its
operations are run through covert forces
whether it be military and special
forces jck or the CIA um and the the
books got uh goes through the history of
some of the places where they've used
these uh uh secret um agencies just to
overthrow governments to destroy uh uh
Liberation leaders um and uh I mean the
scale of detention and torture during
the war on terror and everyone obviously
knows about Guantanamo Bay but that
wasn't the worst of it no the worst of
it happened at CIA blacks sit on
overseas territories yeah and I was
talking recently to um John kiraku who
was CIA who was in the CIA until 2004 he
suff from 1990 to 2004 and he blew the
whistle on CIA torture went to prison um
he and he talks about I was talking to
him about uh the Assange case actually
but we were talking about the power of
the CIA in
Washington and he was just like they've
run the whole show like they like they
there there is no uh separation of
powers in terms of of the uh a uh
agencies of State uh the CIA has its its
fingers in everything and it's massively
under blown and if you some people say
that the last president who was not in
the hands of the intelligence agencies
in the US was JFK that's what Oliver
Stone says um and I mean I'm saying I
agree with that I don't know I don't
know enough to to say that's true but he
was he said he JFK did say he wanted to
scatter the uh CIA into a thousand
little pieces so he was he he made
himself un unpop clear at the CIA but do
you are you sort of implying that you
think that he might have gotten bumped
off by no do you know what I haven't
really ever looked into the JFK stuff
but but I know and and it could be like
the uh the the rightwing Cubans as well
because Bay of Pigs invasion uh was in
1961 and that was uh us or uh organized
CIA organized um Exiles that landed at
the Bay of Pigs I've actually been
sunbathing on the Bay of Pigs it's funny
uh it's a beach uh and uh he he um it's
not just why David Cameron goes on
holiday yeah yeah he loves it he uh and
then two years later um he gets bumped
off and the whole thing was that the
Cubans were really really angry and the
and and the sort of intelligence
agencies were angry at JFK because JFK
would not give him air cover they said
we could have won if you'd given us air
cover he didn't anyway that's one Theory
so I could I'm not saying it was a CIA
but my point was that that was the last
time you'd ever you'd heard you heard a
president speaking like that about the
CIA you're not going to get Joe Biden
say I want to scatter the C into a
thousand pieces it wouldn't have got
Obama you won't get trumps in fact
Trump's probably the most likely person
to say that funnily enough um but uh so
yeah so the book goes like the book is
it goes by country really so it starts
in Haiti which I think is maybe like the
emblematic example of us Empire and how
it's destroyed countless countries
because Haiti obviously after the
Haitian revolution uh uh which was W in
1804 and then became the first free
black Republic in uh in the new world
and then was basically just destroyed by
the Imperial powers for having the
gumption to do that and the French
initially but then the US took over the
Imperial role and um they and when I
went to Haiti it was uh it was a year
after the
earthquake and I went with the ft and uh
it was insane it was like I've never
seen anything like it I don't think I
ever it was apocalypse you know like
that was an earthquake which killed
300,000 people I think in one go which
is unim unable and this is a small
country and plus like when you when I
arrived in pter Prince the capital like
it was UN it was UN it was literally
unreal I couldn't imagine I was just
thinking what what if this happened in
London because the presidential Palace
had collapsed there were no buildings
everyone was
intense um uh um and I went to Gulf
which was the one that Shawn Penn set up
and it was just it was I mean it was
good work that he did but the the
conditions were just unreal um and and I
but but the world does looks different
if you're an ft journalist so I was
taken around in a air conditioned
4x4 to different uh s uh to different
projects being financed by the IFC which
is the private sector lending armor the
World Bank or us Aid which is the main
uh a US Aid agencies and they were like
this is going to be the future of Haiti
this is a new private power uh energy um
company come and talk to their uh their
CEO in in an air conditioned office
Behind These imposing Gates and I did
that and then I went up I went up to the
north and saw a new industrial park that
was being built by us Aid and you go
into the meetings like I mentioned and
it all seems great they're like we are
employing 500 people here in a country
that has no um uh um uh jobs so and and
Mo and then you stay in a fivestar hotel
so everything seems great you're like
okay well this is uh this is the way to
rebuild Haiti but the truth is and in
fact the book is quite interesting I
think how to I I kind of think about the
book is like I gathered all the evidence
on the ground with the ft and then I
went back and cross referenced it with
the US cables in the Wikileaks releases
because Haiti so I read basically every
cable that went from Porter Prince to ha
to Washington from like 2004 to 201 uh
15 and I found out that that industrial
park that I went to that was being
celebrated was actually built on
people's land that they were displaced
to kick it off and and the the company
that ran it had um busted the union um
and the union had been initially the guy
actually said this to me it was
Troublesome uh so they they got rid of
it uh and that that so and that's the
Two Worlds there's two realities and the
way the system works for corporate
journalist or establishment journalists
is you are given one reality and you're
very very you have to be very very
strong willed to uh to look outside that
because you're also told it's all these
wonderful things so why would you look
elsewhere like when I went to South
Africa it's also in the book they sent
me to South Africa to cover something
called the mining in darba which is the
biggest mining event in the world uh and
it was in
Johannesburg and um you you go there and
it's wonderful like you go into a a a
meeting and everyone's talking about all
the wonderful things or mining companies
are doing and and then you end up with
something like the Americana Massacre
and journalists are going well how could
this have happened exactly and it
doesn't make sense to them and then
everyone and then you get ministers
coming thec Minister came in and was
like uh when I was there and said don't
worry we're not going to nationalize the
mins which was one of the anc's it was
in their freedom chter which was a
really important promise which the one
of the many things that the ANC has
renade on but uh uh and everyone's
clapping and then uh everyone they they
bring up all these slides of all the
schools that they built but anyway that
there is a whole reality that's
generated a whole propaganda system that
is fed into journalists and unless
you're strong will enough to start
picking away it or look underneath it
which nearly no one is cuz you'll be out
the door um then then it you have a nice
life and you can prosper I want to go
back to the CIA for just a second let's
say I am a bright and ambitious
University graduate and I really decide
that I want to work for the CIA how does
that happen what are the kinds of
selection processes that go into someone
being selected for that kind of a job
and what kind of person do they get
morphed into as they proceed through the
system
well it's hard to know because um
obviously I don't know uh anyone
personally I know John Kaku a bit but I
have read Edward snowden's uh
autobiography I don't know if you've
read that and it's quite interesting
with him he he was actually
uh he was uh he didn't do well in school
I think and but then got really good at
computers and then was basically uh
scouted by the NSA uh and started
working for them so I think in the US
it's not like here it's not the tap on
the shoulder at Oxford I think it's more
formalized and in fact interestingly
enough in the US is much more open
Society than us in terms of its
intelligence agencies although you can't
get much from the CIA it is open to the
Freedom of Information Act so you can
send the Freedom of Information Act to
the CIA and the NSA I've done it I
didn't get anything back yeah they might
put it in the shredder but you can send
it but but it's in theory you can here
you can't MI5 and MI6 is completely
completely secret the special force is
the same you can't you can even you can
fo the special forces in the US um so it
works in different ways I think that um
I think the CIA is so big now it's it
has to be more formalized like millions
of people have uh security clearance in
the US which is a problem for them as
well because you could get more many
more well you get they get many more
whistleblowers than we get here that's
how end up with the Chelsea Manning
that's how up ex exact and Snowden
Snowden what Snowden did uh was
incredible for and will be seen by
history does it perturb you that in the
years since the Snowden League that
we've become a lot more casual or
passive or apathetic about
surveillance yes um I think but it's
like that with everything though like
you I I don't want that to happen with
Gaza as well I worry about this with
Gaza because at the time with the
Snowden leaks and it was also the
Wikileaks uh releases in 2010 you know
the Wikileaks releases preed the Snowden
releases but were incredible you had it
on the front page of the guardian in New
York Times really really uh uh stories
that really really explain the nuts of
bols of how it how the system works uh
and completely blew open the propaganda
system that we've been talking about and
then Snowden in 2013 showed Mass
surveillance of all of us by our own
intelligence agencies illegally
according to the European Court of Human
Rights so uh and then and then it goes
back as there's a flurry of activity and
then everyone just uh goes back to how
they were before uh and that uh it does
depress me but there's not I don't know
if there's a way around that because you
have to have a we don't control the
discourse so the discourse is controlled
by powerful interests which uh and they
work and they can work very easily to to
to kill those issues once they've come
out uh but I and I worry about that with
Gaza because I don't know with previous
massacres in Gaza in 20089 2014 21 uh
I've always been like okay well this is
going to change the game now everyone's
seen and then a little while later
everyone's fine with to play music in
Israel or whatever it is but I do think
it's a bit different with the Gaza
genocide now I think that it's maybe the
biggest event that's happened in terms
of politically in in our in our Liv well
let's talk about the Israel Lobby
because one of the things I'm really
curious about is the combination of
factors that go into creating an
incentive structure for politicians and
in your view how much of it is
ideological alignment so you don't like
Muslim we don't like Muslims we've got
some shared interest here how much of it
is geopolitical alignment so you need a
western Outpost in the Middle East um
how much of it is cold Hard Cash like we
will fund your campaign or we'll fund
your Rivals and how much of it is a kind
of political blackmail like you will be
smeared as an anti-i a terrorist
sympathizer so on and so forth um so
yeah H how do the incentives work here
in the UK and is it different from how
it works in the US in the UK uh I guess
it works similarly in both places but
it's a combination of all the stuff you
mentioned I think um my belief now is
that the Israel Lobby is the overriding
factor I.E this uh and it's not just
funding of politicians obviously that
happens but it's also just bodies which
are set up uh and have links to the
Israeli state that are set up to destroy
anyone who might step on the toes of the
Israeli government uh and you saw that
in a big way of Jeremy Corbin now Jeremy
Corbin wasn't bought down by the Israel
Lobby by itself at all that it was a
Confluence of different interest British
establishment Israel Lobby uh uh uh arms
industry like every element of the
British billionaire own press exactly
everyone everyone had an interest to
bring him down but they were a part of
it um but they're hugely powerful and uh
I think part of it is that it's got
massively out of control because people
are scared to talk about it because it
does there is this people think it's
anti-semitic or it's part of a Trope
shadowy Jewish power when it's not it's
not about Jewish power it's about uh
Israeli power uh and every country has a
Lobby of different differing powers like
in this country the Gulf States have
hugely powerful lobbies like uh UAE
Saudi Oman even um uh but the Israeli
one and and actually the work I've done
at Declassified I think the most
powerful country in this in this country
that that interferes in uh in our
country is is America but and then
Israel is probably second but in terms
of to go to your question I think that
my take now is that the Israel Lobby is
the main reason why we have such such
loyal support for Israel across the
board because I think back in the day or
when when Israel was created or even in
Bala Declaration was 1917 and there was
a famous quote from um the the the
governor of Jerusalem when it was under
British mandate period he someone this
is before Israel was created but someone
said to him why why does Britain support
um Zionism and he said well we want to
have a uh a a loyal Jewish oler in a sea
of potentially uh hostile arabism so
their their fear was that independent
nationalism in in the Middle East might
kick out the Imperial forces like
Britain and France and that having a
little Jewish olster would be able to uh
it basically keep the Arab world
backward and keep it reactionary and
keep it open to uh Imperial control and
I think and they were right and
they were right and it did and it served
that function you know like they invaded
Egypt in 1956 when they when when NASA
nationalized the Su Canal that was that
was a that was a British and a French
interest or British interest primarily
uh but Israel invaded Sinai uh and so
they became and then and then in the
sixth day war they defeated NASA again
and NASA was the big
the British and the French hated NASA
because he was independent and wanted to
create an Arab nation and stuff so uh
Israel was doing its job then uh and I
think but I think I think it's changed
now I think that I don't know how much
um uh how good Israel is for for the US
and UK now because especially with the
latest G of genocide like it's turned
the whole of the Arab world against them
and in fact us ambassadors did it was
leaked that they were saying they were
sending cables back to the to Washington
telling Biden this that you're going to
you've turned the Arab world against us
for for Generations it's tanked the
Abraham Accord T I mean it's a disaster
for them PR Wise It's also like they've
had to smash the system just
yesterday um the Congress passed or
House of Representatives passed to
approve sanctions on the ICC so even
these Imperial institutions which I
think the ICC up to now has been uh
they're having to smash It All To Pieces
Just for this little country that is 9
million people it's the same population
as London has a GDP smaller than Sweden
and literally the world's most powerful
Empire uh is is literally smashing the
whole system it created after the second
world war just to keep it sweet so I
think that that's not explained by real
politi or geopolitics I think that's
explained by the fact that the political
system in the US and it's the same here
has been captured by Israel and that is
that is mainly done through financing uh
politicians through APAC in the US but
also labor friends of Israel
conservative friends of Israel here uh
and it's also done as I say through and
as you mentioned through smearing people
who uh speak out against Israel as
anti-sites and stuff um and it and it
works it works like the spear stuff
works as I mentioned Corbin uh he he
he's he's not even allowed to stand as a
labor andp it's kind of amazing and this
is a guy that's like been probably the
leader of the anti-racist movement in
Britain in terms of parliamentary
politics for for his whole life um and
and they've managed to they've managed
to present him as an anti-site uh and
that's purely because he has a history
of supporting the Palestinian cause I
mean just going back
to what you describe as America smashing
you know Imperial institutions to bits
in order to protect Israel and saying
well this shows that Israel's captured
American politics is there also perhaps
a real politique explanation that
involves Iran which is if you look at
Iran as America's biggest uh
Regional threat and its need to shore up
the Middle East well you've got to bring
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on side and
obviously you need Israel for that so
the sacrifice for that is the r
International this is the most powerful
country in the world they have bases all
over the Middle East they bases in Saudi
Oman they got the fifth Fleet in Bahrain
they own that whole region of the world
CC in Egypt is basically a US client
they don't need a little aircraft
carrier in Israel in my opinion like I
don't it's not like they they have it's
not a sea of potentially hostile arabism
now like the Arab world the the the gulf
dictators are all on their side so I
don't think you need Israel now I think
if you're if you're a state department
planner You' look at the situation and
be like why we need to cut these people
loose uh but they can't because the
elected politicians who are in control
of the agencies are are so deeply
embedded in this uh in this system of
lobbying and uh uh cultivation and it's
interesting here because you again you
can be specific about it here the main
way they do it is conservative friends
of Israel and label friends of Israel in
terms of and what they do is they fund
trips for new MPS nearly always new MPS
like within the first year you're taken
on this trip by conservative friends of
Israel labor friends of Israel and shown
and given the Israeli propaganda tour of
of of Israel but also the West Bank and
that has an impact you know and then and
and the and there was an amazing
documentary by Al jazer called the lobby
which I would tell everyone to watch
because it's one of the best bits of
journalism I've seen in recent years and
they went undercover in labor friends of
Israel and you know that the findings
are amazing like um what one one
official of lfi said we worked closely
uh with um Shai masot who was one of the
Israeli diplomats that well I wanted to
ask about Shai masot so who is he and
what did he do so he was an Israeli
Diplomat um that was exposed in the
lobby documentary and it came so he was
undercover recorded saying he wanted to
take down British MPS one being Sal Alan
Duncan who was a foreign minister from
2016 to 19 and he also said um that uh
he was wanting to create a a a new uh
youth movement uh which was not
affiliated to the Embassy but was going
to was being done with labor friends of
Israel so basically it was just exposed
at the fact that labor friends of Israel
is is a front and I'm not I think it's
very legitimate to say it's a front for
the Israeli Embassy in London um and he
eventually had that that story about
taking down MPS did what there was a
front page in the Daily Mail and he
eventually had was forced to resign and
went home to Israel uh but none of the
because they'll say oh but he was a
oneoff yeah of course but actually it's
interesting so I'd also another thing
that I'd tell people to look at is Alan
Duncan alen Duncan's Memoirs uh called
uh in the thick of it I think which came
out a couple of years ago and he Alan
Duncan is
like he's he's not someone I agree with
politically he was he's he's he's part
of the circle
uh and actually in his in Memoirs he
talks about going to the circle meetings
um he's he's very very close to the golf
dictatorships um he's an oil man but
he's good on Palestine in fact well he's
not good he just has he he he he tries
to enforce the UK government's official
policy which is a two-state solution but
that's too much for the Israel Lobby and
he and it's fascinating what happened to
him like in
2016 um he was slated by Boris Johnson
was then foreign secretary and Theresa
May as prime minister and he was slated
to be the Middle East Minister cuz he
has massive links to the Middle East as
I say to the gulf dictatorships and
others
and conservative friends of Israel got
word of it uh and Stuart poac and Eric
pickles who are two senior figures I
think they called up either Theresa May
or her um uh chief of staff and said you
can't do it can't you can't make Alan
Duncan uh Middle East Minister it's not
happening and she did she she listened
to them and he was not allowed to uh
become middle Eastman that there's this
really funny interactions that he has
with Boris Johnson he tells Boris
Johnson and Boris Johnson apparently
says in the diar the Israeli shouldn't
do this they always do this they
shouldn't do this and then Alan Duncan's
saying to him well maybe what we should
do is give I take the Middle East brief
but we leave Israel Palestine out of it
and this is and then you're sort of like
are we a sovereign country now where
there's an Israel Lobby group dictating
to the Prime Minister who can be Middle
East minister in the end he was not
allowed to be Middle East Minister he
was made Minister for Latin America uh
for the Americas in Europe and in that
role was a major figure in uh dragging
Julian Assange out of the Ecuadorian
Embassy actually that's another story
but his Diaries are the best window we
have into how the Israel Lobby in
Britain works and everyone should read
them and they should be widely known but
again is how the media Works what were
those Diaries were covered but it was
all the froy stories where he said rude
words about Eric pickles or Boris
Johnson none of the actual substantive
issues that tell you how our society's
run and in whose interests were covered
so I did I did article for Declassified
on those um on those Diaries and the
headline was the Israelis think they
control foreign office and they do
exclamation mark and that's one of the
lines in his Memoirs you would think in
a functioning democracy with a free
press if a former foreign minister is
coming is is saying that our foreign uh
office is controlled by the Israelis as
the quote you might think that might
interest some people but again has never
been mentioned in a mainstream media
sounds like a Trope to me so yeah exact
well it that's what I mean is like we
have the evidence we have the evidence
this Alan Duncan is not a fringe figure
he's someone who served in the inside
and was targeted by the Israel Lobby in
terms of conservative friends of Israel
with his appointment but also Shai mot
who was recorded saying we want to take
him down and there's a whole whole if
you scratch the surface it just unravels
you know it's uh there's a whole
infrastructure here and I think that
actually the Gaza genocide is ripping
the veil off because people aren't
scared to speak about it anymore and I
understand why people I'm not like I'm
not here to like chastise people is we
all have uh our own concerns about how
we want to be presented so I understand
there's a lot of obstacles to speaking
about it but I think they're gone now or
they're kind of G I say stuff on Twitter
now about this stuff and I used to get
loads and loads of feed uh push back but
now people are open to it and say okay
well this is this is a real thing uh and
and we need to talk about it and but the
interesting thing is all the people that
we have in this country that talk about
um sovereignty you know like a taking
back control brexit they never mentioned
Israel they never mentioned any of the
stuff that I've mentioned they never
mentioned the United States and we
should talk about that actually because
as well as uh as well as the Israel
Lobby not being talked about the
American Lobby is not talked about well
I want to let's talk about the American
Lobby what was really striking um at the
time we're recording this interview the
night before was the first head-to-head
leadership debate between Rishi suak and
K Dharma when it got to uh Gaza there
was nothing nothing dividing them there
was a slight difference in emphasis but
policy for policy exactly the same it
seems to me that the consensus position
on foreign policy in the UK is that we
just Outsource it to
America H H how did we end up here
firstly I agree with you I think that is
basically where and in fact I think you
could probably trace it if you had time
that the starma especially st's labor
like every time the position changed
literally the next day they change it's
almost like we can say it now what like
a um how did we get here well we
basically just took um took a junior
role after the second world war to try
and retain our Imperial pretensions uh
and we are still an Empire that's
another thing that you're not allowed to
say but is we we are an Empire but we're
an adjunct to the US Empire effectively
Butler to the world is the Oliver bow s
phrasing yeah exactly and and and we do
but we do perform some important
Imperial fun functions for them like the
work we've been doing at Declassified
has been about how our base on Cyprus
which Cyprus was U made independent of
Brit in 1960 under Archbishop macarius
uh but was it made independent because
we retained 3% of the land mass which we
still have and there's a massive RAF
base there there's a massive
intelligence station to called the kelia
uh I've been to both those places and
the whole of the um uh uh arming of
Israel is being done via that UK base
and that's been done by the US Air Force
but again that's that's shows what
function we provide uh but they control
the political system here through again
through groups that are quite specific
like we talked about the Israel lobby
but the American Lobby they were really
worried uh in the 80s about Michael foot
who was the only since the second world
war it's only Michael foot and Jeremy
Corbin who have been Anti-Imperialist or
at least not atlanticist uh demonized
political and they were freaking
although it was before our time they
were freaking out about Michael foot in
the same way they were freaked out about
Jeremy Corbin and in fact the left
destroyed him as well by be by splitting
the vote creating the sdp but uh uh the
the American embassy at the time was
really really worried about the um
Anti-Imperialist um labor party under
Michael foot and Michael foot's um
Manifesto in 1983 which has been called
the longest suicide note in history but
it it said it's like the first thing I
learned in politics a level they always
make sure to tell you that the left got
humiliated and you shouldn't try it
again but it was it's quite amazing
document you should look people should
look at it like one of the things is
they they said we should leave NATO uh
as long as the Warsaw Pact was was was
disintegrated as well uh and other stuff
and anyway in 1983 they created a thing
called The Brit it was US Embassy funded
initially uh and later on as well called
the British American project which is u
a really really interesting uh
Institution for understanding how
Britain works and what it was about was
it was started by someone at chattam
house and a couple of other fig but what
it was about was trying to cultivate the
left away from
anti-imperialism um and it still exists
today uh and what it what uh it it
basically worked all through the 80s in
fact for the story that I did on it for
the classified Emma code who's the
former MP for Kensington and
Chelsea she I interviewed her because
she was approached by the British
American project in the 80s and she said
I I thought it was very strange I was
just a journalist at the time and she
was uh uh approached to to go to one of
their meetings and she she said it
didn't smell right so she didn't do it
and then she was told that the person
who tried to recruit her who was at the
time working for a prominent peace group
uh was a CIA working for the CIA this is
what ident Co said again not a fringe
figure uh not conspiracy theorist uh and
you see uh and and it still exists today
and a lot of the people that are
associated with the British American
project were the main uh critics of uh
Jeremy Corbin so Peter manderson people
like that um and so they control control
the the British politics through groups
like that but they also do it uh through
they they have a occupation of our
country OCC I say occupation because
we've never voted on it we have 12,000
over 12,000 troops permanently based in
the UK spread across 11 so-called RAF
sites they're called RAF sites but
they're not RAF sites they're least to
the Americans and operate as American
Air Force bases um most of them uh the
two most important ones are near here
they're called Lake and Heath and Hall
um and we're not allowed to know
anything that happens on them so we can
get information about UK activities
military activities on on UK sites we
can't get any information about they
they say we don't comment on allies
activities so we got they operate and
this is again not an exaggeration they
operate as black sites for the Americans
are British bases we can't get any
information about what they're doing at
RF crer so you got that then you've got
the National Endowment for democracy
which is uh again was set up also in
1983 by President Reagan
uh and that was that's a very
interesting institution itself because
that was also set up because of the
scandals with the CIA in the' 70s so
they had all these scandals that were
getting into the media about trying to
assassinate leaders overthrow
governments there was something called a
church Committee in 1975 which exposed a
lot of it and Reagan's people were just
like right we need to stop doing things
covertly let's just put it all out in
the open so the Ned was created
explicitly as a way to do what the CIA
did but uh over uh over ly and and
openly so they so they any and it still
exists they fund uh media organizations
and and uh uh all sorts of other sort of
Civil Society groups and I did no wonder
we're broke man we don't get any
of that sweet sweet CIA money well well
open democracy got funded by it and I
I'm a fan of open democracy don't get me
wrong and I I I questioned them about it
and wrote it in the piece uh it's in a
book um they they they they were given a
grant I think in 2017 18 or something
but uh but as well as them Belling cat
was fun is funded or was funded by them
index on
censorship um which I'll come back to
Article 19 there's various various ways
to do it and there's
a um just to go back to index on index
on sship is a really really interesting
case because they got like
600,000 from the Ned from 2016 to 2021
their CEO is called Ruth Anderson she
was previously called Ruth smei she was
a major
um critic of Jeremy Corbin is now an
unelected Lord and apparently a shadow
defense minister I saw the other day so
she'll be Minister she was exposed in
the um Wikileaks cables as being a
strictly protect us informant for the US
Embassy in
London everyone can go and look at that
it never it's never been mentioned in
the mainstream media again uh these
things are just wiped out but she uh uh
she so they're funded by the Ned the CEO
is exposed as a US Embassy informant her
husband was a senior figure in the
British American project so you see like
that there's a whole web of interests
that support uh and uh make sure we
retain our alliance to the United States
and the first stage of breaking that
which I think we should anyone who
believes in like America is the major
sort of counterrevolutionary reactionary
force in the world today we we don't
want to be part of that so we want to
create a sovereign country the first
stage in getting there is to make people
aware of it because no one's allowed to
talk about it so we need to get the
information out there I've got one final
question for you so unless something go
spectacularly sideways kiss armor is
going to be the next prime minister of
this country what's your take on him is
he a True atlanticist Believer is he a
useful idiot who'll say anything if it
gets him into power is he a fully
committed establishment operative how
does he relate to this INF structure of
you know foreign interests uh you know a
closed rank establishment and a system
of propaganda that you've described in
this interview I think he's a nothing to
be totally I don't think he believes
anything he's just interested in power
and he'll do and say whatever he needs
to to get into power and in our system
that means basically just signing
yourself up to the Israel uh an American
Imperial well well the American Imperial
project but also Israel um and again
there you can be specific about he's
joined and being part of groups that are
part of this American uh uh
infrastructure of control in Britain
like the trilateral commission which was
set up by um David Rockefeller in the
70s again Rockefeller was linked to the
CIA um he uh he joined that while he was
Corbin's Shadow brexit Secretary of the
trilateral commission uh and uh without
telling Corbin by the way uh I asked
Corbin's people and he said and and they
said he didn't tell Corbin and Corbin
would have blocked it um and he served
on the trilateral commission alongside
Henry Kissinger and two former heads of
the CIA including David
Petraeus uh so there's that then his
then there's a whole uh uh um his
history at the CPS shows that he's
willing to do what whatever is asked of
him uh on Julian ass but also uh the um
clamping down on people on right people
who were um 24-hour courts ex after six
month prison
sentence exactly all the riot Stuff Plus
de manzz uh like his his whole record is
I he will do whatever is needed uh for
the establishment to retain their power
and uh and then uh in the case of um
Julian ass sign is quite interesting
because again we're the only people that
have done work on this at Declassified
but I asked the CPS for records of his
four trips to Washington as um director
of public
prosecutions uh he was director of
public prosecutions from 2008 to 2013 he
made four three trips to Washington
while he was in charge of his proposed
extradition to Sweden and the CPS just
got back to him said can't give you them
because we've destroyed everything we've
destroyed everything that's quite
shocking it's a public body and it's not
a super old material and it's obviously
has historical value which is what which
is the criteria to retain stuff and then
so I sent one back I said
okay that's strange well I didn't say
that's strange but I said okay uh can
you tell me what you destroyed and they
said we don't even know what we
destroyed that so you there's a cover up
in my opinion I don't think it's too far
so and that's another thing you see with
st it's not just that he's willing to do
the bidding of the establishment but all
through his career documents go you
don't know like he's he's he's going to
be the secret prime minister his whole
history is is has been uh kind of erased
and CPS is the public body so that's
where we could get the most information
about what he was up to but he's willing
to do what he's told in the case of
Israel like and you mentioned the
debates with Gaza I think that they're
actually more Pro
Israel than the conservatives because
you wouldn't get someone like senior
like Alan Duncan anywhere near the labor
senior positions now like Alan Duncan
wasn't just a backbench MP he was a
minister and he had a just a normal his
whole position was the British
government position but you wouldn't
even get someone saying that now I mean
that that going back to smashing the
International System Labor's also man
probably destroying itself although they
win a landslide I think things in this
country are going to get very very
interesting soon after because people
have been sold the lie for uh over a
decade that the country is in a mess but
as soon as we get the Tories out it's
all going to be okay and I think
unfortunately because we have a mass
media that promotes that a lot of people
believe it but they're going to see very
quickly after starmo is elected that
that's not the case and that the labor
party is basically doing the same things
on some things even worse and there's
going to be some kind of uh reaction to
that whether that's popular movement
whether that's the far right benefit or
the far left who knows but I think it's
going to get really interesting and I'll
just finish on this is that um couple of
days ago I was out with lean Muhammad
who is a 23y old British Palestinian
woman in ilford north and what uh it was
really interesting walking around with
her because you see the people are
seething it's bubbling under the surface
you don't see it in the media but people
are so angry at Labor and their position
on Gaza it's it's unreal uh and they
should be uh but I don't think that's
going to go away and I think that the
the global Awakening uh and The
Awakening here that people are having
over Gaza the fact okay will both the
main parties support the genocide in
Gaza that's having a deep deep impact
and people don't realize they've been
lied to by everyone uh and just stop
looking they they think okay well if
I've been lied to about Israel Palestine
maybe I've been lied to about other
stuff and then that's when it all starts
unraveling and the discourse unravels
and we as of the left or as people who
are interested in truth and having a
real truthful account of how the world
works and how Britain Works should be
ready to step in and provide some kind
of uh guide for these people because I
think that the whole the whole system's
been smashed to pieces and and it's
going to be rebuilt but it's the
question is who rebuilds it Matt Kennard
thank you so much for joining us this
week thanks a lot
