Autos work DTF dialectical thought forms
has been the
biggest thought analysis problem solving
tool I have ever come across and
Autos work when applied to problem
solving because that's my background
that's what I I focus on particularly
the climate
issues it's it's so far in advance of
other analysis systems that it's almost
a joke when you think of the other
systems they're like they're one quarter
or one fifth is
powerful and his DTF dialectical thought
forms are critical to solving the
problems that the world has to solve
right now it is essential that more
people learn these
techniques otherwise we are going to
have bad leaders making bad choices and
we will suffer bad
consequences and the world is in enough
trouble right now that we absolutely
have
to learn these newer techniques there
are hundreds of studies that come out on
the climate every year I probably read
20 25,000 pages of climate studies and I
look at these
studies and I see them as a collection I
I don't look at them monolithically I
see them as a as a broad
spectrum describing different parts of
the many parts of the climate system
what I do is I use the 28 thought forms
the process the Transformations the
relationships in the context and I I
look into the data and I look for
I look for patterns and I look for
emitted data and the hardest thing to
find is what's
emitted absolutely the hardest thing to
find is what's emitted when you use
these 28 thought forms you're looking at
it from so many angles that what is
emitted almost pops out at you because
the thought form says where is this that
should be there and and you go it's not
there
and this was a critical emitted piece
which allowed you to see a greater
pattern and to understand the
relationship between multiple climate
systems so the climate has 12 or
something major systems the oceans
permafrost the atmosphere water vapor
Etc and you're watching all these
systems interdependently and
interconnected
interact and what auto system does is it
it allows you to to to look at this
interaction from ways that you could
never see it not even in System Theory
System Theory was a great Advance over
just regular logic but with being able
to see it 28 different ways to look at a
single moment in evolutionary time it
allows
you to see what no one else has
seen to literally see what no one else
has seen I I wind up looking at patterns
that I I go how could these other
researchers not see this I look at these
omissions and I go these omissions are
serious how could other people not see
it and I I look at errors that if I had
not seen the data moving through these
28
perspectives I wouldn't have seen the
errors between one study and another and
those inter relationships and how that
affects our future so his work has been
instrumental
in really taking climate science and
pulling out the errors looking at the
deeper patterns that have been missed
and speaking a deeper truth that could
not be seen if it wasn't for his tool it
simply could not be seen I'm not saying
I'm the brightest guy in the world but
I'm saying his tool makes me look like
I'm a lot smarter than I am Otto's work
has to be spread worldwide to political
leaders to our intelligence agencies to
our intelligence analysts to Major
Executives to everyone who's handling
critical areas of life because if you
can't see contexts you can't see
processes relationships and ongoing
Transformations and then the seven
subsets of each one of those seven
subset
perspectives you will miss reality you
will miss the fine details the pattern
PS the errors the omissions that will
cause undue pain and suffering for
Humanity we need our leaders to learn
this as quickly as
possible yeah I'm extremely happy to be
here uh because as I will briefly
outline uh promoting Otto's work
spreading its influence is very
important for the future of humanity for
the future evolutionary evolutionary
success of humanity my scientific work
focuses on uh the big picture of
evolution in particular uh it looks at
the trajectory of
evolution uh where it's come from where
it's headed headed to um it reveals that
there are two main uh directions to the
trajectory of evolution the first is
towards increasing integration since
life first emerged on this planet
um living processes of in a stepwise
manner uh increasingly become
integrated um and we can use that
understanding of of that trajectory of
evolution to see where it's headed and
importantly to see what the next steps
that Humanity must take are um and the
next step in terms of integration is the
ultimate integration on a planetary wide
basis uh of living Pro processes with
the emergence of a global uh cooperative
and unified Society of human beings that
manage the living processes of the
planet into a unified whole the second
trajectory of evolution and this is the
one that brought me to Otto's work um is
towards increasing evolvability
evolvability is the ability to adapt um
and to evolve the ability to search
possibility space um in order to
identify uh how to adapt and how to
evolve when Evolution first um began on
this planet uh it had very low
evolvability
it proceeded through blind trial and
error it searched possibility space um
through a mechanism that had no
foresight um no ability to look ahead so
with the trajectory towards increasing
evolvability
um eventually uh as we know uh It
produced human intelligence human
intelligence is distinctive in the sense
that it enables uh humans to form mental
models uh of phenomena and use those
mental models to predict uh and plan for
the future to avoid um dangers and so on
um so that that evolution of avability
when we see the trajectory
um we can see what the deficiencies are
in our current intelligence our current
ability to evolve uh and it enables us
to see how those deficiencies can be
overcome and what the next great step uh
in the evolution of evolvability on this
planet is um and basically that step um
uh is towards intelligence the capacity
to build mental models and use Mental
models that can capture complex reality
um
so I was also in addition to uh
being uh propelled in this direction of
Investigation um by my work on Evolution
I've also had a personal uh interest
throughout my life since I've been an
early teenager on working on myself that
is on self- scaffolding on building my
own
capacities uh in the social emotional
area Plus in relation to
cognition um so and given that I was
interested in evolution I was
particularly interested in uh systems
perspectives the big picture of
evolution um so I
became uh focused on and an expert on um
systems thinking and so on uh
however um whilst I develop capacities
in that area through trial and error
stumbling into possibilities and so on
and even though my antenna were always
out over this last 55 years to find ways
of scaffolding and improving cognition
both to uh uh to assist and do what I
could to propel The evolutionary
development of humanity towards
increasing Evol ability um it uh it also
was a major personal interest however uh
even though my antenna antenna were out
I couldn't find anything so it was an
enormous um it had enormous impact on me
when I came across Otto's work uh in the
first decade of the um 20th century and
what I saw there astounded me um because
I expected that if I ever did come
across uh techniques for scaffolding um
metas systemic or dialectical thinking
the ability to form models of complex
reality then I thought that uh it would
be in a half-baked form it would be a
first approximation it would be a first
draft so to speak but what what
astounded me when I came across the uh
manual for dialectric Thought forms was
that here was something that was fully
formed highly sophisticated uh could be
put to use immediately and could be used
to propel Humanity's Evolution and
enable Humanity to overcome the complex
existential threats that are currently
threatening uh
endangering uh the future of
humanity um what what the thought forms
do what the uh moments of dialectic do
is
identify the limitations of our current
thinking they identify where our current
thinking is
deficient uh it identifies for our model
building where the models are inadequate
the things they leave out um and then
most significantly of of all the thought
forms identify where we have to move our
attention where we have to move our
Consciousness in order to fill in those
absences in order to develop Vel models
that are comprehensive and models that
finally can capture what most of reality
is like and most of reality cannot be
understood by mainstream science which
is powered by analytical rational
thinking which is mechan mechanistic and
limited most of reality uh is too
complex to be captured by that and it
needs um the uh it needs tools that that
identify
how the thinking has to be expanded how
our attention must move in order to
develop complex models um so uh Otto's
work made an extraordinary impact on me
I see it as the key the key to
propelling the next great step in the
evolution of evolvability in living
processes on this planet um it's it's
the key to that and it's the key when
applied to overcoming the complex
existential threats that currently
threaten Humanity so for the so I'm
extraordinar happy to be here tonight to
do what I can to um uh help promote
Otto's work because the spread of Otto's
work uh is critically important for the
future uh Evolution and survivability of
Life on this
planet
thanks putting my thoughts together
before coming into this
core one of the quotes that kept going
through my head is what Newton
apparently said where he said if I've
seen further it's because I was standing
on the shoulders of giants and that I
think rarely applies Otto to what you've
created with your entire body of work
is it really is a giant piece of work
and it's something that I found
incredibly
useful over the past 15 years since
first encountering your work and it's
something
where the more I put your work into
practice the more I realize how little I
know about it and how little I
understand it and how much more I need
to to work with it to really Master it
if if it can ever be
Ed
and where it's useful and where I really
underline again what has been said this
is something that I believe everybody
ought to know just in the same way that
a few hundred years ago people were
beginning to realize that everybody
ought to have a basic level of literacy
and
numeracy one of the things that I
learned in my first career as a
physicist is that there is nothing more
practical than a good theory and this is
what your body of work is for me it's a
superb
framework that I can use as a
practitioner in business to really look
at what is present what's missing and
how can we arrange this in such a way
that we can see
clearly what are the systems what are
the structures what are the processes
what is the
interrelatedness and what are the
potential Transformations that we can
bring in and this last one is critical I
left my job with proon gamble in
2008 very frustrated and very much in
despair at the inability of a company
whose purpose is to improve the lives of
the world's
consumers to actually do that over
anything longer than a quarter and
instead primarily taking decisions for
smooth returns to
investors and that has led over the past
15 years to myself and my colleagues
developing a new way of
incorporating that fully includes all
stakeholders
effectively just before this call I was
listening to a podcast from yanis
varakis and he was saying we need a way
of governing companies and what he
described is exactly what we developed
10 years ago and have been putting into
practice over the past 10 years in more
than 50 companies around the
world a core part of that was the
recognition that business lies in six
ecosystems from the inner ecosystem of
each individual all the way up to
ecosystem six the global
economy and that was something that was
initially for
me primarily
intuitive it just made sense to me but I
hadn't really thought it through fully
and it was only in dialogue with Otto
that I truly understood how all of that
fits together and in particular what I
rarely mean when I use the word
ecosystem is both the systems and
structures and the interactions and
agencies in such a way that neither of
them is conflated into the other but
truly treated as distinct components
that are
inseparable you know and without that
Insight I wouldn't be doing much of what
I'm able to do now I wouldn't have
written the two books the way they are
we wouldn't have got to the deep
understanding that when we talk about a
company or a person we can't think of
what that company is at a point in time
we can only really work with that
company when we look at its entire path
from beginning to end same with a person
we have to look at the whole
path and that led to my second book The
a godic
investor because the statistics you have
to use when you're looking at an entire
path as the fundamental unit rather than
discrete disconnected moments in time is
fundamentally different
statistics and economics not being aware
of that is why almost all businesses
today are built to fail they're built to
perform below average that's why we have
climate change and so many other aspects
of our poly
crisis and I'll give one final example
of where autos work has been seminal for
for everything that I've been
doing it's led to my co-author Jack Ren
who's an
economist the two of us proposing a
radical new approach to economics is a
discipline you know a discipline that
needs to build
off the entire body of Auto's work not
just the 28 thought forms but also
everything that is in the entire
elements of social emotional
development everything
around the integration of systems and
interactions as an approach to economics
that puts individual human meaning
making Center Stage that starts by
saying every decision that any human
being has ever taken was completely
rational at that moment in time within
their internal frame of
reference and
looking at people as PA as looking at
economics
as the as a consequence of individual
human meaning
making we see having a lot of potential
to bring economics to the point that is
actually useful to us in solving the
challenges of our poly crisis you
so in essence it comes back to people
tell me that what I'm doing is very
insightful and helpful and pointing the
way to a promising future and it's it's
very clear to me that I would not be
able to do that without all of the
shoulders I'm standing on and one of the
critical shoulders is oto's shoulders
because this theoretical
framework enables me to scaffold and
structure and see more clearly it gives
me a lens to see more clearly what's
important in everything I'm
doing so as I was uh reflecting on my
15year old Journey with uh working and
collaborating with Otto uh what came to
mind was uh the impact he had on me
personally and on my own development and
I think this is uh the most significant
contribution that that AO made to my
life uh because when I met him I was
working on my PhD and I decided to use
his U methodology for my doctoral
research at the time I wanted to change
the world and as I was uh uh studying
with Oto more and more I realized that I
needed to change myself before I go out
and change the world so I started at a
very very intense Journey on discovering
and rediscovering myself first
uh and uh after all those years I can
just say that I'm still at the beginning
and I am still fascinated by by 's work
uh and wanted to make it available to
others not only uh to myself so after um
developing that sense
of my own identity and how it's changing
and how I'm negotiating with myself uh
uh different parts of my my own identity
and my own
growth um how is identifying different
patterns and uh uh way of seeing the
world uh interpreting the
world I've spent the past I would say
maybe 10 years in in in a very unsettled
state of Self in
that constant and permanent process of
De constructing and reconstructing
myself and uh it was only in the past
few years that I was brave enough to
reach out to others and bring otheros
work to uh my audiences my students and
my
clients uh and I realized very quickly
that 28 thought forms were not a way to
introduce AOS work so
I
simplified uh this 28 toone framework
and made it accessible to wider
audiences so I created a 12 toone
framework in 12 thought form framework
I've been working with this ever
since and uh uh that has been it was
very effective and I also recently
sponsored a documentary about oto's life
and I will say a few words about it in a
moment so 's approach what I found that
AO approach to D development is very
unique it's profound and the most
comprehensive method I've ever
seen however it has to be carefully
introduced to those without prior
knowledge of adult development and
dialectical thinking so I feel like I'm
running a preschool for future
dialectical thinkers people who have
potential to
develop uh into uh complex thinkers so I
use dialectical thinking in conjunction
with transformational
learning uh leadership studies and with
uh organizational development and
change uh as I said I work exclusively
with 12 platform framework uh in a
simplified way and I'm preparing my
clients to uh then come to Oto and to my
colleagues and learn more complex way of
using this framework so in summary my
work uh hardly produces Earth shaking
shifts on a massive scale I work with
those one person at the
time uh one class at the time I help
people disengage from their own
perceptions cultivate curiosity shift
perspectives and see what was previously
unknown to them and hoping that um I'm
hoping that I planted seeds for them to
reach the point where they can feel that
they can make significant change on a
big scale so well A's monograph Bridges
the gap between dialectical and systems
thinking my teaching bridge is the gap
between linear and
logical thinking to systems
thinking so looking at myself and
looking at my clients and my
students uh developmentally and
constructively has been a a way of that
permeated in my life and the the most
rewarding outcome of this work is
knowing that my best best work is still
ahead of me so with this uh with those
few remarks I just wanted to
introduce uh the documentary that has
been dominating my life over the past
two
years and I want to tell you about uh
the documentary is ao's Life and Legacy
and tell you a little bit about how this
movie came about so first I want to
publicly acknowledge the movie director
Marcus tanic so how this movie came
about as I became increasingly in
familiar with AOS artistic work I was
Fascinate but his ability to
effortlessly move from poetry to visual
arts from uh to science and and he his
passion for music and his ability to
find infinite possibilities for
expressing his uh expanding his
scientific work at the same time so most
people who know auor they know a as a
social science scientist or a poet or
musicologist or visual artist but uh no
one could fully grasp the complexity of
his own life so I felt an urgent need to
capture the richness uh of ot's life so
I reached out to Marco who was
passionate about documenting people's
life stories and I shamelessly exploited
his interest and convinced him that
producing a documentary about the
extraordinary rich and multifaceted life
otasi would provide him with unique
opportunity to pursue his passion to the
fullest so he accepted the challenge
without knowing what he was getting into
and you will see the results of his
stess work I cannot thank him enough for
his time Talent dedication and selfless
commitment to this work Marco from the
bottom of my heart I um want to thank
you on behalf of all of us for all what
you have done
on this entire documentary and now I
want to invite
everyone I detached myself from
Germany uh I I always say that when I've
stood at the peer in Braha and the ship
at midnight began to
move the whole burden of European
history fell off my
shoulders my parents were all
about learning there was no way I could
have become a farmer no no no it was how
can you develop yourself
cognitively at the time I was uh so
passionate about poetry it was my life
at the moment and so the thing that
jumped out in this ad was that he was a
poet so I didn't care about anything
else it was like Wow meeting an older
man who who's a poet is quite
interesting you would have to be an
idiot not to ask
yourself what is music what is behind
music what what is the sinking behind
music we can research that we don't have
to think historically about music music
happens in real time right now any
conductor any
violinist any musicologist who does an
analysis is working in real time he is
inventing music in real time not back
then but
now there is always an energy flow there
is a rhythm there is a totality and
there is movement nothing is static
that's why I call it visual music
I think it was 91 I had uh no place to
go so I said okay this is the end of the
road I'm going to
Harvard and so in that sense I think
even CDF is a is a is a work of art and
not in the way it's constructed but in
the way it can be used you can use it
artfully you can use it dumbly you can
use it expertly and you can use it as an
artist it's up to
you incredible thing is that you can
stay identical with yourself only by
constantly
changing by
metamorphosing and therefore development
is about loss of
self we can do a little bit to change
the
world I ow it to Lawrence weshe and John
Stewart to have made me fully aware
of the
analytical
potential of dialectical
thinking
um my own work and Eva's work and those
of many of my students including Yan has
been to work with people either one1 or
in
teams uh in real time and the term in
real time is very important to all of us
who work with u thought forms
um
because we think all the time and we
don't realize that we think all the time
and when we listen and much of my work
has been about teaching people to
listen uh we realize that we ourselves
are in constant internal
conversation
ourselves uh that we can actually
systematically analyze way of thought
forms and once we are aware that we each
of us is constructing their own world
every
microsc until
death um unbeknown to us we can say oh
it would be nice to know a little bit
more about my own conversations that are
deeply buried in me and so that's one
reason to read my book to realize that
they are that they can be covered so to
speak that and and also that the world
that everybody of each of us is creating
his own world and that it is a totally
wrong assumption to assume that other
people are living in the same
world there are of course connections
between our personal worlds and one of
them is cognitive and can be analyzed or
understood in terms of s forms but the
maybe perhaps much stronger relationship
between our mutual our worlds is is
emotional or as I say social emotional
and that too can be researched in terms
of meaning making so I would say to Yan
to answer his question why should one
read the second edition of this book
that is now 15 years
old um I have
um this this book is on cognitive
development and some a few people have
read it over the 15 years that I have
taught uh and they have most mostly told
me how difficult the book is but those
who have worked with me personally and
have made case studies of other people
by interviewing those people and then
analyzing what they have said in a 1H
hour interview both both socially
emotionally and in terms of thought
forms
they have what I call gone the Royal
Road of handson
learning this book cannot or the
dialectical thinking just cannot be um
learned by
reading you have to practice this
whether you do climate analysis as
Lawrence does or evolutionary analysis
or you um help companies design
themselves better uh than they do now
or if you work as Eva does and I have
done a great deal with people either
individuals or groups um you need to you
need to be in real time and be aware uh
of what you're listening to what the
structure is of what you are being told
and that what you're being told comes
from a world that you are not in and the
therefore you have to take the greatest
care to get into and maybe you never get
into it if you don't know how to listen
so listening uh so that's I think why
this book should be read um in a second
addition I think also
that these books could be a bridge for
you to a new understanding of yourself
and the world you create entirely on
your own terms
and largely without your knowing because
the book shows you that your world is
like nobody
else's and so I recommend to read the
books foremost in order to get to know
yourself
better um and as Socrates would say to
become a better friend of
yourself and that's also a better friend
of the world around you
I would say looking back at your own
life can be difficult and also
accelerating and I would say in my case
it was
both it was difficult uh in that I was
discovering things about myself that I
didn't
know and I was entirely during the
making of it but also in viewing it
taken back by how emotional I was about
my teachers
uh of course my my parents and so forth
also but especially my teachers from
from Ado to Jac uh it apparently was not
what they what they taught me but that
that made such a big impression on me
but how they did and also what when I
studied with them they stood for for me
outside even of the personal
relationship
ship that really astonished me you know
I found
myself standing right next to Ado and
I I couldn't take
it so um there are many other things I
found
remarkable above all the many shoulders
I'm standing on with my
work or you know the many shoulders my
work is standing on that all I did was
made possible by
culture that I was unaware of and that I
had the privilege to be part of and thus
also to carry on and and that includes
also you my
students that you I'm standing on your
shoulders also I cannot thank you enough
about um working with me and uh working
with me in the future also I interpret
the term success as a Keegan prompt in a
social emotional
interview it is a term having to do with
what I will have to overcome to have
outward
success or have already
overcome it is not with outward
success but but what I need to be like
to have that success or to be aware of
it so I probably have to overcome the
notion that my soul social science work
and perhaps my artwork too is
esoteric I have to come to believe that
complex thinking to speak just of
thinking um um can be learned by more
people than I have taught over 15 years
or will be teaching I say in the
documentary that there is no social
forcing
function to go to self authoring and
self authoring is a term in the
developmental sciences that implies that
you are living and working and
acting and and sleeping too on account
of your own
internalized value system not that of
others that you're not defining yourself
any longer by others expectations of you
but your own expectations and that when
you are disappointed you are not dis
disappointed in the world but in you
in
yourself so um there is no such social
forcing function which I think we as
teachers of complex thinking have to
stand in
for uh and um so establishing a
worldwide program for dialectical
Thinking by itself will not do success
could perhaps lie in reaching those
people who have a need for mental growth
even if only for the sake of their
mental
health I think a lot more people can
learn complex thinking if given
institutional
structures that support them in learning
complex thinking including about
themselves whether these supports are
educational or
organizational and they don't exist
there is no University that at the
highest level teaches dialectical
thinking
and so we are on our own for now to
begin doing that so one might say I
might say that it would be my
dream um that thinking about your own
thinking does not remain Something Out
Of Reach for you and becomes or moves
into a reach of a lot more people than
now reflect on the structure of their
unseizing conversations with
themselves you can order OS book on
almost on all online
bookstores the documentary as I've
announced uh will be available through
Vio thank you all
