greetings uh it is Sunday July 28th
there's no way I would have predicted I
was going to record a frankly today
because last night Saturday night I had
103 temperature um I thought I had covid
but tested negative and I think what
happened is I went for a three-hour bike
ride yesterday it was like in the early
80s but really humid um early 80s low
80s um early 80s was Duran
Duran um and I didn't drink anything and
I think I had like a miniature sunstroke
um the uh I'm feeling much better now um
but I toss and turned for 12 hours in
bed and of course this podcast and
running this uh
NGO aren't really a job anymore they're
my life so I think about this stuff uh
all the time and this popped into my
head um
so last
week on the frankly on solution
of course these are all riffs I don't
have scripts and I often forget 10 to
30% of what I intend on saying and I had
two Circles of uh socially acceptable
Solutions and effective Solutions what I
forgot to say was that the effective
Solutions the size of the circle
declines over time because we're losing
the window to have interventions
preparation governance um different
technological responses to uh what we
face and so the role of this podcast the
role of my work RIT large is to expand
the Overton window of what is socially
acceptable so that it increasingly
overlaps with this shrinking uh
effective
Solutions so with that in mind um I
wanted to take a big step back uh on the
Overton window and talk about
overshoot um and I've come up with seven
fundamental drivers of overshoot which
is the topic of today's
frankly so what is overshoot um we don't
hear about it that much but is when a
species um grow go and expands to beyond
the carrying capacity of their
environment the carrying capacity is how
many of frogs or uh orangutans or
reindeer uh a certain ecosystem or a
certain environment can sustain based on
the food supply on the ecosystem
Services overshoot is when the
population exceeds uh the carrying
capacity um um and over time that excess
population and excess consumption of
resources actually degrades the carrying
capacity and then there is um uh a a
reduction uh and so the species gets
back into line on what's
sustainable humans are in overshoot uh
we look at other animals and organisms
in ponds and on savanas and in forests
and can label them as being an overshoot
but I think there's no question that 8
billion humans living at one time not
overtime uh is
unsustainable and I'd like to just uh
give a brief recap of the seven
fundamental drivers uh of overshoot
first of all uh as many of you will be
aware the carbon pulse um where we have
millions of years of stored energy
injected into an economic system uh
versus 10,000 years ago the number uh
the the amount of mamalian biomass which
is humans are livestock and all the wild
ma mammals on Earth is 700% what it used
to be because we've injected this huge
bolus of ancient productivity into our
food supply the carbon pulse has
exploded um the overshoot and carrying
capacity uh not the carrying capacity
sorry the the overshoot uh above
carrying capacity
the second is uh our culture using uh
monetary um Alchemy to uh draw
consumption forward in time when we
create money there's a double entry into
the financial system there's an asset
and a liability but our financial
creation neglects the third and the
fourth um book entries which are the
non-renewable energy and resources that
it accelerates extraction of and the the
ecosystem impacts of the biosphere um
and the environmental
deterioration the third uh uh
fundamental driver is the fact that
we've outsourced our governance and our
wisdom to the financial Market this is
the
superorganism um and the superorganism
is based on power which is energy per
unit time and our entire Society our
entire species with the exception of the
cultures that are still not part of the
superorganism which are very few um we
continue to optimize for growth which is
antagonist antagonistic to
um overshoot
uh you'll you'll I'm I'm happy I'm
recording this now because I've make
flub UPS I can always say that I had 103
fever last night and you'll have to
forgive me the the other thing is that
um in our in our governance structures
in our corporations our leadership
structures there's embedded
self-reinforcing hierarchies because
most institutions promote the assertive
confident and optimistic employees
individuals humans uh to senior roles
within their ranks so there's embedded
um positive feedback of more of the same
leading to more
overshoot the four fundamental driver is
a culture or species-wide lack of
ecological education and resultant
values um yes we are numerate yes we are
literate but very few of our species are
equate or ecologically literate the
world's richest man this week um said
that Earth can support 80 billion humans
this I mean he is very smart and I
actually agree with some of his
positions this is the most delusional
statement I've ever heard this would be
a planet full of dead locusts and
smoking Embers with 80 billion humans on
it because of the environmental impact
uh we wouldn't have a biosphere left so
uh one of the drivers of overshoot is a
lack of recognition of
overshoot um another is uh the positive
feedback of status and consump
assumption and envy that our marketing
and what we uh view as socially
acceptable and uh aspirational is more
money more stuff more conspicuous
consumption it's as if our culture puts
this large shiny conspicuous carrot in
front of us and says this is your
objective in life this wasn't always the
case this is because of this giant bolus
of of fossil
sunlight uh another fundamental driver
is is the prevalent consumption and
Technology have raised the Baseline of
our own dopamine super highways and the
neurotransmitter Cascades in our mind
require us at every decision tree should
I go on a campfire with my cousins or
should I play Candy Crush uh should I go
to Vegas uh for a poker tournament or
should I go canoeing in the Northwoods
uh
should I have a salad or a hamburger
there's a zillion of these uh micro
choices and the more addicted we are the
more um comfortable and convenient
things are the more we choose the uh
more overshoot Laden Choice uh which
uses more energy and
resources uh and this doesn't again
doesn't have to be that way there could
be maturity wisdom uh more right brain
thinking uh but this also acts as a
positive
feedback um last but not least is
overshoot creates the mother of all
cognitive
dissonances um there's a lot of examples
in the literature of cognitive
dissonance the one I use the most um is
Jared diamond in the book collapse
talked about uh people that live
Downstream a dam that was about to burst
and people that lived three miles
Downstream were just a little bit
worried about it people that lived two
miles Downstream were quite worried
about the implications of that Dam burst
but people with living within a half
mile of the dam bursting professed total
unconcern because for them to recognize
that this Dam would like tear their
houses down and uh go Downstream and
upend everything of their lives was too
painful for them to hold both truths
simultaneously their own life and
Lifestyles and the fact that this could
be disrupted we have many examples of
this cognitive dissonance in our lives
we have a tasty chicken sandwich at the
same time we actually like chickens
they're good animals we have the lights
on in our room and we leave to go for an
errand we leave the lights on without
recognizing they're fired by a Coal
server somewhere you know just Burning
uh electrons and emitting some small
amount of coal into the atmosphere but
RIT large we don't think about we are
part of a species in massive overshoot
on this planet because the implications
uh of what we have to do in the future
are are very very severe um and you know
that's another reason that this podcast
granted is getting more popular but will
never be really popular because most
people don't want to hear the the Gory
details of the ecological environmental
Financial geopolitical social
situation so I actually think a
cognitive dissonance is one of the seven
fundamental
drivers briefly um since I don't want to
leave on that note what would be the
seven antidotes uh to overshoot well
obviously one would be the um the
peaking declining and eventual uh
dissipation of the energy Surplus um
energy Surplus is what
enabled uh overshoot situation and again
climate change isn't the problem climate
change is one of many problems
Downstream from
overshoot um we a lot of us in our
cultural narratives look at all that
humans have achieved the last couple
hundred years and technology and
innovation and inventions but we forget
the fact that this is uh 85% powered by
ancient sunlight which is finite and
we're treating it as if it were interest
but it's principle so reduction in the
energy Surplus would certainly uh
mitigate uh the level of
overshoot uh another thing that would of
course would be the planet itself
reducing the carrying capacity and in
the reduction of the carrying capacity
it would truncate the growth overshoot
and and cause um a
retracement we're going to see this and
we're seeing it already with higher
standard deviation of drought and floods
higher wet bulb temperature um heat
stress uh different implications on
crops um the biosphere will itself uh
limit how far overshoot of a certain
species
gets another antidote potentially would
be a design by the species in overshoot
itself to care about and address
overshoot um you know what I'm saying
here is nothing new depending on the
boundary we've been in overshoot for
almost 400 years or 50 years uh
depending on where you draw the boundary
certainly what I'm saying in this video
was true a year ago 5 years ago 10 years
ago 30 years ago the only difference now
is a lot more people are recognizing
that this is happening happening and
therefore their brains are open and
their hearts are open to learning about
it and it's becoming uh you know
undeniable in some senses if such a
culture were to care about these things
what would some other antidotes be well
one would be that we gradually change
our cultural conversations from a human
centered to an Earth centered world and
all that that implies um another
antidote would be instead of creating
money with no reference to ecosystem
services or non-renewable energy and
materials we would create money with
some biophysical tether it would be have
some relationship to uh productive
Capital uh productive capacity and and
the ecosystem Health um and uh
additionally we would have syntropic
technology instead of technology that
would just add to the overshoot it would
actually give us the Human Services
basic needs that we want but in Synergy
with ecosystems with watersheds with
forests with soil uh a a more syntropic
uh Earth centered
technology um and then lastly um and and
maybe firstly it starts with the
microbehavioral recognition and change
at the level of the individual human
where we don't don't require this
massive exosomatic consumption in huge
amounts to live meaningful lives where
you do find these decision trees of do I
want to go camping or to on a roller
coaster uh do I want to eat this thing
that's unhealthy but gives me great
dopamine and comfort or do I want to eat
something more healthy and locally grown
there's a whole um well you know I'm
learning this and experiencing it myself
I'm trying to have little Nate On My
Shoulder weigh in and observe on my
decisions and behaviors and maybe if
one% or 3% or 6% of society starts
living their choices differently in a
world uh of overshoot in a world where
we recognize that there are 10 million
other species that are living on this
spinning orb in space and the only
planet we know to har uh Harbor you know
life and complex life that maybe things
would change so uh this is my brief
fever induced um reflection on the seven
drivers and maybe some antidotes to
overshoot talk to you next week
