the first speaker is
a uh somebody that I met first about 12
years ago or so when I was reviewing his
book on mind shaping and um he was kind
enough to uh invite me to to Washington
to have dinner and drinks while he
explained his book to me and we
discussed uh discussed it over um very
nice meal and and had a good evening and
um so now 10 15 years later I'm honored
to introduce Tad who's a professor U
associate professor of philosophy at
George Washington
University and who will give us a
presentation entitled pattern finding
and pattern
making oh thank you so much John can
everyone hear me
I can okay hopefully hopefully you're
representative uh so um thanks so much
for um inviting me to this and uh again
your flexibility in accommodating my
schedule I have a chair's council
meeting to go to later again apologies
I'll have to duck out early um so what I
want to talk about today uh I don't
think I actually explicitly refer to
normativity or mind shaping in this
presentation but I think it's highly
relevant as you'll see so here's the
background and the plan I think what I
the way I'm thinking about this uh
project is as an initial stab at a
cognitive Neuroscience of
ideology and to get clear on what I mean
by that uh there'll be a bit of a
whirlwind tour through intellectual
history so please bear with me um so the
idea the sort of problematic I want to
intervene on is this traditional idea
that the cognitive process is driving
what I call pattern finding and pattern
making are radically disjoint uh it
corresponds roughly the distinction
between beliefs on the one hand that
have a pattern finding function and
desires or intentions that have a
pattern making function roughly modeled
on the distinction between assertions
and commands in
language um and uh I what I want to call
the problem of ideology uh roughly is
this some of our most important pattern
making relies essentially on beliefs and
assertions that seem to aim at pattern
finding and then go on to make
themselves at least partially true um so
on this traditional distinction uh in
cognition it's kind of hard to
categorize ideology ideology and
ideological thought um uh in terms of
these two different cognitive processes
however there is a a recent uh recent
sort of very interesting an exciting new
approach to cognitive Neuroscience uh
called uh you know variably the basy and
brain approach or the predictive
processing approach or the active
inference approach and I think it's
ideally suited to um accommodating
ideological thought and language so I'm
going to the first part of the talk or
Lion Share of the talk I I'm going to
you know work through this and then at
the end I want to say something about
how um the uh active inference approach
to explaining individual Behavior can be
extended to uh the making of social
patterns not just individual patterns
and behavior so that's roughly the
agenda um let's begin so this is roughly
what I mean by found patterns the
paradigmatically the patterns uh in
nature that are uncovered by natural
science um uh patterns that we notice uh
when we um look at evidence the evidence
of the senses and try to um uncover deep
regularities that explain them um and
what I mean by made patterns or pattern
making uh you know paradigmatically is
human artifacts
technology practices like dance and
marching uh one of the earliest made
patterns known to Archaeology is the um
aulan hand ax there on the top left
corner um but architecture music and
language are um par paradigmatic
examples of made patterns so this
distinction for a very long time in the
European Tradition at least has been
explained in terms of a distinction in
cognition um Aristotle distinguishes
between three types of knowledge theoria
prais pois um theoria aims at uh pattern
finding uh prais pattern making in human
uh social behavior and poesis pattern
making in techn ology and even
identifies or a uh different form of
thought uh Behind these different kinds
of uh practice uh theoretical famously
the theoretical versus the Practical
syllogism and this Duality has had a
huge um influence in the European
philosophical tradition Mo most notably
people who made it explicit in the 20th
century uh very nice um kind of uh
encapsulation of the distinction in
Elizabeth anam's uh grocery list example
you can have the same list of uh food um
in in one case it's playing a uh
directive or pattern making role in in
the case of the person who's searching
for food based on the list but if you're
a private detective uh uh tailing the
person and trying to note what they're
buying that's um uh pattern finding role
and uh surl famously worked this up into
a distinction among uh declarative and
imperative speech acts um where that you
can have a spe two speech acts with the
same content uh one with declarative
Force aiming at tracking a pattern or
finding a pattern one with imperative
Force aimed at making a pattern okay so
that's um the background and uh it's
sort of standard cognitive science and
philosophy of mind since Hume has uh
maintained this distinction in
philosophy of language and sort of put
use it as a model of how the mind works
so this distinction between belief
modules and desire modules in classic
computational uh uh models of the Mind
sort of encapsulates the idea of there
being a separate part of cognition
devoted to pattern finding another
devoted to pattern making and only in
collaboration do they lead to behavior
however uh as my dissertation director
from many years ago Andy Clark has
recently argued this model is not an
accurate model of how the brain works um
according to the uh active inference or
predictive processing framework quote
desires and motivations are fluently
accommodated uh within the unifying PP
schema where they emerge as webs of
Prior beliefs that sculpt probabilistic
predictions some of which become
positioned so as to bring about AC s
importantly and here's the key idea a
single construct plays the role of
belief and desire so that's a nice
summary of the active inference uh
framework which uh uh makes clear how it
differs from this classical uh view
According to which the cognitive
processes underlying pattern making and
pattern finding are
disjoints okay so now onto the problem
of
ideology um what I you I am not an
expert in this extremely rich and um uh
um field of philosophical um inquiry so
I just want uh to for the purpos of this
talk to uh propose a sort of minimal um
minimal understanding of what ideology
is and that is its pattern making
masquerading as pattern find finding so
in classic discussions from these
uh folks you see whose pictures you see
I I use the term Suspicious Minds from
uh Bob brandom I think at some point uh
called this these philosophers uh the
philosophers of
Suspicion
um so uh the basic idea is that you can
promote the powerful interest by
concealing true patterns with something
like masking patterns that victims
unwittingly work to reproduce at least
partially so if you think of religion is
an ideology you can think of these
assertions about the nature of reality
the meek shall inherit the earth God
will redeem our suffering as um
motivating Behavior Uh on the part of
people who believe them uh that
partially sort of conf confirms uh these
um predictions or um you know as Fuko
pointed out this uh these sorts of
assumptions about what's natural to
human beings it's natural for men to
desire women for example uh masquerading
as a found pattern about human beings um
that partially uh uh maintains itself uh
in in virtue of being you know widely
promulgated um okay so this has had in
contemporary philosophy this basic idea
has had some really rich development by
Sally for example so Sally uh famously
argues that a lot of politically fraught
categories like race and gender are real
but not natural they're constructed and
what's interesting is um Sally
emphasizes that quote sex and race
oppression are structural institutional
but they're also internalized in our
basic
interpretations and understandings of
our bodies ourselves and each other um
and that's sort of what I'm trying to
get at here is in what does this
internalization consist what how what
model of neural computation might be
able to account for
this uh one reason um that these sorts
of patterns are incredibly uh persistent
um has been explored in the work of kayn
ok Conor where she deploys um
evolutionary Game Theory to explain why
uh certain sort of ideological patterns
uh become stable um because they uh uh
constitute or contribute to what she
calls complimentary solutions to
complimentary coordination problems uh
uh as opposed to correlative ones so
correlative one driving on the right
everyone does the same thing um in a in
a complimentary coordination problem you
have people playing different roles to
solve the coordination problem as in um
dances like the passo do um so she
applies this to um gender norms and
looks for example at gendered solutions
to household division of labor problem
um and argues that if you model these
using evolutionary game theoretic
simulations it shows that asymmetric
role Solutions can be stable equilibrium
strategies what that means roughly is
that not playing the disadvantaged role
has greater costs uh than playing it um
so for example uh the persistent
asymmetry in um the female uh uh uh bird
part of the burden in in domestic in the
household division of labor problem is
uh it persists because not doing it is
actually makes the person worse off in
in these game theoretic uh
Dynamics so ' Conor argues that this
explains why these gender
asymmetries um uh are stable and
remarkably uh robust across cultures
unfortunately um but also she shows that
she argues in this book that um they're
not inevitable right uh there is
cultural variation so sociohistorical
and political factors explain the
particular um uh distributions that we
see in particular cultures okay um
another sort of uh uh um famous concept
from recent philosophy which uh is sort
of in this vicinity and gestures towards
a cognitive explanation of this sort of
phenomenon is hackings notion another
another person who um uh sadly departed
uh um our our world uh this past year uh
um the notion of a looping effect so he
famously argues that humankind and in
particular psychiatric uh
classifications sort of are engaged in
this kind of looping effect where the
labeling um has Dynamic effects thus
Dynamic nominalism has Dynamic effects
uh on the uh people who are uh labeled
and and he thinks this marks an
important distinction because unlike
natural objects humans are aware that
and how they're categorized um unlike
say um a sample of iron which gets
categorized but is not aware of it uh
human beings are aware um and the
categorization feeds back affecting the
categorized and that triggers tweaks to
the the initial categorization and you
get this kind of spiral uh this Dynamic
spiral and um you know he talks about
different illustrations of this of how
you know the category of multiple
personality gets taken up by people
diagnosed in its terms gets turned into
a new category dissociative identity
similar for these other um Concepts um
and finally there's some very
interesting empirical evidence that
shows um how uh uh descriptive Norms can
have these sorts of looping or
self-fulfilling effects so public social
scientific classifications this is a
recent paper by U Peters who shows uh
discusses all the evidence that I it's
relevant to uh science communication
that's what this uh paper is about uh
the way descriptive Norms are
communicated to the public often leads
to um their own fulfillment so a
descriptive Norm is something that aims
to capture to track a pattern in the
world or find a pattern in the world but
it ends up making patterns or
reinforcing these patterns so for
example Californian households informed
that they use more electricity than all
the other households in their
neighborhood subsequently reduce their
energy consumption whereas households
informed that they use less than all
others increased it so there's an
interesting Duality here that's similar
to what I think I claim to be uh um
definitive of ideology where something
which appears to be describing a pattern
actually works kind of uncom consciously
to uh reinforce the pattern uh um and
make it more
stable okay so how how how have
philosophers is there a sort of any
philosophical discussion of this
something that really uh stands out is
uh Milan's concept of a push me pull you
representation uh from way back in the
90s uh milikin argued that this is
actually the Primitive form of
representation that um non-human species
uh all share and that that actually
distinguishing between pattern finding
and pattern making uh cognitive States
beliefs and desires as a sort of later
arriving um uh things so so she sort of
anticipates this this kind of um uh
approach that active inference uh takes
now um so as she writes what one does
what a woman does what a teacher does
how one behaves when one is married or
when one is chair with the meeting these
are grasped via thoughts push me pul you
represent present ations that
simultaneously describe and prescribe um
we don't eat peas with our fingers as
another example where you know the the
the grammatical surface grammar appears
to be a an assertive uh pattern finding
uh uh act but of course it has this
normative
Dimension uh implied when especially
when a parent says this to a child you
see this all over in politics uh you
know over two years a go now uh uh
secretary blinkin used this assertion
when all is said and done in independent
Ukraine will be there and at some point
Vladimir Putin will not but um of course
he had very little evidence for that
when he uttered it um it was more uh
sort of aspirational and in politics
often you will hear assertions or
predictions made which clearly um are
also functioning to try and make
themselves true or contribute at least
to their uh
self-confirmation so um that's a sort of
classic push me pull you
representation um okay so now on to this
new paradigm a little detail about
predictive processing and active
inference this is the basic basian
algorithm that's uh the the kind of
building block of the active inference
Paradigm I'm not going to go into the
details of the math because I frankly am
a little foggy on it myself but um I
think this bullet point here
encapsulates the basic idea that the
brain really has one um uh uh imperative
which is to minimize the difference
between old information which is stored
in its models of the world which
generate expectations and new
information which is uh sensory
stimulation and um active inference is
the idea that there are two ways that
the brain can succeed at this here's a
recent discussion uh um by par pulo and
friston friston being the sort of uh um
Pioneer of this approach under active
inference perception and action are two
complimentary ways to fulfill the same
imperative minimization of free energy
um what he means by free energy is
something like surprise so perception
minimizes free energy by Basi and belief
updating or changing your mind thus
making your beliefs compatible with
sensory observation instead action
minimize this is free energy and
surprise by changing the world to make
it more compatible with your beliefs and
goals this unification of cognitive
functions marks a fundamental difference
between active inference and other
approaches that treat action and
perception in isolation from one another
so here's a diagram from that book which
makes this very clear uh you make a
prediction about how the world will be
there's an observation there's a
discrepancy between the two and then
there are two uh options to minimize
this discrepancy which is what the brain
aims for you can either change the model
which yielded the prediction so that
next time it conforms more closely to
the observation or you can change the
world uh this is what happens in action
where the world the relevant part of the
world is your body um and uh so that the
action more closely uh next time um
accommodate uh uh um matches the
prediction okay um another discussion of
this from Jacob Hoy one of the earliest
philosophical discussions of the active
inference uh
Paradigm um I'm in the interest of time
I won't read the long quote but this is
sort of a standard assumption in this
new approach to relatively new approach
to uh cognitive Neuroscience so uh the
lesson I want to glean from this is that
the basic idea in active inference is uh
when it comes to explaining pattern
making or action is something I want to
say call
counterfactual expectation peration what
I mean by this is um the idea is instead
of maximizing utility relative to some
extrinsic goal uh agents minimize
prediction error by acting to minimize
the difference between proprioceptive
feedback and expectations so that's the
model of action right so the idea is you
when you uh raise your arm you predict
that it's uh high up before it's high up
and there's a discrepancy between your
prediction and the feedback you're
getting from your arm but somehow the
discrepancy is minimized not by changing
the representation of the position of
your arm but rather by adjusting your
arm such that it meets the prediction
and so this raises the question why not
just adjust the expectation right um and
just say you know my arm is down not up
and just change your assumption about
where your arm is as you do uh to in
most cases of discrepancy and the answer
here is that some expectations
especially those related to fundamental
requirements on Survival are what we
might term sticky uh they don't go away
even when there's a discrepancy and the
only way to minimize the discrepancy is
to act right so a classic example from
this literature is the uh representation
of your inter Al body temperature when
um the feedback from your body departs
from this uh say uh your temperatures
goes higher you're uh you don't adjust
the um expectation about the temperature
your your body should be rather there
are uh activities that take place to uh
try to bring your body temperature um
back down to that uh predicted
temperature so what makes uh some
expectations sticky
excuse me here's how uh Andy Clark puts
it bringing about an action requires
attenuating which means assigning a low
Precision to the sensory information
currently indexing the actual
disposition of the body so as to enable
precise proprioceptive predictions
corresponding to some desired trajectory
to Prevail intentional action thus
depends upon a delicate balance that
combines precise proprioceptive
predictions with attenuated information
concerning current bodily States and
here's what's interesting I think for
the problem of ideology an interesting
consequence is that action thus depends
on a kind of systematic
misrepresentation of how our body is
currently arrayed in
space okay so here's the lesson I want
to draw from all this here is the
classic pattern finding pattern making
dis disjunction uh that um I mentioned
earlier some thoughts or or uh Speech
acts have a what surl calls a word toor
direction of fit so for example diet
diet doesn't impact Health humans act
rationally that maps onto true or false
right where where the um word is trying
to respect constraints placed on it by
the world but other assertions uh or
sort of other speech Acts or thoughts
have the opposite direction of fit a
world to word direction fit where the
world is modified to um uh fit the word
so men and women act thus for example or
life has meaning and every thought and
every discursive act has to be placed in
one of these two buckets on the classic
view and you know the the what's
motivating my talk is that ideology is a
bit hard it's bit hard to know which
bucket to put it in because it sort of
presents as a pattern uh finding act but
it actually functions as a pattern
making act and what's cool about active
inference is it enables us to replace
this classic um distinction this classic
picture with the following one where you
have a kind of um
Continuum of pattern finding and pattern
making um where and there are dimensions
on which you can place any uh linguistic
act or or any thought um on along the
horizontal a axis you can think of that
as a measure of stickiness to what
extent does the expectation um is the
expectation preserved despite a
discrepancy from sensory feedback back
and on the vertical axis you have say uh
rather than truth or falsity um or
fulfillment or unfulfillment you have
this generic notion of prediction error
so here you might say well diet doesn't
impact Health that's a huge prediction
error um uh and it's also not that
sticky we're very willing to revise that
um humans act rationally is a little
more is a little stickier it's a pretty
good descri descript description of
human beings but uh it's not a perfect
description but it despite the fact that
it sometimes fails to describe
adequately human behavior we hold on to
it uh and it ends up regulating human
behavior to some uh a degree men and
women act thus this is sort of getting
towards the more ideological part of the
spectrum uh where um you know the
prediction error is relatively high and
yet it's still very sticky um and then
you know here's my attempt at humor my
nihilistic attempt at humor where um uh
something that like life has meaning
could be have a lot of prediction error
and yet we can't get rid of it uh it's
very sticky okay so that's that's the
idea that's why I I think the active
inference um approach is a nice fit with
ideology because it's not like there are
these two buckets where a thought or a
judgment has to fall as as either making
patterns or finding patterns it falls
somewhere upon this
Continuum uh defined in terms of these
two dimensions and the interesting thing
is that you know for different people
the same judgment might fall in
different parts um of this uh Spectrum
so I I think this is a much better fit
uh because when it comes to ideology
there's you know variations in how
sticky the assumptions are and how much
prediction error they generate okay so
that's uh now the problem here is that
the active inference approach which is a
model of individual Behavior how does
this translate into pattern making at
the social level which is you know how
where ideology is usually uh
found and um there are some uh possible
mechanisms where of this so one idea is
the notion of identification so often um
by identifying with a group you can look
at the Brazilian soccer fans on the
picture there as an example that by
identifying with a group or with another
person um one's own sort of uh active
inferential uh um uh judgments are
transferred onto another person I it's a
nice example for when my child my son
Anton was very young we went up on this
water slide up on this rickety rickety
um staircase into this platform to go
down this water slide and I have
terrible um terrible vertigo I was
terrified uh he didn't care he was
completely oblivious but as he sort of
approached The Edge I couldn't help but
um uh feel like like uh you know danger
was imminent and and I felt it in my
body presumably because I was
identifying uh with him to such an
embodied extent that um uh I had this
sort of active uh desire to stop him uh
another example is you know strawson's
notion of reactive attitudes where we
see someone um violating normative
expectation and instead of adjusting our
expectations such they that they better
track their behavior in the future we
have these Rea emotional responses like
resentment blame and so forth to try and
you know modify the pattern to fit the
expectation uh or there might be more
basic mechanisms such as those involved
in dance and marching where there's this
basic motor resonance or behavioral
synchrony among multiple people I think
all of these mechanisms suggest a kind
of social have a sort of social Niche
construction um function concept from uh
Evo devvo approaches in uh uh
evolutionary biology where sometimes the
Adaptive uh um uh the Adaptive uh
response is not to modify oneself to uh
respect a uh environment but rather to
Mo modify the environment to make it a
better fit with one's own expectations
and I think humans do a lot of that kind
of social Niche construction so I want
to locate ideology in this kind of
Zone think of them as sociocognitive
tools which shape us into better
sociocognitive objects and agents um
there are some nent um uh proposals
along these lines uh one by my current
post talki who I think is in the
audience uh has a recent uh uh piece um
in philosophical psychology where he
links the active inference framework to
mind shaping um uh in roughly the way
suggested here also a recent um uh
Target article in uh um uh I think
it's life uh physics of Life reviews uh
by Tero young and Barrett which talks
uses the active inference framework to
try and explain the sense of should so I
think there is some interesting work
just beginning um along these lines okay
so to conclude I want to
a few remarks about what the
implications of this picture are for
human social cognition and folk
psychology here's a a relevant
degression just quickly there's a bit of
a dispute within the active inference uh
literature about what these models uh
that the brain uh develops what they're
tracking so uh hoe originally argues
that predictive processing and basian
updating inevitably lead to increasingly
accurate models of the causal structure
the hidden causal structure of the world
World which is responsible for the
sensory s stimulations um that yield
error signals but Andy Clark instead
argues that really all the brain cares
about a successful action and so what
the models need to track are affordances
not necessarily the uh causal structure
the hidden causal structure of the world
affordances is a gibsonian notion you
could see a classic gibsonian picture of
a bird in Flight up on the on the right
where the bird is simply tracking this
kind of relational um or constructed
property uh uh that relates it to its
environment in a sort of dynamic way and
enables to enables it to guide Its
Behavior adaptively that's not an
objective fact about the causal
structure of the world it's a relational
uh property that uh relates the organism
to um uh some features in the
environment and so transposing this onto
uh the uh case of social cognition for
us ultrasocial humans uh if we take Andy
Clark's approach what are the social
affordances that our models of the
social World um uh enable us to track
before gesturing towards an answer um I
want to put on the table two challenges
for applying uh active inference or
predictive processing to social
cognition one problem is by predictive
processing's own lights the folk
psychology that predict predictive
processing generates our folk psychology
when applied to the social domain is not
an accurate model of the relevant causal
structures what do I mean by this well
the folk aren't basian the folk don't
think of perception as top down basian
infer inference of departures from
expected sensory stimulations they don't
think of perception and action as aiming
at the same goal they don't think of
expectations as distributions of
credences and so forth so that means you
know by by predictive processing own
lights that when applied to the social
domain predictive processing does not
yield an accurate model of the relevant
causal structures um rather it yields
folk psychology um so here at least Ho's
view seems obviously false and Clark's
view seems more applicable we're
tracking social affordances but then
that raises this question why does do
human coordination problems afford folk
psychological
conrols um and the second question is
you know the big problem in uh
coordination as have been recognized uh
by game theorists philosophers for a
long time is that we're trying to
predict agents who are also trying to
predict us at the same time so when we
apply our sort of predictive models we
have to take into account that um the
the process is somehow also modeling us
and that seems to threaten this kind of
unstable
so what I want to suggest is that
there's a solution to both of these
problems if we think of folk psychology
as something I've called um in print a
sociocognitive tool that the idea is
that the folk psychology generated by
predictive processing and applied to
social domain is not a model of the
causal structure of individual mind
brains rather it's a set of
sociocognitive tools that shapes us into
better sociocognitive agents and objects
we work to turn each other into better
Believers desires Willers because this
makes us easier to interpret and predict
by others doing the same so um uh these
are the social affordances tracked by
predictive processing apply to the
social domain they're patterns we find
in the social domain because they're
also patterns we make uh another way
slogan to think of this by is ideologies
are these coordination devices
um okay so
one way we could extend this line of
thought is so when uh are these folk
psychological distinctions like the one
we began with that don't map onto
anything in the brain if you buy the
active inference Paradigm um for example
why did folk psychology en code a
distinction between belief and desire
well here's how uh here's a sort of
sketch of an explanation in an
ultrasocial species like ours re that
relies on information sharing
distinguishing between essentially
epistemic and pragmatic States is
extremely useful uh the variation in
uses to which human brains put
information is is widespread so
communicating the precise idiosyncratic
functional profile some information
plays in one brain to another is
unlikely to be useful and very likely to
be impossible given how fine grain the
nuances in these functions are uh if we
buy active inference
so we can learn from others only if we
can abstract information likely to be
useful for us from the detailed
idiosyncratic uses to which only uh uh
to which only particular others put it
and distinguishing between purely
epistemic and pragmatic dimensions of
newly implemented expectations makes
this possible so this shows how this
distinction uh between belief and desire
though not sort of fundamental to how
the brain works can somehow uh shape the
way brains come to work uh once there's
a distinction in language between
assertion and command and it it shows
why making this distinction could be
very useful because it sort of extracts
sharable content from uh um this sort of
uh uh um uh task committed content uh
that that individual brains uh have um
in any case that's just a sketch uh in
which uh um I hope someday perhaps to
take this basic picture um so I guess we
can end on this when I first gave this
talk in Cork Ireland as I was walking to
the venue I see this massive poster and
I thought this really encapsulates The
View that you know belief is kind of
something we do and we can do it uh more
or less effectively um uh so thank you
very much
