in today's book our guest highlights how
artificial intelligence is becoming less
artificial and more intelligent how
instead of data hungry approaches to AI
innovators are pursuing data efficient
approaches that enable machines to learn
as humans do and how instead of
replacing workers with machines they are
unleashing human expertise to create
human- centered AI leading companies use
these basic building blocks of business
intelligence data experience
architecture and strategy the ideas
framework to transform competition
optimize post-pandemic approaches to
work and talent and show the way towards
a sustainable future it is a great
pleasure I've been waiting for quite
some time the books are on the Shelf
there behind me to welcome senior
technology advisor to Accenture former
CTO and head of innovation for Accenture
the author of radically human
and human and machine and the human and
machine updated version Paul Doty
welcome to the show it's a pleasure to
be here Aiden really looking forward to
the conversation it's great to have you
man and as an Irish man I want to say
also Paul is the Science Foundation
Ireland St Patrick's Day science medal
holder as well yeah there was an amazing
event to uh receive that from the
t-shock a couple years ago and yeah it's
another one of my connection points to
Ireland uh which is another reason why
it's great to to talk yes well it's
great to have you man and I really love
the book I've shared it with so many
people because you really for such an
expert in the field of technology and AI
in particular you do really make it
accessible there was stuff that you just
made so accessible for me and I read
about this stuff quite a lot but I
thought we'd start off by sharing the
context for both these books because
human and machine came first and then
radically human and then you updated
human and machine because the world
changed dramatically in between the s
and between starting human machine and
radically human so let's share a bit of
context for that and then we'll share
some of the changes that you've seen and
some of the context for all the work
that you do the books and really all the
work that I've done ties back to
experience back in my University days
you a few several decades ago now where
I I got into Ai and also cognitive
psychology in some fields we can talk
about a bit more but it was really
formative experience that really set me
on this path of understanding the impact
that technology has on people and how
people use technology and that's been at
the heart of everything I've done over
my career and that's what led to human
plus machine radically human all the
work that I did with a fundamental
premise that technology is an amazing
tool that allows people to be better and
I don't think AI is any different than
any technology that came before so what
we're really focusing on with the
research and work we're doing is how do
we use this technology to help us as
people work live and play more
effectively than we could before so
that's what set us on the course I think
one of the points you were mentioning in
the intro there was was it there was an
interesting point between the first book
and the second book which which is in
you know in the first book we talked
about some research where companies that
were the leaders in applying digital
Technologies including AI outperforming
the Rest by a factor of 2x in terms of
Revenue growth and other metrics and
that was impressive in in of its own
right enough of a reason to put this on
the agenda if you're a business or
Organization leader then what was
interesting is after the first book we
did some new research and this is
talking to thousands of companies 8,000
companies in the first iteration of this
study over 4,000 in the second iteration
of the study I think it's one of the
largest ever maybe the largest ever
study like this done of the use of
technology and businesses around the
world and we were really surprised the
second time this was after Co and we
found that those leaders weren't just
achieving a 2X year performance
Advantage it was 5X
but it accelerated the leaders were
accelerating and that was really the
Insight that led us you to write the
second book radically human which talked
about the need for every organization
now to to get to figure out what this
meant to them and how they how they
could get get an advantage and we
covered a second category of companies
called leap Froggers who were using the
technology to to go from being laggards
to change of the game in their industry
so and that then led to Jed of AI and
everything else that came that led to us
writing the third book which was the
updated version of human plus machine
because we believe the the premise of
that first book are more true than ever
in the era of generative AI that we're
moving into I'd love to share in a
moment Tech Vision 2024 the work that
you've done but before that I I was so
interested by the fact that the pandemic
was an accelerant for all this stuff
that most people in technology had been
talking about for quite some time
telling people you need to build
capability inside your organization you
need to understand this stuff and you're
a little bit like Chicken Little telling
people the sky is falling down and then
the pandemic comes and accelerates
everything and some of the stats you
mentioned in the book and some of the
senior leaders that you talk to were
like we were trying to get this through
something that would have taken years
before happened in two weeks and I
thought that was really fascinating
because it pushed businesses to become
technology businesses which was going to
happen anyway but the accelerant of the
pandemic changed everything yeah no and
there was an interesting dynamic yeah it
was definitely an accelerate but there
was also another thing that the pandemic
did was when the tide went out so to
speak it exposed the shaky you know
Foundation that many organizations had
everybody had been talking about digital
and building digital and every all that
sort of stuff but when you were forced
to create digital Supply chains when you
were forced to do touchless contactless
payments when you were forced to allow
all your employees to to work from home
companies realize hey maybe I'm not as
digital as I thought I was and that's
what led to the acceleration so that
realization that we're not really where
we need to be like to extend metaphor
you such the emperor had no clothes in
some respects as companies looked at it
and so he saw that coming out that
period there was a 63% increase in
technology meaning 63% of companies that
weren't previously using some of these
Technologies adopted it very quickly and
that's the kind of acceleration that we
saw before he get stuck into this book
in particular radically human which I
absolutely love both of them but I
wanted to share Tech Vision 2024 before
we get out of 2024 you consistently
update this but let's share a little bit
about that work and then i' get stuck
into the book we do this technology
Vision every year I've been doing it for
for well over a decade and it's been a
remarkably accurate forecast of the
trends that will impact business and
that Business Leaders need to think
about and 2024 was a particularly
important year I think from a number of
perspectives and I think before I talk
about what the the trends are you to
back up and realize that this is a a
really important moment and an epocal
moment in human history I believe in
terms of what we're experiencing with
you know generative AI isn't just
another technology it is simply put the
most powerful digital technology of the
70-year computerization era that we've
been in because it has this more
humanlike characteristic and it's
already started to make massive changes
I I think most of your listeners I'm
sure have played around experienced
written Shakespearean soned or something
with the chat GPT so you see the power
and the power of this to transform
business transform organizations
transform the way things work is really
stunning and I think it's what I can
it's one of the four I can come back to
this one of the four points that really
surprised me in my four decade career
with technology and so we just have to
put that in context and then when we
talked about the vision for this year we
singled out a few trends that I think
are really important to tune into one of
them is is you know Ai and we talk about
match made in AI is the clever phrase we
use but it's talking about this human
plus machine nature of AI now
supercharged with a humanik capabilities
of generative AI we'll talk a lot about
more about this during the podcast I'm
sure that was the first the first Trend
and we've all seen this one firsthand
the second Trend we talked about was
something we called meet my agent which
is talking about how AI would become
embedded in agent personas so that you
could interact you know not just prompt
and ask a question but you interact with
in my case I I can interact with a
coding agent that can help me code or a
testing agent or a research agent that
can look for information and this rise
of agentic computing is really what
stands to transform the Way businesses
work more than anything else the third
Trend we talk about is the space we need
talking about how digital will extend
itself to three dimensions we're stuck
up I'm looking at you in the screen now
and the your viewers are looking at
these two- dimensional screens and it's
kind of crazy to me that that we live in
a three-dimensional world but we've just
accepted the fact that we can only do
digital interaction in two dimensions
that's changing now we talked a lot
about the metaverse in previous years
Apple released their headset not too
long ago lots of things moved in this
space meta has the new glasses watch
this space because it's inevitable and
it'll happen faster than we think that
we'll be interacting more in three
dimensions than two Dimensions to and
then the final Trend we talk about is
how this starts to move to the edge
impact everything we do and we called
this trend the body's electronic or the
body electronic talking about how
devices and instrumentation and
awareness of every move we make and you
bit who just Computing the environment
around us really has some risks we need
to manage for obvious reasons but also
stands to really add a lot of
opportunity for us I wanted to come back
to some of the human challenges and by
this I mean in organization so we work
with senior leaders all over the world
many of the show listeners are senior
leaders CTO in many cases and they're
frustrated often times that their
organizations won't move until there's
clear evidence that there's need to move
and one of the things you said
absolutely resonated with me which was
you said a large M majority of companies
used Technologies as a Lifeline not as
engines of innovation so this was during
the pandemic and you said like so many
companies that innovate under Jess not
by choice and this is
just such a frustration for so many of
our listeners they're the change makers
they're the heads of innovation they're
the people who are crying we need to
make this change and I wondered what did
you see as the Magic ingredients that
would help people see that future I know
a lot of the work you do is this show
them glimpses of that future but still
people get stuck in the status quo
instead of embracing these Technologies
early there's uh a variety of thoughts
on that one you know the phrase never
waste a good crisis comes to mind and
that's I think what a number of leaders
used to their advantage back in that
period co co and the period following it
I there was one CTO of a of a large
manufacturing organization that I talked
to and and worked with and they had
visions and plans of using virtual
reality augmented reality to do
inspections of their plants globally so
they didn't have to send experts flying
around the world could never get it off
the ground could never get adoption
until Co happened and then by the way
they had a PO proof of concept they had
a minimum viable product when within a
couple weeks they got this new thing up
and running and we're using this new
virtual augmented reality approach to do
things and and it it took off and became
the viable natural way to do things and
another another technology leader told
me that Co had given him the business
case now for Innovation because people
were willing to to break through
inovation think about touchless payments
and things like that that accelerated
during the pandemic so so that's that's
one thing the other thing I I think is
in the new book in the subtitle we talk
about reimagining work in the age of AI
and that word reimagining that we chose
very intentionally some of the people
listening might be Chief Information
officers at companies that would say you
have to think about that eye not just
being I think Chief in the eye like
underplays what so many cios do Chief
Information officer I think it's really
a chief Innovation officer it's the
chief imagination officer because I
think the technology leaders whether
you're CIO or CTO whatever role you
might have need to be the Evangelist and
bring the imagination across the
organization so that they can help the
other leaders help the sea Suite imagine
where to go with the technology and
we're seeing that happen now with
generative AI there's been a shift when
chat BT is less than two years old now
be just about two years old when many
reviewers are watching this and and it
shipped it a lot of the initial we did
our surveys all the research we do
initially people were saying hey this is
great I can cut these costs or I can do
this process more efficiently using
generative AI but that's flipped now we
see 60% of leaders looking at uh
generative Ai and the technology as a
way to drive growth and improve their
business Drive growth Drive higher
pricing margins Etc and that's an
important shift because is reflects the
fact that people have gotten past the
the maybe more mundane and obvious use
cases to look at how this really
transformed their business in a more
fundamental way one of the things I told
of Paul was just your own experience and
your the depth of research in these
books and indeed the tech Vision reports
that you put out every year and your
work with clients I think that's the
difference it's you you work with
clients as well so you're seeing what
what clients are doing things well
you're seeing what clients are lards as
well but I I thought about the the
things that surprised you over the last
two years even with since the since cha
BT kind of made people pay attention and
I often think about Visionaries and and
futurists and people who work in the
future even in organizations and
sometimes they're too early and I often
think about that that movie Field of
Dreams with Kevin CER is like build it
and they will come and then they don't
come or they're waiting they're like
where are they and there there can be
some innovators in organizations that
that go too early and they run out of
steam by saying yeah things are going to
change and then there's others that just
get it right and I wondered what you saw
as the secret formula for being able to
know when to press the accelerator and
when to press the cluture the break yeah
it's it's funny you mention field deams
I I just rewatched that about two weeks
ago it's such a phenomenal movie and and
a good message as as you say yeah timing
is the timing is the hardest thing to
get right in Tech whether you're a
leader a CIO or executive investing in
technology entrepeneur an investor the
timing timing is everything and and it's
hard to get that that right which is
which is and what I say with it with the
technology that we have today the phrase
I use use a lot is it's it's a
participant sport not a spectator sport
to really engage and understand whether
the toing is right and understand
whether you can scale into your business
you need to be you need to be using it
at at in some way and diving in you
can't just sit on the sidelines with
this so it's it's been true with many
Technologies but I think it's
particularly true with the AI
Technologies of today and I would say
that applies on an individual level not
just an organization level for anybody
listening to this to this right now i'
challenge you I I hope everybody's using
generative AI directly whether it be
they're using Claude or gemini or
notebook or chat GPT whatever you choose
perplexity use it use use a couple of
them because I think you'll see
differences and you'll learn a lot and
then figure out when the organization
where do you get started and the formula
that I'm seeing for for organizations
that works pretty well on this timing
issue is think about the no regrets
things that you could do easily now if
you're a Microsoft teams user turn turn
on the the teams co-pilot things like
that and organizations are doing that
without those are the easy use cases
apply it in areas where there's clear
value customer services an area where
we're seeing Broad and really rapid
experimentation and and then starting
with adoptions of the technology and
then as you're thinking about those
types of cases I can talk a lot more
about what the table Stakes kind kind of
first category is think about that
second speed where you can gear it up
and differentiate and drive your
strategy different and uh Delight your
customers and do things your competitors
can't that's the Strategic level and
that might be drug Discovery in life
sciences it might be capital projects
breakthroughs in the energy or other
Capital intensive Industries it might be
new personal new levels of
personalization and Retail and
understand can you do those and where
are you on the timing curve for those
things and looking at those levels is
what should I do start with now the gear
speed one so to speak and when and how
to accelerate into that strategic higher
gear I was thinking about one thing that
you said in the book I I love what you
said here you said as lumbering Legacy
it systems struggle to keep up with new
technology leaders found that making
wise Tech decisions and Investments had
become more difficult than ever yes you
often heard from CEOs in the course of
your work we know we have to become a
technology company but what technology
and I I found that very important thing
to call out that one they often have the
wrong it stack and and it reminds me of
here in Ireland at the moment we're
supposed to get a gig Broadband but most
people's Tech can't even take that kind
of speed so the most devices they have
in their house can't take that speed so
they're like wondering why they're not
getting a gig broadband and the same
with many many people's Tech Investments
and when they're very much CFO driven or
eida driven the investment feels oh we
only did this a few years ago and now
you're telling us we have to do it again
I'm sure you see this a lot from CTO
well yeah well there's been a there's
been kind of a kind of a second punch so
to speak from that we talked earlier
about the acceleration of covid gender
of the ey has thrown a new thing in
there a new level of awareness so
companies are looking saying even with
my acceleration after Co boy I'm still
not where I need to be to really now add
in the gener of AI capabilities I need
so it's really like the the second Punch
or the second moment of awareness for a
lot of organizations and we we call it I
I call it the digital core like where
are you with your digital core that runs
your business every company is a
technology company I've been saying that
for 10 years and it's becoming a little
bit more adopted now me which means
every executive really needs to be a
technology executive and be litered into
some respect and you need the right
modern Foundation going forward a
digital core now when you move into the
the AI era we're moving into needs to
have some new characteristics data
becomes more important not just your
transaction your structured data your
data lakes and such but the unstructured
data have you mastered synthetic data do
you know the synthetic data meaning the
data that you artificially create but
that can you can use to train your
systems better or you drive your
business better you understand that so
where are you with the data agenda and
most companies are quite a bit behind
that's the first you know part of the
digital core the second part is your
application Foundation are your
applications ready for generative AI
some of them may be trapped in in kind
of Legacy old Legacy systems or you
might be on old versions of um from some
of the enterprise software providers
well guess what but they're not
providing gender of AI on the old
versions so if you don't if you don't
upgrade to the latest sap Salesforce
whatever you might be using you can't
get the generative AI there's the data
there's the applications and you need a
new architecture the generative Ai and
the new AI technology are changing the
arch your architecture more than any
technology probably since the
introduction of the PC and the network
do you understand those new changes new
layers new modules and things you need
in your architecture things like
switching capability to move between
different Foundation models how do you
integrate different models and ensure
they use data consistently to drive the
right quality results for your
organization do you have the guard rails
in your architecture to enforce
responsible AI this is a technology
issue not just a policy and principle
issue that's the architecture piece so
data applications architecture less than
15% of organizations from the work I've
done and the surveys uh that we've done
have that modern digital core in place
so most have a lot of work to do doesn't
mean you shouldn't start with down the
path and most are starting down the path
but you have to in parallel build that
that foundation for the
future feel so sorry for CTO lots of CTO
have a place at the boardroom table like
they deserve today but they didn't
always but then they get this pressure
when is this going to be delivered from
all different angles and there's only a
certain speed that they can go to and I
wondered had you any advice for them
because I told many CTO I had you
comeing on the show and they're like
I'll ask them about this because I get
it on my ear all the time about can we
go faster and there's only a certain
speed we can go and I wondered what
advice you had for them yeah this is a
this an interesting one the answer is
different for different organizations
but I think there's some the pro there's
been two big problems for CIO and I
agree with you I I have uh many many
many CIO CTO types of friends I think
it's one of the hardest jobs out there
because of the increased pressure for
Innovation combined with the reality of
what you have to run today like and and
keep it all going and the two things
that have been almost impossible for
many technology leaders to do is build a
business case to modernize because
modernization on its own nobody wanted
to pay for unless there was Mother
business you know benefit generated the
second thing that was hard to justify
were just data for data for its own sake
so so as a result people companies have
underinvested in their your core
applications and architecture they've
underinvested in their data I think the
only advice I'd give is that I think the
fascination and interest is this new
technology now is like I said earlier
with a CO example it's giving kind of a
new lease or new bus a new life to
business cases around this so how do you
tie in some of the modernization of
along with the value you're driving as
you as you implement some of the new
capability for example if you're
implementing some new customer service
agent related capability into the into
your front office which many many
organizations are I can give you some
examples in a minute um then how do you
upgrade some of the data and the data
and capability at the core of it which
we're seeing organizations be able to do
so that's one thing is is it's giving it
a new way to package how you drive the
innovation in business case to to tackle
some of these what have been intractable
problems around monitorization and data
the second is that the new technology
provides you with new techniques to use
one thing we're seeing that's
interesting in the Mainframe area as an
example I'm sure some of the listeners
have Mainframe systems still out there
there's still lot ton of Mainframe
systems out there driving a lot of value
for organizations well what what of the
one of the thoughts people have with Gen
is well gen is going to help you move
all this Mainframe stuff and translate
it real quickly well it doesn't
necessarily do that better than the
prior Technologies we had to automate
Mainframe migration but the interesting
thing is genovi can really help you
understand what those Legacy systems
were doing it can help understand the
transaction logs documentation as well
as the code and what was happening and
therefore help your engineers now have
an agent can help them forward engineer
or modernize the app more effectively
which is a little different than people
think so it's gen gen isn't the silver
bolt of solving the migration it's
helping your engineers in this human
plus machine way now solve the problem
more effectively so those are the kinds
of things that i' that I'd suggest
people think about is it look to build
this business case to get to the
modernized digital core of the
future fantastic there so many people
are going to be taking this exert and
sending it to their bosses or the boards
think go listen to that
if you ask me how faster I can go listen
to that now next time and and to that
point the question I'll add one more
just in case people use it that way I
think the question you should that every
board or or CE or C Suite should ask if
they they see a generative AI use case
coming forward hey we're g to use it to
improve customer service going to use it
for knowledge man we're going to improve
our supply chain over here we're going
to improve it development with gener of
AI the question I would ask and I
question every executive should ask is
not just how am I how are we achieving
that how is that
putting our digital core in a better
position every step you take needs to
move uh your digital core into a better
position I think that's a question
leader should be asking otherwise you're
just bolting on capability that's going
to make you more fragile in the long run
if every step isn't also improving your
digital core preparing you better for
the
future one of the things I just wanted
to lean into and pull a thread on was
the importance of every company is now a
technology company because many people
will resist that
and i' I'd love you to explain what you
mean and maybe some examples of a
company that saw itself not as a
technology company but now absolutely is
and you you talked about the leap
Froggers versus the
laggards yeah you know I started saying
this back in 2012 when the title of our
technology we talked about technology
visioner the title of our technology
Vision in 2012 was every business is a
digital business and as I went around in
this the tour talking to companies about
that vision of it was I was widely
attacked at the time because people were
saying why you saying that my business
isn't a digital business blah blah blah
other than the industries that were
obvious but within about 18 months
everybody said yeah that's right like
yeah that's where it's going and and
that's where I started also saying if
every business a digital business then
every every leader needs to be a
technology leader every CEO needs to be
a technology CEO because techn the way
you do digital the way you use
technology is going to differentiate
your business and as a leader to
understand how that's happening I think
that's become true in many organizations
just a few examples I'd highlight
Walmart maybe as one example globally of
an organization who's embraced it going
from going from the the bricks and
mortar store stores of 10 years ago it's
an amazing company but look at what
they're what they're doing now in
e-commerce and use of AI uh in their
stores and use of data in very ambitious
ways and kind of fighting fighting
against Amazon and the other other uh
leaders there Amazon themselves are
amazing at technology obviously
but it shows how Walmart's really
transformed the CEO of Walmart Doug
McMillan has really embraced technology
you really changed his team and Chang
the whole company approach to embrace
technology I look at another example
happening right now that the
transformation right now I'd say is in
the insurance industry insurance as an
industry I would say over my decades in
in Tech has been a lagger in adopting
technology generally speaking insurance
I think most insurance executive
probably acknowledge that they've been
El lagered in adopting new technology
it's borne out by the surveys if if you
look over the years This Time It's
Different Insurance Executives that the
CEOs I talk to in the insurance
Industries are really looking at
technology difference how does this
impact the way I look at risk how can I
use AI models in new ways insurance is
largely a language-based industry its
policies and its communication with
customers and it's it's it's regulation
and and stuff like that and so it's
really ripe for this new development and
technology so senior leaders are leading
in they're learning about the technology
they're meeting directly with the AI
companies and it's the change coming
with that cying through the industry
those are a couple examples and this is
really true in every industry that the
differentiation going forward is going
to be how companies really put this new
digital core in place and use AI we're
entering this AI era use the technology
to to reimagine the way their companies
work and if that's what comes down to
leadership and we'll come back for those
people interested in the likes of
Walmart there's a brilliant case study
of okado in the book as well and we'll
we'll talk about that when we come back
to the ideas framework but I wanted to
share by the way one of the things I do
on the show I wear a PIN to try and
reflect the show in some way it's just
one of these rituals I have this is a a
kind of a human head with a with data
kind of a Rubik's Cube stuck in his head
so I thought it was like radically human
that's what I was trying to trying to do
there it might have been stretching
stretching the metaphor but but
radically human and human and machine
has a has a theme between it and
hopefully we'll have time to come to
human and machine at the end end and
this missing middle yeah but in this
book radically human you talk about
Innovation turned upside down and you
talk about three major
phases about in intelligent technology
and how we're entering this third phase
this this radically human phase but I'd
love you to just give us a Whistle Stop
tour of those three phases and what you
meant by them we started this in
radically human and then we built on it
even more in the new book but the if you
think about automation people using
technology yeah you can go back through
generate you can go back industrial
agriculture you can go way back with
Technologies but look back to the you
know Industrial Age it was uh machine Le
automation where it was assembly lines
standardized processes Frederick Taylor
a scientific method if you you're
familiar with these things that was the
machine Le era that we started with then
the second era came about with
computerization that I alluded to
earlier roughly 70 years into that the
computerization which gave us more a
little bit more collaboration in
processes and such and maybe you got to
you human plus machine in some cases
still lot machine Le in terms of the
technology but the technology fused
together in different ways and in that
era what really mattered was we moving
from standardized manufacturing you know
types of processes to human plus machine
processes that were put together but
there were still pretty static processes
now in this third era that we're just
moving into it's really human Le it's
more adaptive processes and that's
really really why generative AI is so
exciting because it's technology that
has many humanik characteristics it's
got humanik capability in certain areas
so rather than processes and interaction
being defined by keyboards and different
primitive ways of interaction it's human
level interaction with the technology
that we're dealing with which can really
give us superpowers in terms of the
power of people and the abilities of
people and it leads to the need to
change the way you think about processes
and that's again why this word
reimagination comes in there and we talk
about this this radical change in the
way we do things a good example of that
human lead thing we talk about is it's
very simple example is in the design
field there's a a chair called the elbow
chair which won a lot of international
design prizes several years ago it looks
very different than any chair you've
seen but it's structurally amazing in
Integrity design is beautiful and it was
designed by is human Le Way by a
designer using generative AI in this
case from Autodesk and the designer
talks about this and says you would have
never come up with the variations that
that the Gen of AI came up with but it
was then his human it was his human
prompting then his human Le filtering
and exchange and finalization that led
to the award-winning process that's what
we mean by kind of human Le and more
adaptive in the way it works Paul some
people would be concerned about
joblessness even in this age of human
and radically human techn ology and if
you think about the jumps in even the
GPT releases for those people who use
that there's lots more AI out there but
M mainly people have adopted chbt I
think but the jumps in each of the
iterations are huge and when you think
when you roll that forward to another 10
years you go wow where's it going to be
and is it a case of we're training the
AI at the expense of ourselves are we
digging our own graves in some way and
we men taylorism I often think about
technological taylorism like the way
Taylor used to sit and look and see how
long it would take you to put a piece
together whatever that AI is now
watching people and seeing how quickly
they do it or how they do it or else
they're even teaching the machine you
talk about M stream teaching for those
people who are concerned about that what
would be your feelings this is a long
topic but we get into it man as long as
it's the reason we wrote the first book
even before jbi came launch it's because
there was in the mid in with when with
the advances and deep learning in that
early 201s 2013
2014 same discussion was happening and
in fact Jeffrey Hinton who recently won
the Nobel Prize Jeff Hinton famously
said in that era we need to stop
training Radiologists today because in a
few years we we will need none of
them brilliant guy won the Nobel Prize
totally wrong on that topic I think a
lot of people misinterpret the way that
this technology will really be applied
in the way that people work and that's
why we wrote human plus machine because
we think we know we need a road map to
think about how to apply this to achieve
the right impact we also did some
research and we're publishing this in
some new articles coming out in Harvard
Business review and there's been some
other studies from MIT and Stanford and
other institutions about why human plus
machine leads to better results and one
of the examples we talk about is in a
chemistry type of process a researcher
on their own had about 60-ish percent
accuracy and ability to get something
done AI model in this case using
something like Alpha fold from Deep Mind
from Google was in about the same range
a little bit better but about the same
range together there was like 90 plus
percent accuracy in what they could do
and that's been repeated in in many many
fields and it's subject of a great paper
from MIT coming out now and that really
is the road map we're trying to provide
in human plus machine if if your goal is
to use gender of AI and try to automate
what your people currently do go for it
I'm sure you can do a lot of that but is
that going a position your business
better no because the real I believe the
real differentiator will continue to be
how your people use the technology and
driving your business and that's what uh
organizations need to focus on another
thing I've been saying for for tennish
years is the companies that'll be
successful are those that invest more in
the people than in the technology as
much as you need to invest in the
technology so that would be the the the
philosophy now that said there's some
big problems that we have as a society
and as organizations to face I believe
there'll be more there'll be more than
enough jobs and just look at what the
internet was supposed to do in terms of
displacing jobs and look at the number
of new entrepreneurs on platforms like
GoDaddy and eBay and other platforms
around the world millions millions
millions of new jobs and businesses
being created in new ways because people
are empowered with new skills that's
going to be multiplied exponentially
with the human capability of generative
AI so the only way you have to worry
about the net total of jobs is if you
believe every job has already been
created it's a zero sum game we're just
automating the jobs of today and I don't
believe that's far from the case I think
we probably only invented five or 10% of
the jobs the jobs and services and
products that uh we as Humanity need so
that's the philosophical type of answer
type of answer to it but the Practical
answer is then to like work on the human
the missing middle and the human plus
machine jobs that will create the
opportunity of the future the other
thing I'd say though a big issue is we
already have and this isn't being talked
about enough we already have too many
people on the wrong side of a digital
divide whether you look at Global South
versus developed economies where you
look in individual countries
socioeconomically or by different you
know groups from an inclusion diversity
perspective we already have a digital
divide that's unacceptable and leading
to political issues and unrest and
various things then gender value and all
this technology will make that worse if
we don't do more about it those on the
wrong side of the digital divide to
start are going to be further on the
wrong side and that is a big problem I
don't think that's being talked about
enough we're so distracted by artificial
general intelligence and all these other
things that I don't think are the real
issues that we're not spending enough
time on the basics of Let's help those
the wrong side of digital divide get the
right skills so that they can catch up
and be effective going forward it's one
of the reasons why with all three of the
books we're donating all net proceeds
all royalties to nonprofits that are
helping mid-career displaced workers
because we believe those are the ones
that that need the help most and we've
been able to support many great
organizations great organizations with
that along the way and I just want to
say as well well now I kind of feel bad
saying this cuz I want you to buy the
book but I have a copy of each up for
grabs if you just follow the Innovation
show substack I have two copies up for
grabs one of radically human and the
other of human a machine just just buy
10 more because it all goes to a good
cost you just heard seriously we yeah
man organizations well done well done
that's Bravo because I'm sure you've
sold a hell of a lot of these as well
particularly you have a second edition
and you're more on the way as well I
know you way more in you so I thought
we'd move on to the the framework I by
the way I hope I hope this is right I I
spoke on the show to yossi sheffy who's
one of the world's experts on Supply
chains and he had the same feelings he
was like and Yos is still going he's
amazing man yeah still lecturing and he
said the same he said Aiden you're fault
because I I'm a little bit like oh I'm
not sure about this is a business a
platform business business if it's a
platform business Wall Street rewards it
for having higher Revenue per employee
and I'm like oh this is the the formula
is wrong here and particularly with the
digital divide and he's like going yeah
but you're you're making the Assumption
by looking at the past and that's what
everybody does in each paradigm shift is
they look to the past to make decisions
going forward and you're falling for it
here so I hope that's the case and I
really do and I hope those people who
maybe are like me or inclined to think
this is a dangerous time may maybe I'm
mixing up like you say with the
political divide and the the digital
divide with people as well because you
see that quite a lot so let's hope it's
the case well just one more thing on
that that you just triggered another
thought with what you said and yeah he's
a an amazing guy so it's good good that
you you talk to him too the what we're
seeing we we just did another piece of
research I'd be happy to I'll send it to
you and you happy to free to post it to
your listeners the title of it is work
Workforce and workers is the title of it
and the point we make in this research
is that we have a bit of a trust Gap
forming in the workforce uh which is
another issue related to this not in
this serve in this research you that
you'll see in the report
94% of workers this is across all
categories of different types of work
across the Spectrum globally 94% of
people believe generative AI is going to
help them and be good for their career
and that's going to benefit them 94% %
about the same percent believe they can
learn it it's not going to be an issue
to learn it but when we talk to leaders
it's almost the opposite view leaders
are concerned their employees can't make
it and uh they're concerned whether they
they have the right Workforce and that's
building this trust Gap the workers
believe it's good the leaders aren't
sure and when we ask the leaders you
know what they're doing they say they
they don't know the impact yet so
they're not saying anything so there's a
silence coming from leadership workers
believe they can do it and as a result
there's this distrust building so if you
ask the workers how they're feeling
about it they say well I'm optimistic I
don't believe my current company is yeah
I believe I'm at risk in my current
company because of it which is just this
great Paradox and this great lost
opportunity to maximize human capital
and why the C plus machine thing is so
important and those organizations those
leaders who are out there talking about
you might not have the perfect answer
but talk about what it's going to have
talk to the employees educate all of
your employees in what this is and what
that's doing encourage them to use it
that they're part of the process those
are the organizations that are reversing
the trust Gap and instead building a
Workforce of employees who have the
trust and and also will bring the ideas
and the culture and everything else you
need to drive the change those who are
are stuck in this trust Gap thing I
think you're going to have a lot of
trouble going forward just again advice
to organizations out there you know and
then is what do you do about it rather
talking about it you need to invest in
your employee skills build durable
learning platforms because people going
need to learn and and relearn and
relearn and less than 15% of
organizations are building those kind of
learning platforms their employees now
so that this is this all needs to change
as well so maybe I'm getting back to why
you're pessimistic a little bit but
there's also the action that you need to
take you need to have a vision and some
message on where this is going you need
to talk to your employees you need to
invest in the skills Foundation that's
doing which gets back to this idea you
need that I said earlier you need to
invest more in the people than the
technology I think that's such a massive
Gap and I get it I mean organizations we
in this real Paradigm Shift moment in
the business world and then you have
younger Generations coming through older
Generations will maybe argue sometimes
oh they're they're they're very
demanding these younger guys because
they want progress and they want it
learning and they want budget to be able
to learn and they don't get it often
times one of the biggest Fascinations
Paul of me was over 10 years ago I left
a role and I was so frustrated because I
couldn't get funding to do a project I
want to do the prince 2 project
management
the CFO wouldn't let me do it and then
he gave out to me for buying a book on
the company credit card and I was like
boy am I in the wrong place because it
was like I just saw that you have to
have a certain level of learning in
order to be able to evolve in an
organization to be able to evolve your
thinking and if you're not investing in
people as the world changes they're left
with these Legacy this Legacy junk wear
that's no longer fit for the world and I
I think it's such an important point
about this constant investment in your
people so they can keep up with the
changes in the world right speaking of
which one of the ways your people can
get a grasp on all these things changing
the world is the ideas framework and I
love the ideas framework because it's
the really can be the building blocks of
how to navigate this change and it's
really simply evolved it's really Simply
Built in order for people to be able to
get so you're not trying to complicate
this at all and I'd love you to firstly
high level take us through just what the
framework is and then I'll pull on some
threads and we'll go a little bit deeper
into each of the five steps I have to
give credit to my co-author Jim for
coming up with ideas where we had these
five things and we're trying to figure
out how to make it memorable for people
and he was on who came up with the
acronym ideas so the five things so it's
ideas ID d a so the I is is about
intelligence and and we use a tagline of
more human less artificial and this is
the point we were just talking about uh
we
we're making two points there by the way
radically human was written before gener
of AI but we were talking about the the
the shift one thing we're making the
point of with the eye here more more
human less artificial was that the
technology was becoming more human we
were kind of looking at Transformer and
these things that became the T and chat
GPT before before that that moment and
um so we're kind of anticipating the
more human-like nature of the technology
and therefore why you needed to embrace
these more you know human ways of using
of using the tech uh the technology so
that's the I part the D part is data and
we we we're making the point from uh Max
maximum to minimum and back is what we
say in the book at the time when we
wrote the book everybody was just
focused on the big data and we were
seeing things like zero shot learning
and other techniques which were about
how do you create a path would you have
less data and there's other optimization
techniques and such that are very good
at less data and then there's synthetic
data that we talked lot about in this
chapter what do you do when you don't
have the right data what if you need to
train your manufacturing system to
identify defects but you're so good you
don't have many defects you don't have
enough data to train it on well you need
synthetic data to train it and so we're
talking about don't just get enamored
with the bigger the bigger the bigger
think about the best data and the best
way to use it the best techniques
because as we know using a lot of data
to pre to train these models costs
Millions hundreds of millions of dollars
tremendous energy impacts and all the
rest and using finding the right
techniques the problem is really
important so that's the point we're
making around the data expertise is is
talking about moving from machine
learning to machine teaching it's was
just a clever way of saying try to
reverse the equation a little bit and a
lot of people are fond of saying well
you need to keep the human in the loop
with with it with AI I just think that's
backwards it's not like this Tech
Overlord and the human needs to be a
minor part in the loop it's the human is
in control of of a process that includes
technology that's the way to think about
that's the point we're making in the
expertise one of the points we make in
that section machine learning to machine
teaching is what's the role of the human
in this and how do people make the
technology better a great example of
this right now is what we see in in uh
in uh life sciences when we see AI being
applied by scientists it's um it's SC
you know scientists have a hypothesis
you learning models starting starting
the models down a certain path the model
generates some insights the research
says aha yeah that's interesting but
let's go a different direction
and that the models learning and the
scientists is learning and they're
coming up with better results than
either could do on their own as I said
in the data I cited earlier architecture
is talking about going from Legacy to
living systems and that's this digital
core idea how do you move from Legacy to
living and by living we mean dynamically
adaptable systems with the properties I
talked about earlier the modern data
application and Architectural
foundations so we can talk about this uh
a lot more as well if we want to dive
into detail and then the strategies this
is kind of a fun part of the book to
work on is and this came from
interviewing a lot of leaders and
organizations is is if we're if every
company's a technology company then how
does your strategy need to change to
incorporate Ai and everything that's
happening around technology and that's
where we talked about some new strategic
Concepts forever beta minimum viable
ideas collab a few different Frameworks
of strategies that we see companies that
are very successful adopting I love that
man I love those ideas the minimal
viable idea collabing and hopefully
we'll get there man hopefully I I can
fit this in I I thank you for giving an
overview of ideas I I notice sometimes
looking at the data to show that people
kind of get distracted and might drop
off halfway through so I might cut it
even into two pieces so people get this
right at the start the ideas framework
because it's so so valuable the
intelligence part I I just there was a
couple of things here that I don't think
most people knew which me included by
the way that we hear a lot about deep
learning and firstly many of us don't
know what deep learning is but C
certainly we don't know that it's kind
of has limitations and this was one of
the big lessons I had from the book is
the limitations of deep learning I'd
love you to unpack that first because
that was a real eye
opener yeah the I mean so deep learning
it really took off in the two 2010's
Jeff Hinton who I mentioned earlier
that's part of the reason he he won the
Nobel Prize was he was amazing Pioneer
and researcher with some new uh a lot of
the new Concepts around deep learning
but deep learning does there's lots of
different forms of deep learning and uh
you do supervised learning unsupervised
learning reinforcement learning
reinforcement with human feedback all
sorts of different techniques that can
help you improve the results and yeah
you have to really understand the right
techniques to use and at the same time
it's it's sometimes not the right
approach to use and it's got limitations
in terms of the amount of data and such
that you need to use use it the the the
the emergence of generative AI I gave it
new life so to speak because you
generative Ai and the models are are
built with some of the techniques that I
just talked about but with the
Innovation the added innovation of
Transformer technology which is a new
way kind of a creating and predicting
what might happen next which is what the
the models do well and diffusion models
which are used in uh in the multimodal
the more visual mods those two
innovations added bet you know into
everything that was happening around
deep learning is what led to the you
know the Boom in Genera of AI in kind of
you know fueled where we are today but
one one thing we talk about is is
there's things if you're trying to
predict your use AI to predict your
retail sales in a certain Market 18
months from now incorporating economic
patterns and weather in your business
Trends deep learning is probably not the
right answer there's other forms of
machine learning and optimization
problems and such that are have' been
used for that for a long time they're
appropriate to use if you're doing it a
next best next best action kind of
things you know if you're on Amazon and
try to figure out what book you're going
to read next that's probably not going
to be deep learning it's probably going
to be other other forms of of machine
learning and AI that are that are used
in there so that's one of the things
we're talking about in the book is
making sure you're choosing the fit for
purpose types of models we talk about
really three three broad categories of
AI the diagnostic AI often deep learning
driven predictive AI often driven by
optimization other algorithms and then
generative AI with a unique you know
creative capability you know powered by
these these new types of
models one of the things you mentioned
about deep learning is that it has a
black box problem and that it it's
making really consequential decisions
but when you try to figure out how it
made those decisions it's pretty opaque
that was one thing and the other thing
was deep Learning Systems can't read so
when people are actually uploading
documents I think this was really
important it can't read those documents
and I'd love you to share a little bit
about those to
yeah that's where there's a lot of
exciting things happening now too so
yeah deep learning kind of on on its own
you have this black box and
explainability problem and there's ways
to solve for that there's gener of
adversarial networks and things like
that you can use to try to understand
what they're doing but still
approximating some of the interesting
Innovation going on now is how do you
take how do you add the explan
explainability back in that there's some
really interesting things happening if
you use perplexity for example one of
the generative big gener of AI models
you'll hear headline as this comes out
about the you know large amounts of
money they're raising perplexity is one
of the successful Frontier Foundation
models they have explainability built in
when they tell you something they'll
give you the citation is this came from
X that that's really important to do and
others are working on that type of
problem but deep learning on it own
doesn't have that capability to your
point which is important so that's and
one one thing I'm was just working with
a company on is using that type of model
in an Investment Portfolio analysis
application where you don't want to you
don't want have hallucination make you
make the wrong best but you want to
understand as Financial anas I gu human
plus machine I want the model to advise
me but I want to understand and make
sure make sure it's the right bet and
that's why the explainability uh
features come back at us working with
this company on on recently and the
second part was explained but was the
second part was the um that I can't read
yeah and that was a big limitation and
you know that's why you have to look at
how you combine different techniques so
you can you now you can use NLP and
gener a you can use them to do the
reading and adjust and then combin it
with the Deep learning models what of
the it and you have other problems the
gener of AI the New Foundation models
aren't good at math so they're because
they're you kind of language based so
you really have to understand there's no
one silver bullet for everything and the
answer we can come back to this but the
answer isn't just making these models
bigger and bigger with more hundreds of
billions or trillions of parameters
that's not going to solve it it's kind
of combining these techniques and models
in different ways so for example we we
did a man a manufacture uring inspection
system for one of the largest Automotive
companies in the world almost more than
10 years ago and it used visual used
cameras video cameras on their assembly
lines with a with a deep learning
algorithm to ID to identify defects back
so this is was in common technology now
back then it was more pioneering but now
with General VI we can do some new
things we can understand the nature of
that defect we can look at documentation
and other things so we can use language
based resources Now understand and add
to the power of the system that can
generate the defect and kind of look at
all sorts of other dimensions of it so
it's sometimes looking at how you
combine you know multiple dimensions of
the of AI together to solve one problem
it's not like generative AI displaces
the prior forms of AI machine simple
machine learning optimization algorithms
are relatively simple in many cases are
going to be the best answer and may
maybe you can wrap G of AI around for
better human inter interaction and
understanding the context of the problem
and such there's so many great examples
in that I'm actually looking at my notes
here going I don't have enough time to
cover all these examples I I love the
stuff the covariant in there I tracking
by AI etc etc so I'll leave that to
people now and now particularly that you
know where the proceeds of the book go
to to buy the book so we better keep
moving on to data and again lots lots of
huge insights reading this chapter
particularly things like the lack of B
existing big data sets for AI so maybe
we'll start off there and maybe you give
an overview of the world of a of data
and then I'll pull on a few threads yeah
when you look at the data you most
companies understand and can can itemize
their transactional data so my customers
their history Billings and such and such
and that's one level but even that in
many organizations has issues you have
no single source of the truth and things
that that need a lot of work quality of
the data Etc then you have this the kind
of second type of information you're
dealing with which is the unstructured
data your call transcripts the what
information externally what people are
saying about your company and on Yelp or
customer view sites or what have you so
unstructured data that may come in
different ways and then you have
synthetic data that you may be able to
create that'll help your your business
in different ways that's data and then
the other thing that you need and that
you can use that and in as a foundation
integrate it to power the AI that you
need but then sometimes you also need
data sets to drive the data think about
scientific discovery you may need things
like like Alpha fold which has protein
folding predictions and information and
such or if you're looking at one thing
we did for the book is we us some AI
looking at job classification and job
Trends and what's happening use of
Technology well there there's massive
data sets on that fortunately available
that are aggregating a lot of uh
different company information but that
data doesn't always exist and I think
the lack of data sets is one thing that
we're seeing organizations deal with and
in some cases we're seeing Industries
collaborate leaders in Industry say hey
let's put this data together you know
clinical trials around related drug
in the pharmaceutical industry for
example if it can help all of them you
know with different aspects of the
problem and you know avoid some of the
you know the intensely competitive areas
then there's value in collaborating to
create data sets that will help them uh
Power new things going forward so that's
that's you know there's a lot of work
going on on this because you know the
the a will only be as good as the data
and the data sets that used to train it
and they feed it to produce the
results again with some empathy for your
colleagues in CTO all over the world who
are pulling out their clips and sending
them to their bosses one is well one one
thing that that that's a a new uh thing
to to look on at there and some on the
call probably are looking at this is how
to use AI to improve your data there was
a a great study not to say Walmart again
but just just happened that one of the
interesting that that interesting things
they're doing with AI that they talked
about recently is how they dramatically
improve the quality of their product
categorization data that drives all
their online business so in other words
this is this is the data that's really
important to make sure if you search you
find the right product that you're going
to buy they have some quality issues
with the data and they use AI to
dramatically improve it very quickly
example of of of of using the technology
to improve your own data one of the
things I was going to just mention was
the rising costs of data so training a
single model is relatively inexpensive
but the better you get the more it costs
and I thought that was an important
thing to mention yeah I think one of the
issues that's going to drive how AI
evolves in companies we're we're at the
very early stages with these large
models and and again it costs hundreds
of millions of dollars to train the
biggest models and therefore the
commercial commercialization of that to
use those models is going to which is
called the in there's the training cost
the inference cost a lot of times those
training cost hundred of millions of
dollars absorb the frontier model of
companies but to use those models it's
the inference cost that you as a
customer pay those costs are very
expensive for the largest models they're
measured in the tokens you submit or the
input you give and things like that so
it's a big consideration for companies
because yes you may be able to use a
very sophisticated model to get a good
answer to support your customer service
process but can you afford to do it and
that's and that's an important
consideration for companies going
forward similarly if you're developing
or or tuning a model for your own use
how much is that training of the model
for your own use versus the inference
versus your use
so these are we're at the early stages
companies are starting to understand
this we've developed Frameworks to help
companies evaluate these types of of
costs but that's why it's very important
uh to make choices only use the really
powerful models or only build those
really powerful models if you really
need them because they're incredibly
complex and expensive to use where can
you use open source models say from a
meta what one of the Llama models or mol
or other organizations who have much
smaller more fit for purpose models that
might help you in a domain in a more
efficient way than within bigger modelss
but that's it's all sorting itself out
right now and that's going to be a
really important area to stay on top of
over the next few years one of the
things I thought was really important
was again you mentioned here even
leaving budget we're in budget season
for many companies and they don't leave
enough budget they think they might have
enough budget to do these things and
then they have this problem with data
and you tell us that AI Pioneers are
addressing three distinct challenges one
is to find the needle in the Hy stack
you a bunch of d dat about what's
relevant the second is the amount of
data is small so we talked about this in
the intro the efficiency of that data
and then there there's some cases
there's no data at all synthetic data
for example you mentioned I'd love you
just to give a a quick word on that the
one of the the things that you need to
to really think through is how to
integrate the data in the right way and
how to you use some new ideas so there's
Vector databases and knowledge graphs
and in different technology some of you
will be familiar with that other the
rest of you will become familiar
relatively soon with it I'm sure the and
it's it these are ways to take the data
you have which in some cases may be
small data it may be specific supply
chain data about your business and the
way you build products and such which
isn't massive big data but it's really
important to the the the problems you're
going to want to solve with AI the
creating the knowledge graph and Vector
datab Bas is vectorizing the information
you have that's easily available and
digestible by the large models these are
really important areas that are going to
that are going to dictate how successful
you can be in getting accurate results
in getting results that are really tuned
to your business so thinking about your
data as I talked about earlier all the
different forms of data and then
thinking about how do you prepare that
in the right way to interact with your
you know generative Ai and the other
forms of AI is part of The Art of
Getting that architecture right we
better keep moving on because I'm going
to run out of time here and people are
going to be left hanging we're on E
which is the expertise piece and this is
the move towards machine teachings in
human and machine we'll cover that again
in the future but in this book and in
human and machine you talk about the
human machine hybrid activities that
you've identified and maybe we'll just
give a quick overview of your favorites
of
those yeah I think when you think about
the expertise there's really you know
from machine learning to machine
teaching there's some some simple ways
you can see this in in terms of people
labeling and tagging things that's
really not we're talking about there
those aren't necessarily the really high
value examples the the other types of
examples that you see here are in areas
uh like uh customer service as an
example where think about it a large
telecommunications company we worked
with where they use they have customer
service agents but they also have ai
agents that can listen to the call
understand what the C customer might be
asking about and then suggest what you
to the human agent what you know might
help resolve the problem in this
particular case they the use of of uh of
AI and generative AI agents increased
productivity by over 30% increased
customer satisfaction by over 60%
because people were getting the
customers were getting better answers
and it had this amplify effect if you
think about the what we were just
talking about Aiden where the AI made
the person you made the human agent
better they they were they were that was
as far as that the customer new they
were just dealing with the human and
that human was more effective and had
these superpowers to answer the question
better but the AI was also learning
based on the interaction and what the
human did did the action resolve it or
not so that next time around it' be that
much better and that's that amplifying
interact capability of the you know
machine teaching coming from the human
interaction with the AI Paul mentioned
in that brief overview earlier on
architecture and what I found really
interesting was that architecture in
your it system is starting to reflect
art architecture in the organization
conways law where we need to be more
fluid we need to be more adaptable and I
love the way you talked about for
example the top people so the AI
Pioneers are not only using the cloud
but they're innovating in the cloud and
I thought that was so interesting to
show people how far you can go to be an
a student yeah that really is I think
for the the innovators and again we we
talked earlier about the the way that
they're out performing part of the part
of their whole rationale for getting to
the cloud was it it was the the only
place to really innovate if if you're
not in the cloud and there's certain
things you can't do in the cloud for
variety of reasons I I totally get that
but we'll continue to see more and more
move to the cloud about 40% of
Enterprise workloads are in the cloud I
think that'll double over the next uh
few years is what we're going to see and
a big part of that is innovation if
you're not in the cloud you're in your
own environment you're trying to
innovate add new services and features
and keep up so that your applications
can can take advantage of these features
why not be in the cloud where the cloud
providers are introducing these new do
things on a continuous basis and that's
the the Insight that some of the early
leaders that went into the cloud had and
why they're uh innovating really rapidly
so if there's a new AI capability so if
you happen to be a Microsoft customer
and they release a new uh open open AI
capability in Azure you can take
advantage of it right away rather than
needing to figure out how to deploy that
in your organization which therefore
focuses your teams more on the business
Innovation you need rather than doing
the nuts and B of the technology work I
think that's a core Insight that the
leaders have had and that will continue
to drive it as we go and now we have
Cloud we're moving to the edge we have
ai layered into it with all these new
technologies coming about the more you
can leverage the partners who provide
that technology rather than building it
yourself the more you can invest the the
precious dollars you have on the
Innovation that's going to benefit your
business so we're going to have to move
on and I'm going to use the architecture
and use actually everything I'm going to
use idea to finish on the S which is
strategy one of my favorite chapters in
the book brings everything together
great case study you given in that is
the lemonade case study I'd love you to
share that yeah it's a great example
because it's it's also showing how it
how you can just approach an industry
entirely differently so lemonade is for
those of you who don't know it's it's
really a startup insurance carrier who
had a different proposition about that
about how to approach the market it
really sh it's really this minimum
viable ideas framework which is taking
like the different elements of of ideas
using the intelligence the uh data the
expertise Etc and so what lemonade did
is they created a cloud native new
business powered by intelligence you
know getting insights quickly online
immediate response to policy requests
and things that that the customers were
asking for and and they had humans in
the loop humans as part of the process
powering all that and and they've been
very they've been successful with this
whole new model in the industry kind of
reimagining what insurance might be for
a different segment of customers who
wanted this very fluid digital adaptive
process it's a great example of a whole
different approach to strategy and
that's and that they continually iterate
on and improve on as they grow their
business and expand it we have to cover
man I'm going to squeeze it in I loved
minimal viable idea forever Beta And
collabing as well got to share them man
we'll squeeze them right at the end quet
people's appetite so forever beta is
another one of the strategies that I
think is is really resonating that we
see companies that adting the example we
talk about in the book a lot I think is
just a great example is is Tesla who
really is uh you know that that their
car itself is a beta I drive a Tesla
some of you in the audience may drive a
Tesla and I got a recently got a new
download of an of a vastly improved uh
driver assist you near autonomous
driving capability that they downloaded
so they view the the car is the platform
and it's forever beta forever approving
the product based on customer need based
on the improvements of the technology
and such I that's the best example you
know companies that live that that model
are going to be able to to continuously
adapt and Delight their customers with
these new experiences another one that
follows that I think just to SLE out an
example would be Amazon with the Amazon
web services in particular with you
again with Jeff basos famously had it's
it's always day one p mentality and that
led them to this to this you mindset
where they continually introduce new
products new features new services to
their customers and then so that's the
minimum viable ideas we have the forever
beta then collab is the other strategy
which is when you really focus on the
collaboration the collab and the collab
had a little bit of a science
connotation what we talk about the book
too as well as collaboration and I
talked about examples of this a little
bit earlier we see this uh in particular
when we see this applied in areas with
scientific research types of areas where
we see this happening modna might be a
great example of the way that they P
ered the covid vaccine by pairing their
scientific processes with AI powered
models they had an AI workbench that
they used their drug Discovery process
that allowed their scientists to
innovate through all the permutations of
the virus and potential new messenger
RNA based Therapeutics to come up with a
right answer much much much faster than
anybody else could
have absolutely fantastic I want to tell
the audience we only got through the
first half of the book because in part
part two of the book Paul talks about
how companies use the ideas framework to
differentiate themselves on four
dimensions Talent trust experience and
sustainability and it's absolutely
brilliant it brings everything to life
and I we have to finish it there and I
hope to have Paul on again to cover his
other book human and machine it's been
updated recently as well I just add just
aen could I just add one point just from
that back half just one point I want to
emphasize is the trust Point since it's
come up and we've hit on it a little bit
as we went through we talked about a
trust Gap with employees and such but I
would I would just make the point for
listeners and viewers that trust is one
of the the key things I'd encourage you
to look at that part of the book it's in
there's a part of segment on trust in
all them because I think trust becomes
the differentiator in this next era
we're moving into if this is all about
data and if this is all about creating
new experiences for customers and if
it's about more human-like capability
those companies that really instill
trust and get trust within their
Workforce trust within their customers
and Trust within their St their
stakeholders are going to be the one who
have the the right and the currency to
move even faster those who violate the
trust customers are going to opt out
employees aren't going to want to work
in those types of environments and so
trust I would strongly suggest is an
area for everyone to really think about
how does every part of what you do in
ideas lead to trust among each one of
those groups that you're working with
beautiful Paul nice way to finish man as
well for last question for you for
people who want to reach out to you or
find you you did Keynotes all over the
world as well where is the best place to
find you best way I'm on LinkedIn active
on LinkedIn reach out to me at Paul Ry I
think you'll you'll find me out there
without too much trouble and love to
hear from you author of human and
machine hopefully in the future we'll
cover that and this beauty radically
human Paul darty thank you for joining
us thanks Ed it's been a pleasure
