critical is realistic govern budgets
because they are out of date and they're
not realistic and they're not going to
achieve the Paris all so even if we get
to Net Zero by 2050 we're going to be
way above the temperatures we're aiming
for as we talked about that means way
more risk than than people um expect and
it's a bit like a broken record on this
but where there is
uncertainty there's a called the
precautionary principle if you think it
might be a crocodile don't get in the
water and that's kind of what we're
doing the opposite of the precaution
principle where there's uncertainty
we're excluding it and crossing our
fingers and hoping everything goes in
our
direction hello and welcome to Planet
critical the podcast for a world in
crisis my name is Rachel Donald I'm a
climate corruption journalist and your
host every week I interview experts who
are battling to save our planet it my
guests are scientists politicians
academics journalists and activists they
explain the complexities of the energy
economic political and cultural crises
we face today revealing what's really
going on and what they think needs to be
done these are the stories of the big
picture go to Planet critical. comom to
learn more And subscribe my guest this
week is Sandy trust Sandi is an actuary
he's the head of organizational risk at
m&amp; the chair of the financial resilience
nature workstream for the climate
Financial Risk forum and he's also the
lead author on a number of papers which
have been published by The Institute and
faculty of actuaries in the UK in
collaboration with the University of
extor and these papers explain the link
between our economies and the Earth
Systems revealing the extent of the risk
to both if we continue as we are this is
s's second time on the show he joined me
last year to discuss the emperor's new
climate scenarios a paper which showed
how climate change modeling was
dramatically underestimating the risks
both to the Earth and to our global
economy today he joins me to discuss
their new paper planetary solvency which
Builds on the original paper to show the
underlying assumptions that are baked
Into Climate Change modeling the flawed
risk methodologies underpinning climate
policy the failure to understand and
communicate risk with regards to an
increasingly uncertain future due to our
change in climate the necessity of
modeling and what the impact to our
economy human mortality nature and
Society will be if we continue with
these flawed climate change policies a
future which they model could see 1if of
the global economy lost by 2050 on this
episode we discussed this report in full
the Su really going into detail about
how risks should be adequately
calculated ands surprisingly to
listeners of this podcast it's all about
a systems approach and understanding
risks in relation to one another rather
than understanding them in isolation we
then go on to explore how government-led
policies have tended to have a positive
impact in countries around the world and
that our Market L approach to dealing
with the climate crisis has failed to
address the root causes and failed to
actually mitigate against any of the
worsening risks that we're facing we
discuss whether or not people's ability
to confront the reality of the risks of
this century is due to willful blindness
IDE iology or even deeply flawed
economics some of which still underpins
a lot of climate policy around the world
Sandy talks about the difference between
scientists job with regards to
certainties and actuaries job with
regard to possibilities and risk
management and if you read this paper
you will really see how it was obviously
written by an interdisciplinary team of
actuaries and scientists who were using
their combined expertise and
understanding Earth Systems and then
understanding risk to reveal just how
much danger we are possibly in this
Century if we do not change course
finally we end with Sandy explaining
what needs to happen to our Net Zero
policies if we are to adequately
mitigate risk and confront the
challenges of this Century which could
include widespread mortality widespread
loss of human life widespread loss of
the natural world catastrophic societal
upheaval and the worsening collapse of
our Earth Systems I hope you all enjoy
the episode if you do please share it
far and wide and if you're loving the
show become a patron on patreon or
support Planet Critical with a paid
subscription at Planet critic.com by
signing up you'll get the planet
critical newsletter inspired by each
episode delivered straight to your inbox
every week you'll also have access to
the wonderful Planet critical Community
who are full of inspiring thoughts ideas
critiques and determination the links
are in the description box below I'm so
grateful to everyone who chooses to
support the project I'm a vehement
believer in AdFree and Open Access
content so planet critical wouldn't
exist without the direct support of the
amazing Community thank you so much to
all of you who believe in Planet
critical and keep the project going
every week Sandy welcome back to Planet
critical it's a real pleasure to have
you on the show again Rachel thank you
I'm deeply honored to be invited back so
thank you very much great to be here
well when you contacted me with your new
report obviously we had to get you back
on because that first episode about your
report that we did last year went really
really really far
and so hoping this update provides a
little bit more data to people and also
encourages them to send send it to your
local MP everybody who's listening yes
dude that's exactly what they should do
yeah right Sandy first question as usual
why is the world in
crisis such a good question um I'm going
to try answering this with some poetry
Rachel
oh rather than rather than face into
reality
deny delay distract
obfuscate absurd of course bizarre even
not to avoid not to prepare uh not to
change change course Perhaps it is
always been too much to expect this
shift of Consciousness to expect wisdom
from the sapiens a civilization built on
energy and materials and shared stories
of collaboration just needed to heed the
science to harvest energy from a
different source to harness that
Ingenuity and adaptation all the busy
Endeavor and drive to change the great
systems of humanity food education
Finance economy transport energy to
change the beliefs of the humans those
those oh so carefully and expensively
curated
beliefs before they change the great
systems of the planet that great miracle
the anti anti-entropic Planet Gaia the
world system billions of years of life
Gathering energy and creating order
building organisms ecosystems biomes
species
metabolisms life insanely complex
delicate and delicious in its beauty a
gift a bounty a resource to be exploited
conquered even for PLS holidays Netflix
celebrities and mangoes in December this
is
Success wealth life billions of years
for this things stuff distractions ease
gossip social media forget the yawning
precipice of climate change catching all
the fish and replacing them with plastic
forget the Obesity loneliness sadness
and suicide the migrants and the cities
Running Out of Water forget space junk
and the sixth great Extinction who needs
the Amazon when you have Amazon forget
all this and more because well because
the economy silly forget the economy
needs a society until a trades Bitcoins
for the robots Society needs somewhere
to live and food Air Water Shelter
Community meaning we saw away at the
branch we're sitting on ignoring
warnings it could Bend or Break It
hasn't yet stop your wolf crying Antics
why can't you be happy for the progress
look at all the people the wealth that
technology well why can't you see the
future distress heat fire flood food and
water shortages the mess quiet the
football is on and the celebrities are
dancing rather that than face
reality Sandy that's brilliant when you
said you were going to do poetry I
thought maybe you're were going to like
quote tsot Wasteland or something but
that's fantastic you wrote that right I
I wrote that I wrote that that's a Sandy
trust
original that is brilliant and really I
mean it encompasses everything and and I
love that the first person to come on
this show and answer in poetry was an
actuary because that is the kind of
interdisciplinary thinking we need yes
more poetic actuaries oh more poetic
actuaries yeah I just I
was I don't know sometimes you feel need
to get get something out and this we've
talked about this parallel reality of
living your
life being keenly aware of the risks
we're facing so I just wanted to try and
capture some of that because I think
it's
astonishing how much trouble we're in
and how little
mainstream knowledge there is at the
level of risk which is probably a NE seg
way to the the next report oh you stole
my line oh
sorry that's a very neat squ now when we
discussed this last time you had a
report out that was all about uh climate
models essentially and the impact on the
economy and um I went with the title of
our global economy won't survive because
that's the leverage and the freedom that
I have as a podcaster now in the past
year you and some of the core members
core authors of that report have been
working on a new report about uh risk
and how this is what actuaries do like
looking at the risks of what these
models um are likely to play out how
risk is being
underestimated and the diagnosis has not
gotten better in the year since we last
spoke in fact it seems to have firmed up
that we are currently on a trajectory
that will see our current economy
civilization our expectations
dramatically change by the end of the
century
yes yes gu I I guess as actually
um it's um it might it might sound a bit
weird but the the real primary job of
actes what actes are legislated to do is
actually to to stop failure to stop the
failure of pension schemes to stop the
failure of insurance companies because
uh Society has a very low appetite for
those things failing you know if pension
schemes fail people run out money that's
really bad all
sortal consequences if insurance
companies can't want to pay claims in
the future likewise so really actually
pay to think about um risks what what
could impact a pension scheme what might
cause it not to have enough money 10 20
30 40 50 years into the future um and
not just risks but also combinations of
risks which um might might come together
to to cause that pension scheme to
become insolvent to runy in the future
um and this is not a new idea for actes
uh maybe we could take those techniques
and actually uh apply them to the global
risks we face and actually that might be
quite quite powerful so rather than
thinking about a pension scheme R
running out of money um the framing for
planetary solvency is that uh our
economy as you say that's the big hook
needs a society and Society needs
somewhere to live and that's what we
know call think of the think of as the
Earth system and that provides inputs to
the economy energy raw materials but
also food food
water uh regulates climate breathable
atmosphere Etc so it really is the
branch we're sitting on so planetary
solvency as opposed to financial Sol he
is assessing the ability of the earth
system to keep providing us with the
things we need to our nice nice society
and Netflix and planes and holidays and
all that
stuff and
um I mean give me the top headline uh if
we continue as we are will our Earth
Systems be able to continue supporting
our nice
Society uh I think it's I think it's
eminently
plausible that if we continue as we are
we will experience what you might call
Extreme or catastrophic risk events um
so what do I mean by that what do I mean
by by extreme or catastrophic um risk
events there was a fantastic paper
written by Luke Kemp Luke Kemp was the
lead author climate end game and that
was published in
2022 um and climate end game um said we
we've thought Lots about climate change
we've thought mostly about one and a
half and two degrees mean maybe a hot
house world we haven't thought very much
about what happens when it gets hotter
and we haven't come up with what you
might think of as kind of a risk impact
scale so if we get to two degrees of
warming 3 degrees of warming um what
what sorts of things might be might be
happening um and so so Luke and his
co-authors um came up with a set of
societal impact terms so they they said
well look we can't go thinking that
things will never get bad or there isn't
the possibility that things get bad and
and reference seeing the ACT will work
again um we're not saying things will
definitely get bad we're not too
mongering the the very essence of risk
management is imagining things that
could go wrong so that you can take
action to prevent them so luk Luke and
his coor said well we we really need a
kind of a taxonomy of risk so they
Define some terms like systemic risk
extreme climate change um three degrees
on War by 2100 Extinction threat
societal collapse Global catastrophic
threat Global decimation risk Los of 10%
of populational major disruption and
said you know this isn't this isn't um
uh Scarry this is just good risk
management and actually uh if you look
at Insurance regulation actores have to
support insurance companies to do
something called reverse stress testing
sounds a bit weird doesn't it but what
reverse stress testing is is um come up
with a scenario or scenarios which would
cause cause your organization to become
insolvent and and see how how you would
survive and actually organizations have
to go further than that and actually
have to provide a plan for if they do
become insolvent so it's organized
fashion so so this isn't doering and
it's it's not fatalistic it's good risk
management so planetary solvency we said
well um what if we took Luke's work and
we then expanded it to um rather than
just looking at climate change we looked
at some other risk Dimensions so you you
talked about the economy so let's look
at economic impacts and rather than
limiting ourselves let's think about to
use Luke's language what would a
decimation event be a 10% hit to global
economy what would catastrophic me a 25%
H global economy so we've got a climate
Dimension economic Dimension lets do
mortality like there could be major
mortality shocks if we don't change
course so let's put that on our scale
and let's put nature on our scale as we
have a dimension for nature and let's
put um soet impacts on our scale as well
so if you look at catastrophic um people
can see this in the appendix to the
reports we saying so climate 2 degrees
or more Waring by 2050 that's in in my
view quite likely if you look at the
current temperature and the pace warming
we cover that the report um what would
nature impacts spe so would say
catastrophic might be breakdown of some
critical ecosystem services for people
who are not sure what those are those
are things like raw materials climate
regulation fresh water
provision breakdown of some Earth
Systems major Extinction events in
multiple geographies and ocean
circulation severely
impacted catastrophic CLE impact severe
sociopolitical fragmentation in many
regions low L regions lost heat and
water stress dbe voluntary Mass
migration of billions
catastrophic mortality events disease
nutrition thirst and conflict so again
we're not saying this is a nailed
uncertainty which try to come up with a
a sensible risk taxonomy for assessing
Global risks and communicating them to
policy holders and the the the headline
is that catastrophic or even extreme
risk events uh are eminently plausible
unless we change course and
what I mean by change core also mean
that we need really immediate policy
action um because the market Le approach
we've had in in place so far it is
simply not
delivering
yeah now I think what's so interesting
about everything you've just said in
this report is that it highlights that
within our current climate policy
framework there is is an implied
acceptance of certain risks so even the
idea of oh we'll let it go up to 1.5
like 1.5 we can handle the Fallout or
let's create a model in a scenario as
well for two and we're heading there so
we can handle the Fallout I mean the
idea that we could be pushing towards 3
degrees warming um which I don't think
is implausible either considering you
know we've shot pass the Paris agreement
in less than a decade um means that on a
policy level there's a kind of
implication of like well things are
going to happen but there's you know
that that's an acceptable risk but what
you and your co-authors have shown is
that policy makers are dramatically
underestimating the risks that they are
accepting through these Frameworks um
and a part of that is because of this
methodology that they've used which you
point out which is now I'm going to use
the wrong language here I'm going to use
more planet critical language here but
the methodology that they're using is
not systemic like they are looking at
risk of certain things in isolation
rather than taking into account tipping
points for example where there's a sort
of cascading effect through the Earth
Systems and then through society and
thus through the economy so could you
speak more to that methodology that is
typically baked Into Climate policy and
uh why you and your team think it's
flawed I guess the first question is why
does a risk management fail and it's
fantastic Expedition ex Exposition this
Margaret heon's will for blindness and
risk management fails a lot um perhaps
it's because risks aren't understood so
if you think about the complexity of
climate change and tipping points and
the interaction of tipping
points a lot of people just don't
understand that you have to be quite
deep into it um perhaps it's because
risks aren't communicated well the
Challenger shuttle ASAS to its
wellestablished fact that people were
aware of weaknesses in the Challenger
shuttle and heard R about those risks
not been communicated the the urgency
was lost in scientific detail Global
financial crisis nobody saw that coming
and her late Majesty Queen Elizabeth II
famously asked the London School of
Economics why why did nobody see this
coming um and they respond and said well
really was a failure of imagination we
could see individual risks we couldn't
see risks to the system as all um so so
there are there are a lot of reasons why
risk management fails um plus willful
blindness you know often we just don't
want to see the risk more you know much
better employment change wasn't
happening so uh there are lots of
reasons risk management fails and
actually when you when you look at
climate change and nature risks uh quite
a lot of those at present
um the Western reductionist mindset
looks at risk in isolation so if I'm an
insurance company I will typically look
at uh my credit risk My Equity risk my
um Insurance risk blah blah blah and
then sort of fudge them together a bit
but I'm not looking at risk systemically
um as you as you well as you well know
nature risks are a multiplier climate
risks and vice ver and they interact
with society and society's reaction can
both make the risks worse um and make
the impacts worse by failing to prepare
so by looking at the risks in isolation
you're understating them because you're
you're excluding the systemic effects
you perhaps really considerably
understating them a really good quick
example on this one the Amazon forest
Tipping Point best estimate temperature
if you look at it from a climate
perspective it's 3° of warming if you
take into account
deforestation it's 1 and a half degrees
of warming wow holy crap that's where we
are already right we deforested 17% the
Amazon so so the impact of taking into
account the other risk drivers is
massive so fairly to account for
systemic risk R
um and I'm going to and I'm not being
pror here but science thinks very
differently from the risk if you think
about scientists um they typically won't
publish something until they're quite
sure of it and they have the evidence
and we have the scientific method and
that's a good thing risk is the opposite
risk you want to talk about things even
if they're highly uncertain particularly
if they could be very severe um and back
to that word imagination you're
imagining that there could be an iceberg
and taking precautions rather than
saying I'm not going to say this an
iceberg until I've seen it and tasted it
and touched it lied it so so those
factors um have
meant that
um rather than treading cautiously when
we're uncertain we've simply excluded
the
uncertainties and made decisions
on on those estimates exclude the risk
so last time we talked about that very
famous economic estimate of climate
damage is produced by n in 200 and uh
two and that came up with two or 3% GDP
damage by 2100 if we hit 3 de of warming
and then you look at the methodology
Wars tipping points nature impact uh
human health wealth impacts conflict
migration um and it also excludes 87% of
the economy because they work indoors it
would be impact by climate
change just every time I hear it it
drives me mad now for anybody listening
that might not know I mean that
astounding assumption that you know 80%
87% of the economy uh will not be
affected because it's indor he won the
Nobel prize in economics for that work
in 2018 which is just I mean it makes
you want to cry really yeah
and he was lorded um for that and um the
original estimate was 2002 and actually
it was a it's an important question
right important question for governments
um what what might the economic impact
of climate
change be because that's going to
determine how much of a priority it is
now if you're a busy politician or
policy maker someone says to you Rachel
I've got the results but that very
respected Economist it's been
peer-reviewed and the economic impact
climate change is going to be 2% GDP
you're not unreasonable response is
going to be right okay this sounds much
less worse great exactly THB up than
what the scientists were saying um so
it's a lower lower priority so we don't
we need to maybe move as fast as we
ought to be moving um and that um
estimate has proven to be remarkably
sticky so there's a really fantastic
document produced by a company you may
may have heard of Liberty Energy so
Chief Chris right President elect
Trump's Energy Secretary and it's a
great document it talks about energy
bettering human lives and how important
energy is and all that kind of good
stuff um and it does talk about climate
change clearly it's happening and It
quotes Nord and that's the justification
for climate change being a low priority
now I don't know Chris right but he's
clearly a busy person Chief ex Energy
company is it reasonable to expect him
to critically examine the assumptions
underpinning that estimate I don't think
it is and I don't think it's reasonable
for many people to do that that's what
actes are trained to do so unfortunately
that combination of what you call
scientific reticence and economic
estimates of climate change that exclude
uncertainty rather
than making a sense of assumption um
have meant that policy makers in my VI
being making decisions based on
very risk information making decisions
based on information that simply
excludes the risks and um I kind of call
it climate modeling land and if if
everyone listening blinks and open opens
their eyes you're now in climate
modeling land it looks exactly like the
real world because we we're modeling the
real world but it's magical because as
i' I've talked you there are no tipping
points no human health impact new nature
impacts blah blah blah blah blah now now
what has happened over time is the
economic estimat of climate change have
got more severe as people have loaded
more stuff in so I think the the recent
um paper I think CS Al we reference it
in the report um that's now saying I
think something like an expectation of a
19% GDP hit by
2050 on current trajectories so way way
more damage than the investment cost of
executing the energy transition um but
that that's hot off the press so policy
makers that hasn't yet reach policymaker
circles and I think that's
really the whole thrust of this report
is we need policy makers to be presented
with risk Le information in for formed
by science not not science-led
information and the the difference there
if I use the analogy of crossing a
river imagine you had to cross a river
I'm conscious you're about to head off
to all sorts of exotic places so imagine
you have to cross a river in Africa and
you'd be interested in the depth of the
river um particularly any deep pools and
you'd be interested to know if any
crocodiles in the river and you might
see something that looks like a log but
maybe it's a crocodile tell you what
you're not going to go into that River
until you've ascertain it's a
log
now risk Le communication would say it
is possible there is a crocodile in the
river and there is a deep pool science
communication would say the average
depth of the river is half a meter and
there may be other factors blah blah
we're not sure about them and so the
science Le information would simply
exclude the crocodile whereas risk Le
information would major on the crocodile
maybe it's unlikely but the impact if it
does happen is so
significant we we wouldn't enter the
water I think that's such a good analogy
and actually have to say your report is
littered with good analogies one of the
my favorite with regards to
understanding how risk is currently
calculated versus how it should be
calculated was um about the Titanic and
saying that you know in our current
assessments it's sort of like um you
know think about the risk of hitting an
iceberg rather than understanding the
risks of what hitting that Iceberg would
mean and how many people would end up in
the water and how many you know what
would be the impact of hypothermia what
would be the impact on you know the
ocean environment around it like really
getting to grips with the wider system
and all of these
interconnections now sanday I have to
ask because it's been about a year since
we spoke maybe a little bit longer and
that report I mean my audience um
reaction to that report was I mean
everybody was sort of amazed I think it
was very helpful that it has you know
University of exto stamped on it and the
Institute and faculty of actu St stamped
on it um but did you manage to get it in
front of policy makers it it's been a
year this isn't fresh off the press as
you just said key key question um I
think we're making traction I don't
think we're there yet um I've been
working with Coalition of Finance
ministers climate actions who really
trying to push this concept of risk Le
messaging into that group and I think
finance ministry is really important um
we have Ed some conversations with labor
MPS but I think there's there more to do
and actually that's what we calling for
in this report is um realistic systemic
effective Global risk management to be
to be put in place we've developed a set
of principles the resilience principles
going of a checklist of principles for
how to actually assess these Global
systemic risks effectively my real
concern is that if we don't get
effective risk management practices in
place he's delivered to the the very
highest levels of of policy makers we
will continue to um you know go go
blindly go blindly forth towards these
risks it's uh yeah we had some traction
but we're not there
yet it's just amazing when you think
about the contrast I'm going to use um
British examples um although there are
characters like these everywhere if you
think about the contrast between what
you're saying and you know the the
possible risk to GDP and you contrast
that with characters like Nigel farage
and other TFT and Street you know proxy
employees going on mainstream television
um and saying that you know we can't
afford to do the energy transition or
Net Zero is going to cost us too much
money like that's the radical message
that's out in the mainstream public
Consciousness which is you know gaining
TR ction all the time despite mounting
evidence and then you compare it with
this um and you know it would suggest
that if GDP really is the thing that we
all care about and it should be the
thing that is protected then you would
think that people would want to have
this information in front of them would
want to understand the risks that were
being taken um and would be Keen to
implement a series of policies that
would protect the economy at all costs
because for the life of me that's what
our you know politics seems to be
centered on in the west protecting the
economy all costs but it just it's just
another one of these cognitive
dissonances I cannot make sense so right
and 100% agree but I mean not met Nigel
far
um like my working assumption and maybe
I'm being naive is that people who
not is is people well people operate
of beliefs and if in your circle you
seen the n t work and actually a bunch
of other works which show climate damage
is to be relatively small but you
believe you strongly believe it's all
about the
economy then it's it's not unreasonable
now I obviously disagree with that
message I think we need to change the
narrative to n here is an economic and
fincial imperative not unacceptable cost
there are two parts to that uh one the
comparison with the damages is as you've
talked you know is it
conceivable well you can paint a
scenario where global warming continues
to accelerate it's
exacerbated uh By Nature uh loss nature
impacts to significant sociopolitical
consequences we have
significant uh mortality events and GDP
loss um so
the
not having me that outcome makes it much
more positive but even uh the costs of a
renewable energy system were much much
lower than a a f so so yeah we really
need to change that narrative um but and
that's something we put in the report
and that's where uh this risk Le
messaging makes it very clear you know
if we don't change course then these
extreme or catastrophic impacts are
eminently plausible whether on on those
Dimensions we talked about economy
population climate nature soci
disruption um but we also call for of
what you call it education training Etc
because as you and Ben if your listeners
know our current economic model is
energy blind and it's climate blind and
it's ecosystem blind so although the
economy is literally built on raw
materials and energy our current
economic model doesn't see that it sees
labor and capital so we have a deeply
flawed model
and you know a generation of leaders who
have mostly been educated on that
economic model so yes we have to have
the risk Le messaging but we also have
to have that Consciousness shift because
currently we have these two kind of
parallel systems the Earth Earth system
our life support system and the economic
system which now has kind of a loose
coupling over the Earth system but has
very different objectives from most of
the humans and other creatures that live
in the earth system so um while planet
is very much focused on the risk message
and putting in place these kind of risk
management principles and
Reporting um and that very strong
message that if we don't change C War we
for extreme or catastrophic risk levels
um we're also strongly pointed to the
the need for that education that mindset
shift that shift shift in Consciousness
because um we've Western reductionism
has created a world where Financial
system sees itself as separate from the
real economy it sees itself as separate
from nature the Earth system Etc which
actually provides everything we need so
there is work to
do there's one final point I want to
tease out here Sandy and that's about
Net Zero um you referenced before we
started recording James Dyke who came on
the show uh a couple of months ago was
talking about entropy you know he's
episode uh and some of his work has
essentially shown that you know and I'm
going to paraphrase here but like Net
Zero was in a sense like a kind of
misleading goal because it's actually
you know facilitated the continuation of
of
extractivism um exploitation and and
also just hasn't worked um you've said
in your report that um current climate
models are in fully understanding risk
but you also just said that Net Zero is
a financial imperative so what are the
changes that need to be made to Net Zero
policies broadly to make it effective
for mitigating against the worst risks
that we face this
Century oh what a great question C so
I'd go with a couple of things on that
if you look at transition success
stories they are policy driven Norway
has over 90% of new car sales electric
and that's due to policy um Britain has
lots of a wind that's due to policy you
know Britain doesn't have offure wi
because 20 years ago you and me and a
lot of other people said let's build Wen
Farms it was a government energy policy
decision so um perhaps uh the biggest
and you look at the pace that China is
moving might be a Bigg M government
policy um so it's it's very clear to me
that the market Le approaches will not
deliver and government policy needs to
deliver get a a tiny rabbit hole here um
you'll be familiar with the uh personal
carbon footprint concept and you'll
probably know exactly where that came
from came from fossil fuel companies and
Brilliant because you you distract from
government energy policy decisions if
everybody is talking about personal
carbon Footprints Playbook copied by the
Plastics industry in response to US
Congress for us talking about Plastics
in 19 in the 50s in the 50s and they
created this narrative that it's about
Recycling and that's very embedded even
today so so that's the biggest shift we
need to see is that this needs to be led
by government policy um the other big
shift which is critically important is
we need to be realistic about carbon
budgets um Edinburgh has done some big
infrastructure projects recently built
built a TR built uh a new Parliament
building uh the budgeting for both those
projects was absolutely horrific and
they cost you know 50 or 100 times what
they were budgeted for now carbon
budgets are very uncertain because the
Earth system is very uncertain so you
have lots of feedback loops potential
tipping points I was reading a report
this morning that says that the Arctic
has tipped from a carbon syn carbon
Source in
2024 um I know right I know so the
Amazon might tip Etc so so carbon
budgets are predicated on no tipping
points no surprises and a range of other
assumptions like are greenhouse gas
levels not increasing but we know that
methane is increasing blah blah blah so
if you look at the assumptions under
pending bu is
they're heroic heroic to say the least
when you take them take them together um
and in again borrowing from actual work
if you run an insurance company you have
to make assumptions about the future and
every year you test your assumptions and
adapt them uh update them we're not
doing that with carbon budgets so we're
at a half degrees of warming so either C
budget has to be negative now are you
worried what's called overshoot no
people will say but that's all right
we're going to come back to 1 and a 12°
by
2100 well again check out the
plausibility of the some iions of the
overshoot scenario scientists looked at
12200 overshoot scenarios this was a few
years ago now and I think they found six
they felt had plausible assumptions many
of those right yes the are
raised like a stunningly small about I
think we wrote about that in climate
Scorpion and if you look at the
assumptions in many of the overshoot
scenarios they assume things like we
will draw down from the atmosphere
everywhere more carbon and we ship
fossil fuels
annually nuts so um the the the the
policy support is absolutely critical to
kind of accelerate the technology
disruption there's kind of positive S
curves of Technology disruption which
we're we're starting to see in many
locations a fantastic report out from
Rocky Mountain Institute this month
there but equally critical is realistic
common budgets because they are out of
date they're not realistic and they're
not going to achieve the Paris goal so
even if we get to Net Zero by 2050 we're
going to be way above the temperatures
we're aiming for as we talked about that
means way more risk than than people um
expect and it's a bit like a broken
record on this but where there is
uncertainty there's a thing called the
precautionary principle if you don't
know if you think it might be a
crocodile well don't get in the water
don't assume it's you know and and
that's kind of what we're doing the
opposite of prau principle where there's
uncertainty we're excluding it and
crossing our fingers and hoping
everything goes in our Direction so uh
the a specific recommendation we make on
climate change it should be an annual
process to update carbon budgets and
because because
currently there
is
increasing awareness that we're over one
and a half degrees um but it's kind of
nobody's job and everybody's job to work
out what to do about that but it's going
to become it is already I think very
clear that NSU would deliver the Paris
goals and we need to update those
budgets Sandy thank you very much this
is um fascinating as always uh Grim as
always but the fact that yeah I'm I'm
quite a cheerful person I know I'd like
to be doing
this wouldn't we all wouldn't we all
like to be doing something just quite
nice all just reciting you know poetry
together on a Saturday night not reading
reports about AT Systems
collapsing now am I correct am I fair to
say Sandy in a you know in a previous
conversation this was a figure that we
came out and I really wanted to pull
this out in the episode if it's correct
are we looking at possibly a 50% drop in
GDP by the by
2070 Poss possibly yeah I mean that's
we've we've published that previously
other organizations have published
analysis showing that level of GDP GDB
impact and these what what's important
for people to understand is these are
models there are lots of ways of doing
the modeling depending on how you do the
modeling um you get different answers um
every model is a simplification you have
to decide what to include what not to
include and there are various ways to do
the do do the math um we think though
it's much more sensible to work
backwards from ruin than working
forwards from unrepresentative past and
excluding all the risks from your model
and we' much we'd suggest it's much
better to adopt a prudent approach more
sever damages that is not to so that
that particular uh um
analysis like I haven't got it in front
of me um I think we said 50% damage
maybe three degrees of warming and
depending on how quickly you warm that
was the 20170 to 2090 piece right
depending on some of the assumptions you
make so um at the current rate of
warming is is it possible we could hit
3° by 2050 well some people might say
that's very but it it's certainly
possible although would be very bad um
so could you see based on that rational
50% GDP damage by
2050 well potentially now I've put that
forward to people as this this should be
our downside stress th this should be
the measure that is we're using to
incentivize action and the response I
get is well how do you
know like well I I don't but this is
called risk management let's imagine
multiple tipping points catastrophic
food system impacts water shortages and
V Mass migration how can you
justify not having really significant
GDB impacts and and you know fully
accepting this is not all about GDP
clearly there's potential for IM immense
human am miseration and natural
catastrophes not to mention the the
natural world so so yeah I mean my my
strong views it's um better to be
sanguin and prudent about the potential
downside risks and use that analysis to
guide the action you take than
continuing to stick your fingers in your
ears ignore the difficult stuff and hope
for the
best but it's much easier no we could go
back and forward on that all day um
Sandy this is really interesting thank
you so much for this um I will make sure
that the links to the report are
available for everybody so they can go
and download it and read it themselves
um my final question for you is who
would you like to
platform Luke cemp with Luke cemp um
Luke's been a fantastic co author I
think he and some of his colleagues in
the existential risk space B to think
deeply and carefully about this sort of
stuff this s of stuff so um he's a in
particular in particular a scholar of
societal collapse so I think he would
be have a lot to say brilliant sounds
like just a kind of guess from planet
gitv yes he's a pretty upbeat guy as
well I love that I find that we all tend
to be because if you're not laughing
you're
crying right right you have to be you do
Sandy thank you so much for your time
today this was great my pleasure great
to see you again Rachel thank you too
you too if you want to learn more I've
put links to everything in the
description box below remember to
subscribe to the channel if you're new
here and share the episode if you
enjoyed it to support the show subscribe
at Planet critic.com where you can read
The Weekly Newsletter you can also
become a planet critical Patron all
links are in the description box below
as always my deepest thanks to that
Community Planet critical wouldn't exist
without your support thank you everyone
for listening and for coming on this
journey together
