he feeds our mind body and soul the
intellect represented here cause an
effect everything begins with Choice a
character guard said every duty is
essentially duty to God Plato's
Symposium this yours
wonderful I'm so happy to be back with
both of you
um and
I I thought I would start first whether
we would just share something I I don't
know Eric have you been watching much of
John's uh new series I know it's like a
Monumental task to keep up with this
I'm quite often keeping up with it yeah
I'm loving it uh the discussions the
recent discussions on Kierkegaard have
been really interesting I love the stuff
on irony
um yeah it reminded me of a comment my
wife made at one point there was just
the most profound thing I'd really ever
heard in an aphorism which was like why
every moment in life has severity and
flippancy and that's that that irony
that you were talking about I really
love it yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
cool well I I asked because I wanted to
follow some of the themes and just kind
of we could all share some something
that we thought was kind of ironic or
made us rethink how we were looking at
the world and kind of like in a poor it
could be a very small irony it doesn't
have to be some kind of like systemic
Insight that you're you're having
um but just something like like that
that maybe you experienced and I always
go first so I'll go last this time just
to kind of not leave the question as
much so Eric maybe you wanna
share something
yeah sure
um I was sort of reflecting on our
previous conversations and for the first
conversation
um I didn't really know what to expect I
had started the Awakening from the
meeting crisis series and I didn't
understand your work really so I kind of
approached it with this like
relatively empty mind ready to be filled
and then for the second uh discussion I
you know had binged a lot of your
content and read your papers and
realized the significance of what you're
doing and so I felt this like urgent
need to offer you up something so I took
the whole week off work and oh no no I
did leading up to it and um but
ultimately I think the first discussion
uh got closer to that real uh deal logos
so that's an irony and I guess maybe I
shouldn't be taking weeks off work to
you know offer up some intellectual
tidbit
well I want to go back to not right now
I mean I want to go back and watch both
again I I actually found the second one
uh really good I thought it was very
provocative there was a lot of insight
that I garnered from it so I really
appreciated that
for me uh within my practices
um the almost has been coming up
almost this and almost that
um
and I've often
struggled against that and found it
frustration frustrating the almost
um
but in
in some of the inner work I've been
doing the inner dialogical work and
other the almost is perhaps
optimal this is the irony that's coming
out for me in that allows one to get
close enough it's kind of an analogous
to Serious play allows one to get close
enough to make perhaps some influential
moves and redirect things without
getting too close that one gets consumed
uh and corrupted and so I thought
there's been this reframing for me of
the almost
uh as something that I shouldn't be
seeing so negatively but I should be
seeing as positively so there was there
was a an ironic realization for me there
hmm
yeah those were so awesome both examples
I really just want to savor them for a
moment because uh yeah that that Insight
you were saying too John I think is uh
really profound because because the the
youngin aspirational model doesn't
othering is really important right
because you don't actually have to make
contact with things you just have to
give them a space for communications
that's really cool that like that the
humility uh that you were experiencing
in that or that that kind of moment and
I've just been finding AI amazing that's
kind of my my recent uh metanoia and
appreciation and and kind of I've
probably learned about dozens and dozens
of AI tools over the last week or so and
it's just like this serious play that I
was so playing with all these different
AI technologies that it started to kind
of permeate how I was looking at the
world and the world opened up and I go
wow all this Wonder in this domain
really kind of opened up into like wow
that's so cool that I'm living in this
wild time that that you know that the
tails are going to expand so radically
on what humans can do creativity
creatively and it was just so cool to
see the AI voices getting better and how
people are generating video from text
and just all these things but just I
know it's a very technical kind of thing
but but it was very playful and fun to
kind of see
um
so so that was a good share um and then
maybe we'll just do one more round of uh
just anything that's been
philosophically valuable to you in the
last few weeks it's like oh cool we're
three people wondering about things uh
again Eric if you want to go first or if
you don't want to test totally fine as
well
hmm
well I'm trying to think is there any
new philosophical Insight
um you know I'm always obsessed with
philosophical arguments
um so I'm sure there's been a few that
have run through my mind I guess really
it's mostly
um this issue of relevance realization
um and predictive processing that I've
been thinking about just in the last
couple days and
um I'm curious
this is just turning into a question I
always have questions for John so
um but that's what's in my mind so
philosophically speaking the question is
you know I've heard John mention there
are moments when we kind of let go of
that pursuit of relevance and that's
almost like a more Sublime experience
and and yet then in the predictive
processing paper
um you talk about like there's a kind of
um you know like Tai Chi between Autism
and schizophrenia that we have to
balance and I love the the imagery there
and just imagining like that that
balancing act that we're constantly
going through and I wonder you know and
I don't know how to make sense of it you
know how how does that jive this balance
that we have to strike with that kind of
more Sublime you know release from the
process and is it also part of the
balance or is this like a meta balancing
at on another axis
uh
so
um
what's what's the etiquette here should
we first continue around the circle and
then come back let's let's follow Eric I
think that was he seems really
passionate and excited about this
question so let's follow I think
I was just talking to Brendan about this
um
yeah so first of all I want to be very
careful about what that proposal is
um I don't think you misrepresented it
at all Eric I just want to unpack it
um so that we might have the the best
possible set of tools we're we're
talking about sort of things at the
threshold of intelligibility so it's
very tricky but it's very germane to the
whole platonic neoplatonic tradition and
other Traditions like Zen
um uh so first of all the proposal is
that
um
uh relevance realization and predictive
so first of all let's just for people
who are just listening the idea is uh
let's take over the predictive
processing framework called fristin Andy
Clark and especially a student that Andy
and I shared Mark Miller who's now
working with me
um who is both one of the best people I
know in my life and also titanically
brilliant and he he is already
superseding me and I'm very proud of him
and I hope that's not in a condescending
way I genuinely I'm very proud of Mark
um and then of course the work uh Brett
Anderson is out there just follow him
and follow his sub stack he's just
generating all this amazing stuff so
here's the basic idea though
um in predictive processing uh there's
two meta problems you're facing uh sorry
not in predictive processing being a
cognitive agent you're facing two meta
problems one is I want to anticipate the
world rather than react to it because if
I can avoid the tiger that's much better
than wrestling with a tiger
um and then the other one is well that
problem I've been obsessed with
relevance realization
um and then what we tried to show is it
turns out that the if you put these two
together they sort of mutually solve
each other the in the predictive
processing idea is
um the the me there's the main Insight
is don't try to predict the world try to
predict yourself and as you get really
better at predicting yourself you end up
predicting the world well so what does
that mean you have the the sort of
sensory motor part of the brain are
interacting with the world and they're
generating all kinds of patterns and
then you have a layer above that right
um that is trying to predictively
complete uh that pattern
um and and it can get error feedback
from the from the lower part of the
brain Clear error feedback no that's
wrong that's in a way the world doesn't
give you clear error feedback right and
then you you stack these layers on top
of each other and you get this massively
recursive process of predicting yourself
at various levels of resolution from
very sort of momentary concrete to very
abstract and then the idea is error is
Flowing up and uh imaginal prediction is
Flowing down
um and that's how you uh you get to
really anticipate the world at many
different skills now the problem with
predictive processing is there's an
issue in there about what's called
Precision weighting you you there's a
lot of signal you want to just ignore
because it's well irrelevant it's task
irrelevant
Etc
um
so what we propose is the following if
you let predictive processing sort of
self-organize and you put in sort of a
process by which it does precision
weighting that's how it's sort of paying
attention
what happens is the predictive
processing starts to self-organize to
find trade-off relationships
um in reality uh like between
generalizing and discriminating between
bias and variance I won't go into all of
them but it finds these trade-off
relationships and it sort of capitalizes
on them uh by by giving a point of
processing and then the opponent
processing starts to do the relevance
realization and the predict in the
Precision waiting and so the whole
system starts to anticipate in a
relevant realizing relevance realizing
Manner and then does relevance realizing
in an anticipatory manner I just wanted
to lay that out because if we just start
talking about I think a lot of people
would go what the hell are they talking
about first of all did that just sort of
land as a proposal uh uh sorry as an
exposition
that's very helpful yes thank you
and so and then of course once you get
that you get some advantages because you
can you get a way to theoretically glue
predictive processing into embodiment
because relevance realization is always
relevance to autopoiesis and that helps
you deal with a lot of criticisms of
predictive processing that sort of
floats free and it's kind of like a pan
psychist pan semanticist weirdness uh
like two clocks that get entrained to
each other like on a shelf would be
cognitive under this definition and uh
and so uh the theories help each other
the analogy I use is predictive
processing is like mendelian genetics
and relevance realization is like
darwinian selection and when you put
them together you get the grand
synthesis
um so that being said
now to move to the more
um
I think I'm going to use this word
because it's right in this context the
mystical proposal
um and this actually came up when I was
in in conversation with Buddhist monks
uh which was kind of interesting
um
and I sort of had the realization in
discussion it was a very much a deal
dialogical realization
I said well the relevance relevance
realization is intrinsically interested
in itself because it's a self-correcting
evolving thing and insight is the I
think incontrovertible proof that we
relevance realization is recursively
interested in itself in this way
um
foreign but one of the things it can
realize is that the process of relevance
realization itself can ultimately be
irrelevant
um and then what that when when might
that be the case
and this is the idea that when you're
not trying to be in relationship to
beings but to the ground of being itself
um then you have to let go and then what
you're doing is basically you're you're
the the principle
the wanting within relevance realization
and the wanting within reality then
enter into resonance with each other
um it's a proposal for trying to
understand non-duality and what's going
on there
um
the problem that not the problem or
maybe it's a problem I don't want to put
words into Eric's mouth the thing is
guess what predictive processing you're
always doing this balancing between
overfitting and underfitting right
yes and so
here's what I'm going to say that's the
predictive processing side of the
relevance realization side when I'm when
I'm
in resonance with the ground of being
itself
the issue of overfitting or underfitting
disappears
because there is no overfitting or
underfitting that is to properly
misrepresent the ground of being right
because there is the ground of being is
no thing right uh it's a nothingness
um and you know and this is a this
doesn't necessarily even have to be a
heideggerian reading uh you know this is
a Zen reading there's lots of ways in
which the neoplatonic one is understood
this way and so The Balancing Act which
is an optimal grip in which you're
trying to get the the
environmentally dependent because these
decisions are always environmentally
dependent
um and so notice that I'm trying to
balance between overfitting and
underfitting that's the main thing right
sorry some can you hear that somebody's
cutting the lawn outside okay okay so
you're trying to get the balance between
overfitting and underfitting and you're
optimally gripping but you can't decide
that out priori because it's depend what
what is the best depends on the
environment you're in and this goes to a
paper that Anna Riddell and I are are
trying to get published but when you're
not in any environment but in the
encompassing ground of all possible
environments that problem Falls away for
you and that you're just you're right
um you're not doing the balance anymore
you are right you there is no
overfitting underfitting concern
um and I take it that this is kind of
what is meant
I don't I don't think this is a forced
reading uh but you know that the Dao is
behind the yin and the Yang and even the
the balance between them it's it's
actually the the encompassing behind
them kind of thing
um so that would be my initial answer to
you Eric
that's great yeah I was also wondering
in this balance whether it's desirable
to employ a kind of barbelling strategy
um Naseem taleb talking about like
investing strategies says you really
want to like minimize your downside and
maximize your upside and don't really
worry about the intermediary States so
you know that barbell shape now if we
have that underfitting and overfitting
um you know schizophrenia and autism do
we want to barbell those two strategies
so that we can kind of have the best of
both worlds
um and will that allow for this
um kind of subsiding into the background
and the ground of cognition I would
imagine that it wouldn't but at the same
time I would imagine that a barbelling
strategy would have like adaptive
advantages yeah uh and so this goes
towards a proposal and it's a
theoretical proposal that Leo Ferraro
and I made when we published the first
paper on a mindfulness you know I
followed it up with the
a paper within Rick repetti's philosophy
of meditation and then there's one I've
also submitted for an anthology that
Brian Austin is putting together uh and
they sort of form a Trilogy so I might
get confused in my reference uh so I'm
asking for forgiveness around that
because the three sort of like in my
mind
um so but the idea is there is something
like the barbelling strategy but it's it
but it's within a a dynamics of a point
of processing
um and so you get a meditative tradition
in which you're you're you're driving
very down you're driving right down
right
um and then right and and you're in in
in a very powerful sense you're becoming
sort of super autistic right and then
there's the contemplative strategy in
which you're driving out and you're
you're you're you're you're you're
you're you're you're becoming you know
uh a super schizotypical right right
um but you you have them
acting as correction on each other
because you're constantly flowing
between them and opponent processing
the idea is and then this with the
traditions
speak to and this is also what I've
found in practice is that when you
practice this alternating
um
opponent processing you have two things
one thing is you sort of increase the
flexibility of this you increase the
flexibility of your attentional scaling
where the flexibility is measured by
what's the range you can go to how
readily can you get out of an attractor
state to other states how long can you
in like can you keep the alternation
going things like this measures of
flexibility so it does that and that
just
I I
claim right it's like a prediction that
um this enhances just your day-to-day
optimal gripping it sort of improves
your meta optimal gripping but and and
that's valuable for wisdom right but it
also does this other thing which is when
you do this
you right person first you like you're
doing like a prosner practice out you do
you inhale and you go as contemplatively
out as you can and then you exhale and
you go as meditatively in and first
you're just doing this you're
alternating and then you're starting to
do them in parallel right and then what
happens is
it's all at once it's it's deep in and
you get the non-duality the prajna uh
which isn't which isn't homogeneous it's
the world in a grain of sand and every
grain and goes into the world it's it's
that William Blake kind of
thing the scancy intuitiva
um
and so I think that that combination of
what you might call
every day
uh Improvement of optimal gripping and
mystical access to the this this what
we've just been talking about we've let
go is actually sort of meta optimal for
us
in a very powerful way
because I think the ability to let go
opens up a space in which the
flexibility can stretch if you'll allow
me to play with that metaphor more
without with all right and then the
optimal gripping also
tends to get you
um
it tends to enhance the relevance
realization of machinery
because the idea is the better the
relevance realization Machinery is
enhanced the better it is at realizing
when it itself is irrelevant it's a kind
of a platonic argument right did that
sorry that was a long answer
yeah yeah I can't say I 100
followed everything in there but I
definitely got the gist of it so um I
wish I could follow better but
um now have you made the association
between
um this kind of uh autistic and
schizophrenic uh method and the monad
and the indefinite dyad in
pythagoreanism have you thought about
okay because I've I've heard others talk
about autism as like an extreme
masculine brain structure and then
schizophrenia extreme feminine and the
monad is the principle of the masculine
and the indefinite diet is the principle
of the feminine and of course the monad
is that limiting
um kind of you know centrifugal and
self-enclosed yes very much yes yes yes
right yeah right so this kind of ties in
also to what I've really been wanting to
talk to you about from uh our first
conversation which is you know your
conception of naturalness the
naturalistic imperative and cognitive
science and inactivism and I believe
there's real value in that but also you
know relevance realization seems to be
taking place Downstream of the monad and
the indefinite dyad and for me I like it
just I have an intuition that cognition
must have its root
deeper than that in the one itself and
any activity of cognition certainly will
involve the monad indefinite dyad any
intelligibility anything that will we're
going to encounter here but the one I
feel like I I don't know how you include
that in a naturalistic conception oh so
excellent excellent I just gave a talk
about this at the consilience conference
about this and about uh how how we how
how can we have strong Transcendence
which is Transcendence that's not just
psychological Improvement but has real
epistemic and ontological import and
therefore would ground to spirituality
the way neopla neoplatonism grounds to
spirituality and how could you do that
within a naturalistic like what would it
be and one of the main arguments I made
and I've been developing but I made it
um
I made it at Ralston but I made it
better I think at least the feedback
seems to agree with me at uh the
consilience uh talk is that I talk about
extended naturalism
and I talk about
um the idea that naturalism is not only
that which is uh inferentially derivable
from our Sciences but that which is uh
um presupposed by our sciences and then
then that gets you so I call this
extended naturalism and then when you
talk about that
um uh and then you you get a real
um leveled ontology real emergence real
emanation and I argued for that and then
a real Conformity wrote kind of knowing
and I argued for that you put those
together and you get strong
Transcendence within extended naturalism
so I I think very I think you're right I
don't have any I agree with you and I've
been trying to get the idea so I mean I
still teach the naturalistic imperative
in cognitive science to uh introductory
cocci because people are being ushered
into a scientific worldview
um
and that's proper but I think any
account of cognition has to go has to
rely on an extended naturalism in the
way I've just articulated like we have
to get we have to get an account of
um intelligibility and uh the the the
interpenetration of intelligibility and
being you know that Hegel is wrestling
with and Plato is wrestling with Etc yes
into any deep account I think of of
human cognition so yeah I think I hope
you take it my answer is yes I totally
agree with that uh and that we've got to
unfold that
um I I and
um
I don't phrase it quite the way you do
but I'm very interested in because I was
talking to Brendan about this about what
do we do when we're and you can see
physics bumping into an analogous
problem right with ideas of the
singularity is like how do we get
something that is simultaneously the
source of unity and difference and yet
it is bound in some original uh you know
all the words are wrong Simplicity some
original one
um yeah yeah totally
yeah yes and I'm trying to respond to it
and that's how I'm trying to respond to
it
okay that that also relates to something
I heard you talking about with regard to
like the
I guess extended nature of of cognition
and mind and I forget honestly exactly
which conversation this was it might
have been with Rick repetti
um but it was uh this notion that there
isn't a monadic self that like yes
fundamentally there is this interplay
like just you can't eliminate that
multiplicity and I think that you can't
eliminate the multiplicity but also at
the same time I feel like for for some
basic kind of philosophical reasons you
do need the moanhead in the self at some
level like for for leibniz you know what
what distinguishes us from mechanism
what distinguishes us from like
component parts interacting is that I
mean there is this kind of integral
unity and that's why he feels the need
to put forward you know are being a
monad and reflecting the other being so
there isn't an implicit and inherent
multiplicity in us but without that
Oneness
um I've found it difficult to imagine
how you know like with leibniz's Mill
the thought experiment you walk into the
mill uh which is supposed to be like a
conscious agent and you see the parts
interacting we're like okay where's the
Oneness that I experience in myself in
this
you know so I feel I feel that the the
self has to be grounded at some level in
a hen ad you know a Unity of some kind
called a monad or not do you um was I
getting you wrong before when you said
that there's like no monadic aspect to
the self or it's just not a pyramid
so I mean I think of the self
um and the mind
so there's life myself and I think of
them as deep continuity and I think of
life as Auto poetic
um and it is a Unity but is it is a
Unity that in which you get this weird
thing that there is the generation of
norms or standard to which the organism
then binds itself so there is right
there is a going out and a returning
back there's a there's an aspect of
self-transcendence that's built into
life at its fundamental that is not a
contradiction to the fact that it is an
auto in fact it is integral to it being
an auto poetic thing because you have to
be you know it has to be a dialogical
thing in some sense in order for it to
be Auto poetic and so I think of the
self that way too I think this health is
a self-making thing in fact the reason
why I I I want to emphasize and Rick and
I are working on a paper about this the
auto poetic dialogical nature of itself
is precisely in order to in order to be
able to overcome
the Paradox of self-transcendence as
posed by strassan I mean a magnetic self
can't self-transcend it doesn't make any
sense uh so if it just if it if it just
extends itself that's not
self-transcendence because it doesn't
have to requisite otherness if something
other than it breaks in that's not it's
Transcendence but it's not
self-transcendence and then strassan
argues therefore self-transcendence
self-creation are impossible and this
feels like Khan's argument that there
can never be a science of biology it's
like yeah but life is exactly that kind
of thing
um Galen strawson and so your model the
presupposition under it namely that
there's something ultimately magnetic
about the self is the one that we have
to give up so that would be my response
what about a live nitzi and that is
itself extended in the sense that
everything that we interact with all of
our relationships through you know the
analyticity of identity or rather
analyticity of predication for leibniz
all those relationships are in US
essentially they are part and parcel of
that monad so because it contains that
multiplicity you can kind of
transcend the current state of that self
by adjusting the levels you know of of
the relations that you're partaking of
and the the intensity that they have for
you at that moment so it sounds to me
like all you're doing then is stretching
out the dialogical between one instance
of death self and another instance of it
and then it's no longer self-enclosed
it's self-transcending in a very
powerful way because what you invoked
was right because if it's just static
like the the uh what they see everything
but they have no windows who I forget
who said that about leibnizes monads
right
um
then the the problem is you get an
absolutely static thing which of course
can't be what affords soft Transcendence
and what you'd introduce then is you
introduce a historical Dimension and
then you're making it temporally
non-monetic in order to get the
self-transcendence in
right it's like the neoplatonic saying
like everything is in everything but
appropriately in each and so the
self-transcendence wouldn't be
fundamentally swapping out any stuff you
would just be kind of adjusting and
attuning the levels of awareness of you
know what's involved but that monad is a
kind of necessarily fixed thing because
it's that which allows these multiple
relations to come into
um their interaction I mean maybe I mean
to me that would be sort of equating the
self to
um sort of the normative structures that
bind the self together and I think
that's a necessary but insufficient
account of the self I think the self has
to be able to I think the self is an
entity and this is kirkegaard right the
self is an entity that is properly
always in relationship to itself
um and that and so
I want to be able to I'm trying to say
to you that I think the principle of
differentiation is just as important to
a self as the principle of integration
um and then itself is a
self-complexifying thing and and of
course complexification is how you can
explain emergence in Transcendence
and for me again I think that's a much
more dialogical model than a monotic
model
okay
and I get that
but it you know I've heard you say
before that the emanation and the
emergence have to completely in
interpenetrate and be like on a par with
one another
um like following aragina and
you know I don't know how I feel about
that ultimately because I do get this
sense and you know when I read proclus
he reinforces these ideas that the monad
does have a kind of preeminence over the
indefinite dyad and in the one there is
one and many as
um Damascus says you know it's not
simply A1 and yet there is the
preeminence of the one that's why we
call it one right
um so
yes I think the self has to be
um inherently dialogical just like in
some sense the one itself has to be
dialogical but I don't know if you can
put the Oneness On a par with the
multiplicity I feel like there is a kind
of logical priority to Unity I mean just
with numbers like in order to reach
multiplicity first you have to get
through unity and unity like see the
whole point implied a lot of the recent
you know this is what I think Derda is
strong and the most modernist is to
emphasize how much difference is also
irremovably essential to intelligibility
and so if the one is the source of
intelligibility and not just the source
of sort of mathematical Unity
um the one has to be equally the source
of uh integration and differentiation uh
if it's the source of intelligibility
because if I remove all difference I
lose information for example I lose all
in information and I just get
homogeneous non-intelligibility
um and that I don't think that's what
they want to talk about
um I I don't know what I'm not quite
sure what the preeminence what your
intuition of preeminence is and I'm not
I'm not trying to bully you at all I'm I
like I like I I see the Oneness in the
quantum realm and the Oneness from the
Oneness From The Bottom the ground and
the Oneness of the canopy from of of of
you know uh at the cosmological level uh
as
um deeply
uh Deeply One I think and that's what's
driving the current physics there's the
Deep intuition that these two right the
Oneness of entanglement and the Oneness
uh of space-time somehow belong together
um and I think that's right and I think
trying to prioritize one over the other
because what the physicists are doing
they have exactly the opposite intuition
of you they say no no no the bottom
right the bottom is the real and and it
should be given preeminence in our
explanation and so I like when I look at
these two two sets of uh and I mean it's
in a positive sense not a dismissive
sense when I look at these two sets of
philosophical intuitions they seem
exactly symmetrical to me and I can't
come up with an argument for why one is
better than the other because whatever
you say about this I just invert it and
say this this is the other one has the
complementary strength so I I do this
elsewhere at a greater length so I'm
just run so quickly I have this symmetry
argument exactly like between these two
and and I think the reason why
I'm not a physicist but I do study
problem solving and they're not solving
this problem and they haven't been
solving it for 50 years and so when
you're not solving a problem you need to
step back and look at a presupposition
that you're not changing across all your
theorizing and one of the
presuppositions is the fundamentality of
the bottom
and I think that's what's actually
thwarting them they need a properly uh
symmetrical solution to how to bring
about the integration
that's my response
now that I agree with you that that's
not that's not in progress it's
certainly not enough platinus I would
make a case that I think it's properly
an erigina and I think it's because
aragina has a trinitarian notion behind
him that he can sort of get the um uh
being uh of equal ontological status
right
the preeminence for me comes from the
idea that there is a procession outward
into multiplicity and yes the one is
equally the cause of the multiplicity
but as you're moving away from the one
you're moving away from the good and so
teleologically the return the reversion
back to the one is to be preferred is to
be kind of held up as Superior in some
sense than the descent into multiplicity
um similar to how in the theatitis uh
Plato says that God is the cause of all
good things right not necessarily all
things because so much of our experience
here deals with falsehood and illusion
which we talked about last time and I
really liked what you had to say last
time about that
um but yeah it's like there's something
about this lower realm uh closer to the
bottom that has a lesser degree of
reality and that's why I like platinus
and proquis both
um treat matter as in some sense
prevatory platinus treats it more as an
archae of uh or principle of evil you
know following like the way that
Socrates is talking in the Fado
um and I think that's a mistake and he's
taking Socrates a little bit too
seriously you can never take Socrates
too seriously it's the danger of
hermeneutics there
um but progress you know says that there
is no RK strictly speaking with regard
to matter or evil it is this kind of
pure privation and I feel like there's a
need for that Concept in order to
make sense of falsehood and make sense
of apparent evil and make sense of all
the incongruity and lack of Oneness that
we observe and so for me that and for I
think for the neoplatonists that is on
the bottom of the ontological hierarchy
so there is this real difference you
know there's an asymmetry between the
bottom of the top there's an emanation
out to this receptacle
um matter and then there's the reversion
back to the source and the source is to
be preferred
okay so I'll reply to that
um and first of all I think for air like
aragina the the four ways in which God
is God God is also not just the top he's
also the bottom
um he's the nothingness the no thingness
that makes everything uh uh uh possible
and I think what you see in aragina and
this is one of the things that
um I see the Kyoto School criticizing
neoplatonism for is you get uh the idea
that what we we have to hold actuality
and possibility as equally real
um and so I can do the exact reverse I
can say so the Zen tradition will come
to you and say what's most real is the
suchness
the absolute unique you know
specification suchness of this and how
it all fits into everything else that's
you know you're losing touch with what
is most real because you've lost touch
uh with it and what's underneath the
suchness is the Luminous void is the
pure uh is is a kind of pure
potentiality which is very similar to
you know certain ways in which people
understand the quantum uh domain and so
now and now what do we do we or and I
want to say because if I lose that you
know I lose also something that I find
supremely valuable which is the suchness
of and it's also ineffable it's also
non-categorical right and and that I
mean the suchness really matters that
Solaris brought that out right right the
Solaris Paradox here's you know the
story right you're on the the you're on
the planet that's the oh stanislav lamb
is one of the great uh philosophical
sci-fi and then the idea is the ocean
they and people are trying to
communicate with the ocean and they
can't they can tell it's intelligent but
they cancel they send it they send these
people here to actually live like
and the ocean generates absolute
doppelgangers of people they used to
know
more like absolute
so the paradoxes these P so let's take
our hero there's here's this woman he
was deeply in love with he's lost the
woman to death the ocean generates
somebody that has all of the properties
right all of the categorical properties
of the woman shouldn't he love her well
no he has exactly the opposite he is
horrified by this right so and he feels
part of himself being drawn to her
because she is identical but he's also
repulsed because it doesn't have that
suchness of that particular person that
historical irreplaceable in time in
space suchness
and that matters to us too and that's
enough that that is equally a touchstone
of realness for us I mean what I'm
ultimately trying to do and this is what
the next series is about is I want to
put Zen which is the great synthesis of
the East Buddhism and taoism and
neoplatonism the great synthesis of the
West into a deep biological relationship
with each other that's what the new
series is about because they they often
have these inverted complementary senses
of what's real and what's good
um and
um and we we have reason to believe that
this is a doable project the Kyoto
schools of course had a lot of good to
say about this Thomas plant is doing it
in his book you know what he's trying to
put dionysia neoplatonism into
discussion with Buddhism
um and so that's my that's my answer uh
again I'll just keep going back that I
can make moves where I can say yes this
gives you that but this also gives you
right the opposite way and you also
think of that as a touchstone of real uh
so there's there's something and you
know object oriented ontology has really
been wrestling with this too it's like
and they talk about you don't want to
undermine and you don't want to over
mind uh right and and and trying to get
that balance and I think the way we can
do that is we can I think neoplatonism
tends
to over mine when it goes wrong and I
think Zen tends to undermine uh when it
gets wrong it tends to lose the reality
of the systems and the gestalts right
and if we could put them into a deep
dialogue I think we could actually
optimally grip between the two and I
think that's the best way of
getting at
the real and I think there's something
right about I think it's nishitani and
religion of nothingness who says we need
a position in which uh actuality and
possibility are equally real for us if
we're going to break out a lot of these
straight jackets
uh yeah I I think to like what you're
saying is really clever John I used to
think you were kind of insane because I
would meet every week I would meet every
week with like Daniel zaruba and all
these brilliant kind of platonists and
also they have like a really strong
meditative practice and I'm seeing like
all of this contemplative beauty of
platonism and then I've done a decent
bit of Zen practice and I kind of get
what you were talking about when you
would talk about like the Zen aspect and
like Zen is so invested in the
spontaneity of like kind of the material
and and the neoplatonic is in like the
integration of the conceptual or
something or like the imaginal or
something like that yeah and and I was
like this guy John verbanki like he's
very smart but this is something he's
probably wrong at and I kept sticking
with it because you say it and now you
say it even more but I mean even like
you know eight months ago you were you
were saying it a little bit and it's
like oh yeah I kind of get because
they're like these two engines they're
these two awesome kind of traditions
that are these engines and when you put
them together they're so so powerful
they they they they they do for you
participatorially uh so much and like
tanabe Eric if you're interested in he
you can just get his book on metanoetics
and just search like platinus or Plato
and he says some really insightful
things about platinus because I love
platinus like blindly love kindness and
then I'm like oh cool tanabe is giving
some criticism that has a lot of Merit
it's like oh okay let me think about
that and kind of have a a dialectic with
tanabe's view platinus versus kind of
platinus's view of platinus and you you
learn so much and it's like there's
there's this richness between the
Traditions the same way kind of the
Kyoto school was was bridging all of
this with Western Europe
the you know they're they're also
bridging with the ancient uh kind of
Roman Greco tradition yeah they are it's
so exciting like once you kind of can
see it that way it's like oh that's what
John is so excited about and always
talking about because they do they're
such opposite polls in really seemingly
contrasting ways but they do have a
Synergy yeah and uh they like a like a
like a that heterogeneity of their
system is like what makes it kind of
cool when you start to yeah I'm
proposing that right from get-go we try
and bring about something that has
opponent processing written into its
fundamental grammar rather than
something that sort of finds as it
unfolds yeah and we have to remember
that like you know there's oh there's
there's there's been a long-standing
tradition of Zen Christianity and Zen
Catholicism that's also been and when
you look what they're trying to merge
with in the Christianity and the
Catholicism are the are the neoplatonic
elements
um and so like I I this is not
completely de novo this and and plant is
doing it in his book and he he makes
arguments that it it was probably
already how it was happening you know uh
on the Silk Road
um in the past
um yeah so yes I'm excited about it too
and I Eric I realize this is somewhat
promissory uh but that is the that is
the project I'm I'm working on and
that's the argument I I used to justify
the project
well yeah I think I might be able to
kind of reconcile
the neoplatonic account with some closer
to what you're talking about so the
concept of matter obviously it only has
kind of an apparent existence for
proquis it is Preparatory now
uh platinus in on the nature of matter
uh I forget I think it's second any uh
eighth track date maybe no uh I forget
which one but uh he talks about the
intelligible matter
which is contrasted with the the kind of
imminent physical matter in that the
imminent physical matter is a principle
of individuation and it's what separates
things and different forms can occupy
that matter and that kind of separates
them in space but the intelligible
matter is actually a factor of uh
uniting for the forms because that
matter uh being closer to this Divine
source of the indefinite dyad contains
all of that multiplicity in a Unity as
is the case with everything in the realm
of forms that everything is much more
concentrated there now I have my own
kind of I have I'll credit myself with
one original philosophical Insight that
I haven't heard from anyone else which
is kind of a corollary to leibniz's
indiscernability
um or rather identity of indiscernibles
and it's the
um indeterminedness of indifference
that's the corollary to it so for
leibniz if things share exactly the same
properties they are one in the same
thing it's kind of like Plato seems to
say the same thing as well I think of
leibniz as like very much a neoplatonist
um
but uh yeah the the flip side of that is
that if there's something in our
experience related to our identity
within our monad Enlightenment to the
sense that is indistinguishable from
other possible substrates
um like matter doesn't have definite
formal content and leibniz uh actually
disagrees with me in the point that I'm
about to try to articulate for you
um in that he says you know in the
monetology if you keep zooming in to
matter there's just more form there's
just you're going to find planets and
trees and rivers and like there's no end
to it and I think that's that may be
right but not in the way that liveness
thought in because I use this
indefiniteness of indiscernibles concept
where if from my perspective given the
information I have access to I could not
discern between the world in which like
an atom in my finger had a planet uh
with like aquatic environments or a
planet that was a big desert you know
Tatooine world that's uh I can't make a
difference between that and so it
doesn't exist
uh relative to me in either of those
definite States and I think we have to
say that if we accept what's going on in
information Theory and physics where we
have an information mass energy
correspondence because if we want to go
with leibniz and say that things are
fully specified down to like an infinite
degree of smallness then that's infinite
information that's infinite specificity
Ergo Infinite Energy Mass which clearly
is not the case so I think that
argument's the correct argument yes keep
going
yeah so uh I've I've tried to interpret
the neoplatonic notion of mundane matter
in that perspective it is a receptacle
it is in a way a parent but it it the
way that it appears
as a kind of pure potential masks like
all of the reality that is really there
in it so just like the intelligible
matter contains all possibility mundane
matter may actually contain not one
specific configuration of really small
worlds down there but a kind of
superposition of all the various
configurations and structures we might
find
um so that has a lot of implications
um
that I've explored over the years but it
does kind of divinize matter in a way
not matter in its appearance which as
its appearance is uh not quite a
principle of evil but it is that kind of
a principle of Separation that allows
for misconception that allows for
misapprehension falsehood and so like
but it's not the you know what is really
there is that cloud of potential that
contains all things you know all is in
all and I think that applies even at
that fundamental physical level however
I would say with the neoplatonists that
the physical is suspended from the
mental and that's where we I think must
disagree you know relative to your
naturalism and so maybe we could explore
something like that more next time
um this also ties back into one argument
that I
um briefly kind of uh intimated at in
our first discussion about the
immortality of the Soul so I've used
this argument of the
um indefiniteness of indiscernibles
to in combination with IIT and tegmarks
mathematical Multiverse because I I am a
mathematical realist I think we need the
mathematicals out there yes I agree with
that of course yes and I think that
implies in many worlds so the the upshot
of it though is that we you know as we
experience a death We Are One finite you
know semi-mathematical system in an
infinite sea of possibility and the
matter there
is it contains all of the possible
Transformations that may occur not in
space and time sequentially exclusively
but what are the intelligible structures
that can move through a c like a
principle of sufficient reason abiding
sequence you know like IIT talks about
the causal repertoire but their concept
of causality is just like the
association of states and these are
eidetic structures and these are
mathematical structures and so that's
kind of where I situate the the soul and
like or the core of our life and I would
say that's prior to space time and then
we'd have to get into like the the
question that we got at almost at the
end of the last conversation about
there's so much that I'd love to talk to
you about I'd like to like drive up to
Toronto and talk to you for five hours
that I could but um
yeah this idea we just began to scratch
the surface of which is like the
emergence of body and the role of
measurement and the role of
Consciousness in that and uh so that's
kind of how I I view it the
mathematicals are Eternal and real
therefore the soul is real because the
souls of the nature of the mathematicals
like I am Lucas says in on uh the
general science of mathematics so we are
this kind of Eternal eidetic structure
we are akin to the forums in that way
and we give rise to body in our
energizing not us directly because we're
also tied to the world soul and I think
that has a real psychic uh substance
just like we do
um so there has to be a correspondence
between us and the world Soul it's not
like pure solipsism where like the
physical world is my projection it's our
mutual projection led by like the great
um mother
so
five words John I want this summarized
and answered in about you know maybe
eight words we'll give you a couple
extra words no well first of all I mean
I appreciated the you know the
uh the reinterpretation of matter and
kind of the the divinization of matter
um I mean this we're wrestling with
stuff that was at the end of the Middle
Ages right when and this the problem of
individuation was exactly the problem
that sort of brought down neoplatonism
and ushered in nominalism
um because you individuation and I mean
Spinoza makes this point and Hegel needs
this makes this point and this is what I
didn't quite hear in the proposal
individuation needs this capacity which
we then regarded as the actuality of
matter which is resistance uh to
individuate is I I have to be able to
resist right uh right uh I have to be
able to hold things out out of the out
of the time and space I'll put those in
quotes because they're precisely what's
in question but out of the time in the
space that I'm in you know and Spinoza
has the notion of canadus and and I and
that's what became the primary right and
right matter was resistance and the
resistance is what allows for the
individuation and and so for me
um I think there's truth in that I think
that matter isn't purely privative it
has if it is the principle of individual
I agree with what happened I just
disagree with the what the normalists
concluded about this I think we had to
if we're going to have a principle of
individuation it has to have what you
know Hegel talked about as you know
negative determination and I started
that fundamental ability to resist to
hold things out from it uh uh so because
if everything inter bleeds you don't get
into an independent you don't get
individuation anymore you get
interpenetration and of course and this
is this was a problem as you know for
you know neoplatonism is how are the
forms different from each other in the
intellect because they completely mirror
and interpenetrate each other
um and so
I think I agree with a lot of what
you're saying uh I think uh we'd have to
talk about it more and so
um I'm happy for you to go over what you
you said again especially the matter
part but I do think there's something
right to the idea that matter is
um as that kind of superpositioning of
potentiality like you described I think
that's right and I think that reaches
into the quantum in really cool ways I
like that but I do think matter also has
right it has an actuality of resistance
that is what is required for it to be
able to perform individuation
um and I think that's an important thing
too and I think that is a proper part of
right
um trying to explain
like emergence upward
um in an important way
uh now does that necessarily reify A
Matter then and would you then need to
have a form of matter to specify what it
is that has this resisting potential
because I I would feel comfortable just
placing that resistance in the very most
basic formal property that can occupy
that potentiality right and there's even
a notion like this that kind of sounds
like quantum foam again in the theater
where uh they talk about like before you
have definite body you have kind of like
a pulling apart swirling like capacity
for form that's more than pure uh
privation it's not nothing but it's not
quite you know a particular body yet so
but then that's yeah above like matter
itself I would say that resistance could
very well have to do with that very like
uh vague and ambiguous and mysterious
notion from the theatitis that there is
some kind of intermediary between body
and and matter which is pure potential
well even even the notion of the Kora
the receptacle uh implies resistance
right things can't be like if if if you
like if I want to receive if I want to
be a receptacle for something I have to
be it has to be able to be held by me if
we're if the notion is going to have any
sort of meaning which me if it could if
it if if there's no resistance or
there's no receptacle
um so what about the way that the one
contains all things but that's precisely
the point which goes back to your point
before the the the one contains all
things in in a way in which they do not
have any individuation whatsoever that's
what makes it the one right
um and and that and that and that's the
problem with the forums right it's like
well the forms are well how are they
different from like and what people like
and platinus uses staple he uses spatial
metaphors oh it's different like no no
that doesn't work right um You you
because you know you can you can think
like think about all the forms I could
do some compression function on them so
that I got the one form or something
like that and then there isn't there
isn't a fundamental principle of
individuation hmm I I would think of the
difference of the forms just throw this
out there as like the difference between
colors or the difference between
different timbres in musical tones where
it's like different uh spectral analysis
that you could draw if it each contains
all the you know frequency ranges but in
different proportions
um
but yeah I know you're out of time and
we could keep going but um yeah because
they all they're also different in what
is waving in the waves right
um there's electromagnetism versus sound
and air and so that's part of it too and
then I would bring in the resistance in
matters what allows waves to exist and
so yeah but we could do this we could
keep going back and forth
um and um I want to do that so I'm not
trying to uh jump ship uh but I do have
to actually go where we're at my
absolute uh limit
um yeah Eric this is this I think we uh
we got the best of both the first and
the second uh discussions into this and
we got into genuine Dia logos in a
really good way yeah we I think we were
really sparking off of each other so I
wanted to thank you for that
yeah just like the other times leaves me
wanting more and I am willing to drive
up to Toronto if you want to talk for
five hours anytime just let me know well
we can I'll probably take you up on that
when I can block off five hours for
people other than my romantic partner
and my kids uh and my friends I'm spread
very thin right now
um and and I have people like Robert who
are trying to alleviate that and so
hopefully there will be some more
flexibility in my schedule uh I would
love to do that it would be great if the
three of us could all get together in
fact in person I'd like that a lot yeah
that'd be awesome you're very generous
with your time appreciate it John Eric
you know and and this is not meant to be
in any way condescending like it's
you're worth it like you're you're sharp
and you're quick in the good sense and
yeah and and and you have like you have
both a comprehensive and a sophisticated
grasp of this material and it's good to
I mean you and I are ultimately from the
same side of the tracks with with
respect to most of the culture and so I
find working with you really really
valuable I introduced Eric to Rick and
Rick was like the same thing he was like
oh you must be a professor somewhere
because of your grasp on all this
technical knowledge Your Capacity to
deploy it in really interesting
meaningful ways in these kind of
couldn't be higher level conversations
yes I love bringing the two of you
together as well and I like I even in
this hour I don't think I was like just
noticing the joy of listening to the
whole thing and I was like oh this is
delightful if I just listen more I'm
gonna be happier like I'm gonna
experience more joy as I listen and and
I think you're just confirming that John
and what you're saying and how you're
complimenting Eric which I think it's
equally sincere I enjoy uh Eric's wit
and warmth and intelligence so much and
uh yeah thank both of you
I've gotta jump so thank you very much
and we'll talk again uh Plato Aristotle
Socrates and you consider yourself a
disciple of Plato he feeds our mind body
and soul
