hello this is benjamin boyce and welcome
to another episode of the voice of
reason podcast
today's guest is brought to you by the
fine folks at think spot who hooked me
up with the illustrious dr. Steven hex
dr. Steven Hicks is a professor at
Rockford University in Illinois he's
also a lecturer a content creator and an
author who's been speaking about
post-modernism for 20 years now in this
discussion we use my documentary work on
the Evergreen State College as a
springboard to explore how
post-modernism is supposed to be applied
in the world and an inter human
interaction and within institutions of
higher learning and so on and so forth
what else can I say except for that you
guys are in for a real treat
with this one here's dr. Steven hex it's
a total honor to I get to speak with you
I've been aware of your work for a
number of years now one of the things
that I most appreciate but about your
work is how accessible it is and you
actually make this intellectual milieu
really actually fun to engage with by
breaking it down into units that are
easy to to grasp and then with that
comes the ability to to navigate through
this landscape great oh good I
appreciate the feedback I spent some
time looking at the documentary you've
been working on and that's also some
very good work said frightening at the
same time the application of theory one
thing to read these guys in the abstract
and then project what it would be like
in reality and then you actually see the
experiment being run do you think that
that that what happened at Evergreen is
pretty much a direct application of
postmodern theory oh yes absolutely
yeah there's no no unclarity about that
all of the elements are are there that
you're not interested in engaging with
other people as rational beings so
you've given up on entirely on the idea
that there's argument and evidence and
so forth
you don't see people as individuals you
see them as avatars or representatives
of a group you know totally
collectivized understanding of what it
is to be a human being
you see those different collective
groups as in adversarial relationships
with each other and the only way than
those adversarial relationships can be
resolved if you're not going to do it
rationally and civilly treating
individuals as individuals is going to
be through group power struggles and a
battle for dominance and that's very
clearly what one sees at at Evergreen
you know the young student activists
have been you know paying very careful
attention in their classes learning from
their professors they're good students
in that regard and now they our
universities are training ground for
young scientists and artists and
humanists of various sorts and so here
we see the training ground for activists
of a certain sort and they're flexing
their muscles and seeing how much they
can get away with is there any other way
that postmodern theory can be acted out
in the real world was evergreen did they
misinterpret what they were handed well
yeah I think there are a number of sub
strands of postmodern theory I mean you
know a high level of abstraction when is
skeptical one is relativized
one tends to collectivise human beings
rather than seeing them as individuals
you or one has a rather than a
harmonious rights respecting expectation
of civil society sorting its issues out
peacefully you do decide ease somehow
things are a cynical jaded battleground
now at a high level of abstraction those
don't necessarily predict a particular
political outcome so one can be cynical
and jaded and skeptical about all sorts
of things
and ones attitude can be to to give up
and to say well it's all pointless
there's no genuine value or truth to be
sought in the world and it's an ugly of
the replace so I'm just going to
withdraw and engage in quietism and
defeatist and I think a lot of people
who are schooled in post-modernism they
they go in that direction
another possibility of course is to say
you know if there are no truths no
values that are better than others and
no cultures or civilizations that are
better than others then the implication
of that should be a kind of radical
equalitarian ism where you then just say
everybody's narratives are equally
legitimate all groups are equal and so
that can foster a kind of toleration ISM
or we just have a live and let live you
do your thing I'm going to do my thing
as well and that also can come out of
strong post-modernism but this one is is
another strain where you say if there
are no true values and we just have
collectivized understandings of the way
the world works but at the same time I
feel some desire to assert my values in
the world I'm not going to be a quietest
I'm not going to just be a live and let
live person I want to see my my agenda
realized then one will become a kind of
a power activist and so on so I think
there are multiple strands of
post-modernism one thing that I was
wondering your thoughts about given your
your your theoretical work on on the the
procession of post-modernism through
various different enlightenment
encounter enlightenment discussions when
it gets to the era that we're in now
where we have a lot of people being
trained in these various Gender Studies
racial studies all these different
Studies groups that seem to be founded
on conflict theory or on reversing a
hierarchy or understanding everything as
a relationship of power so all these
people are being trained
in this thought process and then they're
going out in the workforce and it seems
like the only viable work that they can
do is to insert themselves into HR
departments or into activist enclaves
within bigger corporate or educational
structures so I guess your question is
is is post-modernism adaptive to
bureaucracy is that one of its
applications
well yes lots of people who maybe in
their heart of hearts they want to be
activists and out on the street and and
so forth and wearing the black uniform
black on black but at the same time they
there are pragmatic enough to realize
they want to make a living right of some
sort and so if they have a university
degree there's a natural pipeline for
them to go into work and then they will
cast around as you say and see where
their skillset best fits and certainly
HR departments is is one Department is
there you are in a position to choose
who comes in and who doesn't shape the
hiring and promotion policies and that's
the position of some power but it
doesn't necessarily require you to have
management skills or marketing skills or
leadership skills so yeah that's a
possible route as well another way is if
you are more of a subversive who you
like the idea of being a revolutionary
who doesn't fight so you know street
fights in a physical istic form but you
like the idea of working within and
subverting institutions that you think
are corrupt then often from the SJW
perspective you know corporations are
the big bad bete noire the the the Great
Satan of American life so there's a
charge to in effect being a double agent
right so you go in and your goal is to
subvert the institution's from inside so
that's another possibility this is there
any other way that this once you adopt
this ideology what kind of
you can you create in society or is that
only from your perspective is it only
about changing other people's values or
controlling other how other people
behave can you create any positive value
in the world yeah yeah well in a high
level of abstraction post-modernism is
ultimately negative its critique all the
way downs the critique of knowledge
critique of any set of metaphysics or
scientific understanding of reality a
critique of the notion of you know that
technology is improving the world or
that markets and democracy are viable
positive projects but I don't think any
post modernist is ever in if his or her
individual life going to be completely
nihilistic typically people particularly
Americans though the one the North
Americans and so forth they start off as
particularly you know decent young
people and they have imbibe at normal
North American values and so by the time
they go to university they that they
genuinely are for the most part decent
people and they're concerned about all
the things that these people are
concerned with and pollution and the
legacy of racism and sexism and why we
can't get along but then all of those
issues can be dealt with healthily but
if you get a poisoned intellectual
framework to understand those then your
your positive values get turned against
you but they don't necessarily all go
away so you know might start off as an
ordinary decent person who thinks racism
is still a problem to some extent but
you don't have any conceptual tools
other than the social justice warrior or
the postmodern way of dealing with them
and so then you come down here jaded
view of it so what you will then have is
you know a person who is is conflicted
at some level they really are
anti-racist but they end up using very
jaded and proto racist or reverse racist
tactics in trying to solve the problem
so yeah so I think in some cases it's a
fig leaf I think some cases like some of
the students who see in your documentary
at at at Evergreen you know they are
just naked racists and power-play people
interested in dominating and trying to
humiliate and control Crowe the
institution and I think for them at
their level of development the anti
racism racism is a is a fig leaf it's a
it's a cover they can say you know I'm
against racism and they know that that's
going to mean people will give them the
benefit of the doubt cut them some slack
give them a moral sanction because
everybody is basically anti-racist at
this point but then you can use that
benevolence and that tolerance against
your target and I think that's a
calculated strategy but I think if you
were to talk with the average say
freshman student at Evergreen or some
such other place that person probably is
is more mixed I have some genuine anti
racism anti-sexism they're still decent
human beings but they are in the process
of being transformed or their their
intellectual understanding is in
conflict with their at that point
acquire legitimate anti racism and how
do you think in studying this you've
been looking at this you've been
speaking about this for 20 years now I
think right was the first talk that I
stopped yeah 1998 what are the steps
that start to erode those as you call
them the positive North American values
into that jaded what are some of the
like the psychological phase states
about oh yes right well I think kind of
first generation post-modernism as I
think of it is you know if you're
thinking of individuals you know such as
Foucault and Derrida and Rorty and the
others they're all extraordinarily
well-educated people is at that point
they're in on Maya they are genuine
intellectual minorities they're well
schooled in the majority traditions so
they know they are
it's inside and out and they they
recognized the weaknesses in those
traditions and they're very good at
teasing out the implications of those as
well so you start off with then people
who know both sides of the debate very
well and they end up being on on the
other side of the debate but then as
those first generation postmoderns are
training the next generation of students
particularly graduate students who are
going to become professors if your
official conclusions are there is no
truth reason is not competent for coming
to know reality different groups have
their own value struggles and there's no
logical or rhetorical way to bridge the
gulf then what that is going to mean in
the second generation is those graduate
students who are going to become
professors are going to say things like
well it's not really worth my time to
try to understand the other side's
arguments I'm not going to be able to do
that and I'm not going to expect them to
try to understand my argument so at that
point then you say we're not going to do
the argument thing anymore we're also
not going to say that we should treat
each other civil that is to say that we
should respect each other's differences
of opinions right about debate because
if civility means that we have a shared
underlying concept of how we should
conduct ourselves in society but what
I've learned from the first generation
is that there is no such thing there are
no universal values and so I've just got
my values you just have your values so
that then means discussion is going to
break down I think for a while what's
going to happen then is they will say
what we should then just do is going to
study or make equal time for all of the
different perspectives in the in the in
the curriculum so you know we'll have
one group and we'll do our thing maybe
we are feminists of a certain fire or
we're african-american a theorist of a
certain sort and each group will do its
own thing and then
we'll just be arguing for a roughly
equal place in the curriculum but each
aspect or the people in the curriculum
they're just doing their own thing and
they're not trying to communicate with
each other then I think the third thing
the third stage this is where we are now
is once each of those enclaves right
within the academic world has its own
power base and is then trained another
generation of students then it becomes a
power struggle within the university you
want to have hegemony you want to grow
your department your program but
typically that means squeezing out the
other programs and so you'll have kind
of the nasty zero-sum power-play
politicking that's that's going on so
you know then you know so what you see
at you Evergreen in 2017 then really is
that that third generation it's not in
the first generation where you you know
mythically reconstructing here you would
have had early evergreen professors
saying you know there is a strong
tradition or set of traditions that
believe in truth and goodness and
reality and liberty and equality and
they have these arguments against each
other and we think that's all ultimately
crap but we understand that tradition
and here are our arguments against that
then you have a second generation of
evergreen professors who will say let's
stop talking to each other let's just
make sure that all of these different
groups have their own niches on campus
and their own programs right and so
forth and then the third generation is
going to be some of those programs will
start to assert themselves and try to
squeeze out the others well what's the
fourth generation is it the dissolution
of the Academy as the Academy is it like
it turns into a variety of different
academies and these things get along at
this stage going for no no there's not
going to be a getting along right so
smaller more vulnerable institutions
like the Evergreen you know there will
be market feedback at some level you
know so it'll be harder for them to
attract students harder for them to
attract donors harder for them to
attract first-rate faculty who want to
come and teach there
and so it's institutions that go too far
down that road we'll just go into a self
destroying death spiral and we'll go go
out of existence unless they have some
huge endowment that they can coast on
for for a long time and then the action
will just gravitate to to some other
some other place but no I I think the
the next step is going to be that other
groups will then start to backlash and
use the same tactics against the the
current generation of social justice
warriors so if you then start to see so
certain sorts of feminism for example
start to manifest themselves in very
ugly adversarial power play forms then
there's going to be a subsection of
males who will then say okay well we'll
just do the exact same thing back and so
it'll just be a right warfare or if you
know a certain you know members of
racial groups you know they want to up
the things and turn it into racial war
then the nice tolerant members on the
other side and the other racial groups
will say enough is enough
and they'll just organize themselves
racially it will be back to the
old-fashioned race wars again so you'll
end up with a balkanization if I can use
that metaphor right or just tribalism as
a little more generalized and it'll just
be it'll just be just fought out at that
point you can't predict you know if it's
a race war but which race is going to
win if it's a sex and gender war right
or if it's an ethnic war well I don't
we've been having ethnic wars for for
four generations and we know how that
history goes it's not predictable well
what do you think about an educational
institutions such as Yale where they had
a dust-up and with Christakis and I
think it's 2015 yes we're 2016 it was a
couple years earlier yeah and they seem
to be big enough to I guess incorporate
that way of thinking or ameliorate that
crowd and still carry on but it seems
like the problem I have with social
justice is that it likes to capture
everything it'll capture all the
schools it'll capture all the sciences
and in insert its ideology or because
the people who were trying to learn how
to be a doctor to spend a lot of time on
this other secondary material that they
believe is primary is there any way to
stop it or counter it yeah no I think
that's that's perceptive in two ways the
points you're making one is now for all
of postmodernism x' rhetoric about being
anti universalistic and anti dominance
and anti imperialistic colonial in
practice they are extraordinarily
imperialistic and universalistic it's
it's a total power agenda there that
they're going for and you're right Yale
is different than in a case like
evergreen Yale has huge institutional
resources and reserves so it could in
principle you know there's as Adam Smith
said about economies as a there's a
great deal of ruination possible in a in
a country that's had deep reserves so it
can tolerate a certain number of
self-destructive experiments and so on
and to some extent we do expect
universities to be hothouses and
laboratories for all kinds of wacky
experiments and so a place like Yale it
might even want to encourage but then
the question is going to be what will
yell and the rest of us who are watching
Yale going to learn right from the
lesson and I think one of the things
that will happen at an institution like
Yale is that this will be I don't know
it's not a tempest in a teacup I don't
know how much to belittle it but TL has
an extraordinary number of first-rate
intellectuals who are doing really good
work in all sorts of disciplines and one
of the reasons why the the crazies and
the activists and the people who are not
really there for education knowledge
truth goodness and so forth
can get some traction at Yale is that
the first-rate people are focusing on
their work or trying to get stuff
actually done they're not taking the the
postmoderns and the social justice
warriors that seriously but then to the
extent that the social
warriors I really don't like calling
them social justice warriors because
they're they're really antisocial and
just and they are anti justice they are
warriors
yes we actually are the justice warriors
we got with their attacker that was we
actually care about truth and facts and
treating individual case but the point
is at certain point the first-rate
people at Yale and the other
institutions Eric this is enough of a
problem this is crap this is interfering
with my ability to do my work my ability
to train students and so forth and so
they will redirect some of their efforts
and as soon as you have the first-rate
Minds taking on what really are
third-rate activist Minds it's kind of
clear to me who will win at Yale
yato wants to be a world-class
institution and I can't see the current
generation of professors the
administration even the students who are
there who genuinely want to do something
with their lives the donors and so forth
and putting up with it for too long now
maybe that's too optimistic but that's
my sense do you think that the pursuit
or the possession of excellence whether
of ability or character is one aspect
that causes somebody to be immune to the
siren call of what we're calling social
justice yeah that's interesting
interesting questions in philosophy is
whether one thinks about the issues
rationally and considers arguments and
evidence counter arguments and then
makes up one's mind and depending on
where one's reason leads one psychology
your emotions and your habits of thought
and speech and action follow that from
that or whether it's the other way
around that we start off with a
psychology that is somewhat perhaps
implicit and when we're attracted to
philosophical positions about values and
knowledge and truth
that support our psychology so
psychology is the driver and philosophy
ends up being an autobiography of one's
psychology and that's an ongoing back
and forth to begin in history of
philosophy now my view is that both
paths are possible I mean I think in
many cases it's clear that people come
in with a psychology and that lends them
to to pay attention only to things that
push the buttons that they they already
like to have pushed and things to take
them outside of their comfort zone
they have blocks in places and they keep
their blocks up so they don't have to
consider those things so I think there
are a lot of people who do come in who
are already disturbed psychologically
maybe they have a grievance against
against society against reality they
that they already don't have much
self-esteem and they don't think they
kind of have a sneaking suspicion that
they're not going to make much of their
own lives but they still need to assert
themselves in some way so there's some
dark psychological territory coming
along and that person I think is a prime
candidate for certain kinds of
ideologies post-modernism is not the
only one but there is that that Road and
that's a natural recruiting route but I
do think it can go the other way that
you can start with people who are
basically decent who are open to the
evidence open to argument who have a
more benevolent understanding of
themselves and humans but they take
seriously the arguments and they buy
into skeptical jaded cynical
understandings of the world they really
think that those are are true and over
time that shapes their thinking that
shapes their emotion and then they can
become poisoned individual so it can go
both ways were you at some point in your
own development and maybe college or
undergrad were you did you play around
with that skeptical jaded censor was it
always distasteful for you or how did
you decide on which path you wanted to
go
right now I remember yeah I think in
some ways I was was you're asking me to
reconstruct the teenage Stephen Hicks
where was I on all of these issues I
think I was mixed but basically
intelligent open-minded positive values
are possible person at the same time I
wasn't you know an idiot and a poly
honest I was you know well aware of all
of the hypocrisy xand power plays and
you know I went through high school just
like everybody else so I you you get a
good education and the social types that
are possible and even though I didn't
typically read what my teachers assigned
in high school I was always reading
history and literature and politics and
so on so I was aware of the dark side
and and the brutality and and all of the
possibilities for a cynical and jaded
like view of life and I think that was
where I was when I started University
and I got a very good liberal arts
education at the University of Guelph
partly because they had genuine
diversity of thought in a lot of the
departments I studied in political
science in history especially in
philosophy when an anecdote I like to
tell was that my philosophy department
at the University of wealth expanded
dramatically in the 1960s and 70s during
the baby boomer generation and the
chairman of the department at that time
was a guy in John Bruce who was a
skeptic and he basically was given a
charge by the president of the
university to go out and hire something
like twelve or fourteen philosophers to
build up the department but because he
was a skeptic his attitude was yeah I
said well I don't really have a an axe
to grind here and so he went to the
Canadian philosophical Association and
the American Philosophical Association
meetings with a shopping list and he
said okay I need a I need a Nietzschean
I need a puppy rien I need a Marxist I
need a conte in I need a tow mist and so
he basically hired people from all over
the intellectual spectrum so this is
coming back to answering your questions
that meant that by the time I got there
basically there were 20 philosophy
professors and they all disagreed with
each other
fundamentally because they were all
coming from dramatically different parts
of the spectrum and I took courses with
all of them and what that then meant was
you know that those professors who were
very strong skeptics very strong
relativists very strong adversarial
ist's Marxists and so on and proto
postmodernists at this point you know I
engaged with them at a at a first-rate
level and it did have an effect on me so
I remember having you know weeks where I
would be following a line of argument
and it seemed like it was leading to a
very dark place and if I was going to be
intellectually honest I had to go there
and in some cases it was leading to very
jaded places and this means that I was
going to have to look at you know
perhaps my current friends quite
differently my parents and and so forth
so so there was there was an engagement
there and you know by the way I remember
siding when I became a philosophy major
was to say look the facts are facts and
the only way to sort this out is going
to be by following the best arguments
and and weighing them and I will just go
wherever those go so that's the path I
that's I pursued even if it landed you
and hell you're gone yes
yeah that's wrong that's right so in
that sense there was a a methodological
primacy we have to follow the facts have
to be true to reality however ugly
reality turns out to be if that turns
out to be the true picture that I have
to deal with human beings as they are
even if my best understanding of human
beings ends up being negative so a
willingness to go there was there now
I ended up not coming to think that
those are the true or best
understandings of reality knowledge in
the human condition but I think if
you're going to really be a philosopher
or any sort of intellectual genuinely
you do have to be open to that what
landed you with a smile then rather than
a friend at the end yeah yeah well any
would just be a matter of you know
reading the people who are advocates of
science the realism and perception that
concept formation is a legitimate
process that logic actually works
putting those arguments up against the
this best skeptical arguments and the
the positive accounts right prevailed so
and it'll be the same thing on issues of
human nature or value politics and so on
do there's two directions I want to go
but I'm wondering if with the armed with
the tools of logic and science that
gives you some measure of power in the
world or some measure of legitimacy and
actually being able to construct rather
than the opposite which would be only
being able to criticize indefinitely
yeah I would say as human beings that is
yeah that is the most important power
that we have is the power of our minds
to figure out the way the world works
and to use that to guide our our actions
where we are compared to other animal
species wimps physically I we have a big
brain and learning how to use that very
well that's that's where it's at for
humans so the post-modern so if we take
them as an instructor of example at the
other end yeah it does become bestiality
you know if you sabotage which is what
post-modernism used tavaa cause you're
your most powerful tools it's also
mental a you know to give an analogy to
a young bird that learns to pluck out
its own feathers
it's mm-hmm it's real of destruction
you you described a moment in your
intellectual life that I think might map
on to a moment in the intellectual life
of our culture where there was an
ability for a variety of viewpoints to
hold be held in tension and it seems
like over time within certain pockets of
academia certain groups of one out I
wonder what was the what allowed all
those different viewpoints to be held in
tension what was the the floor upon
which all those different thinkers could
could meet arrest yeah well I think the
the floor has kind of to operative send
this metaphor to pillars to subbasements
that said that support the for so you
know if the floor is today the the ideal
of a liberal arts college or a liberal
arts university where we're going to
bring in genuine diversity of thought
and we're going to meet and consider
each other's viewpoints and let the best
arguments and interpretations prevail
and that we're going to be
self-correcting and any conclusions that
we reach we're going to be open to
re-evaluating if that's the floor then
the the the pillars are going to be one
that there there are such things as
facts that reality matters and that we
are striving to come to understand
reality and the other is that we are
capable of doing so if we go through a
certain process we can go through that
process individually of being open to
all of the data and initially having an
open mind
orientation to doing our best to try
various ways of categorizing that data
to running experiments to analyzing the
results to putting our interpretation of
the results out there and letting other
smart people critique them and then
taking seriously their critiques and
responding to those and then to
formalize that in a social setting which
is
what a university is supposed to be
where we're going to Train young
students how to do that whether it's a
literature class and we're interpreting
Beowulf or if it's a biology class or
politics class so the platform then is
we're trying to get to reality there is
a reality out there and if we follow
this methodology individually and
socially we we can do it and what
happened then is the skeptics in the
some sectors of the Academy that you're
talking about they won out they became
anti-realist you know they came to
believe that well hey you know religious
people and scientific people and
everyone in the middle we've been
arguing for thousands of years and
nobody can convince anybody else so
let's not talk about reality anymore
people are just going to believe what
they're going to believe anyway and then
on top of that they have a couple of
centuries of very skeptical arguments
that have been directed against all of
the elements that I just went through
that we can be open to facts that we can
interpret things that we can run
experiments and the experiments can give
us decisive results one way or the other
all of that got hollowed out so both the
the fact orientation and the the pro
empiricism and reason orientation got
hollowed out and is there a yeah is
there is there a moment where they
realize that they're undermining the
ability of a utopia whatsoever because
if if they don't have a floor to replace
the floor that they're eroding but like
I just don't see why you would do that
if you don't have another floor it seems
like they have like another better world
constructed of equity or fairness but it
seems like it's missing that that
feedback loop right well that's that's
an interesting question about
postmoderns and I think again there are
subgroups within postmoderns I mean some
will say you know I'm taking the
negative conclusion seriously and what
that means is that all values ultimately
are failures and I don't have anything
to do
place it with now I might have my
personal commitments that I've inherited
or not lived with but when I apply my
own postmodern critical tools to my own
values I have to realize that my values
don't escape that is all I'm left with
is subjective preferences and I can't I
can publicly assert those but I can't
publicly argue that they are in fact
better than anyone elses and so I think
Derry da for example in the 60s and 70s
was in in this position and I think
Foucault to a large extent was in that
position off and on
I think someone like Roorkee and Gary
dog later and in his life they are still
kind of holding out hope for some way of
having their value framework escape the
corrosive effects of a thoroughgoing
skepticism so there's a late interview
for example with Jacques Derrida before
he died I don't know the exact year but
he's being asked about you know what he
actually believes positively in effect
is a variation on the question that you
just asked and you know basically what
he says is we're you know forthrightly
you know post-modernism and
deconstruction it leads to the creation
of monsters it's just everything ends up
being empty and and ugliness everything
is is ultimately and there is no
positive value but at the same time and
then he goes in a somewhat platonic Con
Thien way but wistfully where he wants
to say I would he still like to believe
in some sense that this equalitarian
world vision can serve as as a regular
to the standard that in some sense it
can escape the deconstruction at the end
of his life Jerry dog was interviewed
about exactly his issue and whether
there was any positiveness that can come
out and he basically said
no but at the same time he said
wistfully that he have hoped that some
sort of egalitarian idealism because he
was a quasi Marxist all of his career
far left right and so forth might serve
in some kind of platonic or Conte and
regulative idea way as it's almost like
as another worldly idea that I can't
account for where it comes from and I
really hope that it's true but I just
don't have the intellectual resources to
to support a belief in in something like
that so he ends up in a more conflicted
place Rory I think is is a as a milder
case you know very well read in the
history of analytic philosophy and and
on the Continentals and he ends up going
very far down the post-modern road in
terms of his understanding of the human
condition and his anti realism and his
skepticism about the powers of
empiricism and rationalism but at the
same time he never you know gave up his
kind of far left social democrat
convictions that in his heart of hearts
this is a true and positive vision what
he seems to settle on is that the way we
formulate our values is not a rational
process but he still wants to hold it
there is such a thing as a right set of
values that can and should be urged and
so he wants to recast his rhetorical
project he's not going to use it in
terms of truth argument and convince
people rationally but rather we are more
emotional association beings and that he
can just find a good way to use the
rhetorical tools available to him he can
recondition a certain number of people
to have the felt sympathy toward the
values that you think are things are the
the right kind of kind of values so he
wants to return to pre-modern
religious some sort of reformulated
religion than with faith based trance I
wouldn't say that Rory is at all
religious or or faith-based in a in a
traditional sense I would say he is
emotion
so that we you know something we get
these values from God or another
dimension or a source I think you know
Derry da is to some extent holding out
hope that maybe we're tapping into some
sort of regulatory regulative ideas
source right or there's that quip from
Heidegger when he's being ender
interviewed toward the end of his life
and he says basically everything has
gone to crap and all of his youthful
ideals have been shown to have been
betrayed and so forth and he says only a
God can save us that then it says hey
it's not necessarily that he's believing
in a God but that kind of is hoping that
in some sense is a god-like creature
that can maybe come down and sort out
the mess that we have made for ourselves
now I don't think Rory is in that
category at all I think he's a secular
thinker I think he thinks that we are
primarily conditioned through a
linguistic linguistic methodology that
works more on our emotions and our
passions and then what we call reasoning
is an after-the-fact rationalization so
what we need to do is refashion our
activism and our use of language in a
more a conditioning way of doing things
rather than a logical scientific way of
doing things and then he's basically a
nice guy so he in the the left liberal
toleration is to camp so he is on the
other side of the those who come out of
the Marxist revolutionary camp where you
know really we're fine with taking it to
the street and punching people and
killing the class enemies ultimately to
refashion society so these more of a
democratic socialists in that sense I
just I still don't see how they aren't
just trying to return to a religion or a
religious way of looking at the world I
mean is there a third option that
they're trying to fashion one that's not
reason one that's not spiritual or God
based or faith based there's this soupy
kind of Darwinian emotional neurotic
there were neural network there trying
to for him yeah well I know I I take
your point here when you look at social
justice warriors right in practice there
there are some very striking
similarities to a religious mindset so
when we say it's a new religion we're
capturing something right important
there so but I would say that
post-modernism is a third option from a
traditional kind of religion because a
traditional religion is going to say
metaphysically you know there there
really is a reality when we say that God
exists that's not just a social
construct that's not just a subjective
feel-good assertion that I am making out
there in reality in another dimension
there is a being who is a God who
created the world right and so forth so
that is taken in a literalist sense and
then the the you know the more modern so
the more secular thinkers want to say no
reality is the physical world maybe we
can make an argument for a God or not
but probably not and so we're we think
reality is physical istic material right
or whatever but what the postmoderns are
doing is taking seriously the anti
realism that they do when you push them
say it is meaningless to talk about the
nature of reality whether you say it's a
religious reality or in physical reality
we just have to get rid of the reality
talk and so anytime that we use the word
reality we put it in the scared tapes
pair quotes or anytime we say there's a
fact that we put it in a scare quote so
what we call reality is not out there
objectively a god or out there
objectively a physical world but rather
it is a subjective creation right it
comes from within we construct our own
psychological reality and or if we are
ourselves constructed as individuals to
be avatars for various or vehicles
through which social forces operate then
what we take to be reality is a social
construction and I am a vehicle for that
social construction so they are not
realist in that in that sense at all and
also I think on the epistemological side
one way of talking about religion is
there say there are people who say
things like I know what I want to
believe and I'm going to close my mind
to the arguments and the facts and I
know that there are good arguments
against whatever my religious beliefs
are but I don't want to believe those
things and so as a matter of willing
myself I'm going to not consider those
things and double down and redouble my
commitment to believing certain things
so that's sort of a emotion subjective
based believing that's one a prominent
account of what faith is and so we can
say well if we look at the social
justice warriors and we're trying to
reason with them and say you know maybe
there's another way to reconstruct these
facts or or or you didn't attend to this
and you get the sense that they have
their minds made up and they're not open
to alternate interpretations or as we
see in the videos that you you've done
they say you know we're not here to
debate right you know we're not
interested in that and I have and you
know what's going on inside them is they
have this very strong soup of emotions
that are pointing them in a certain
direction and what animates them is
unleashing those emotions and feeling
committed to acting out on the basis of
those emotions and so the psychology is
is very much the same but it's not
religious I think in any traditional
sense because it's not that I'm making a
faith commitment to some sort of being
that I take to be an objective reality
out there however much subjectively and
emotional istic it's it's a it's a
subjective emotional esteem n't to a
purely secular social value agenda but
there's positive feedback both within
the religious believer when they face
the discrepancy between
reality and their belief and the social
justice believer when they face the
reality between facts and or the the the
data and their theory and that's a being
in a community of believers a community
of like-minded individuals that's what
props them up that it seems like there
was a hint of that and Rorty where he
was going to he just needs to create
enough people around him
this liberal you know secular blob
together that that the reality itself
comes we can disregard reality because
we have each other
maybe that's what causes the it yeah
yeah mail sense that's very perceptive
and that's no that's it that's exactly
right so there's a concept that comes
out of the Objectivist literature of
social metaphysics that is to say that
your your metaphysics is constituted by
your social circle and you either let
others in your social circle construct
what you take to be real and suppress
your independent judgement about what
reality might be like in order to fit
into the group and you have to have
exactly that sense that if enough people
believe it then we can make it real
because most of them want to say you
know they recognize the psychotic break
that goes on in some individuals you
know if I say I know there's all those
facts out there but if I just believe I
just really believe on something then I
can make it real all that strong wishful
thinking so if you put it in
individualistic terms that seems totally
nuts and they recognize that but if
enough people believe it then there's a
mass psychology and if I have trained
myself out of exercising independent
judgment then I can genuinely come to
believe whatever is that my my social
group is now there are deep
epistemological roots in this and this
is why I think a lot of the philosophy
of language that the postmoderns are
very well-versed in you know so if you
take seriously and fundamentally the
idea that language is a social crowd
and I think fundamentally that's a false
understanding of reality or of language
language has a lots of social elements
but it's not fundamentally a social
problem it's an individual's mind in
connection with reality and other people
might teach you words and give you
theories and and and so forth but
ultimately what they're trying to do is
guide your mind to grasp the facts as
they as they are but the the the the
fossa fees of language that Rorty and
Derrida and to a lesser extent Foucault
and leotard
are dealing with they to take deeply the
notion that language is a social product
and that the individual is born into a
social group and you learn a language
and so that is your basic cognitive
framework it's a socially inculcated
language but that that language comes
Freight and with a certain grammar at a
certain semantics and a certain set of
interpretive theories about the way the
world works and so you are conditioned
to think a certain way and then that
what the implication of that then is is
that people who are in different
linguistic communities are then being
conditioned in two very different ways
of understanding the world and so then
your are off to the races and running
again and there's no way for us to then
purge the linguistic gaps and then if
you combine that within a skepticism
coming out of your pistol mala ji that
says all of the the elements of language
all of the words that we use all of
those concepts
if you come to believe that there's no
way to base them empirically in
perceptual evidence or in any sort of
sensory data there's a gap between
sensation and perception perception and
conception and so forth then reality
drops out of the picture so then you
don't have individuals coming to grasp
reality by their senses and then forming
abstractions or you have as members or
unformed members of a group that are
born into a linguistic community and
they are shaped and formed by that
linguistic community so yeah another a
little bit you
you brought up the scare quotes that
they put around truth and reality and
you say it's meaningless to talk about
reality and I'm wondering what is never
scare quoted and once you go down that
path there's got to be something to
stand on something that you can't say
but that's true even if it is that scare
quote as as an active right mastering
something else or being a part of I'm
like hi I'm gain reality by distancing
myself from yeah and again I think there
are variations within post-modernism on
how to address that question so if we
take post-modernism and we and we purify
it and we push all of those themes to
the end then it does seem like you end
up where you can't say anything without
contradicting yourself without engaging
in a kind of performative contradiction
so you know even if I put you know
things in scare quotes I then I'm
presupposing that the scare quote means
something that that symbol has a
cognitive referent and that you even
though you're a different individual can
understand what I mean by that and so we
have a shared reality that we are we are
dealing with so at a very minimum level
if I'm going to speak even through the
act of you know doing ironic statements
and so on I'm not able to state without
contradiction that all language is
subjective and opaque across linguistic
communities right and so forth so it's
the to generalize it's the standard
paradox of relativism but I can't say
that you know all truths are relative or
all claims to knowledge are relative
because then I'm including that as a
knowledge claim but I'm trying to exempt
it from the relative ization so all
knowledge claims are relative is an
attempt at a universal claim not to make
a relative
claim or everything is subjective if I
want to say that to you well I'm trying
to communicate an objective truth to you
that it really is the case factually
that trues our objective in which case I
can't say that all truths are subjective
or you know there is no certainty well
that is a very strong claim that I'm
trying to make certain there's a no the
usual thing dentist is to throw the
claim that will are you certain of that
and you have to say well it's probable
that all the claims are certain or what
are you sure of that and then you just
end up babbling right ultimately so you
know in philosophy we call this the the
cratylus option for the the ancient
Greek skeptic named cratylus who
realized the end road that all of these
skeptical arguments were reaching you
can't in fact say anything and so true
to his beliefs he to shut up and stop
saying I'm sure some people were happy
with their yeah we wish right in some
cases I totally yeah please take the
Cratylus option so if I think if you
were then going to go ahead know it just
what is the what's the net what's the
safety net then to keep them from going
that far because they don't want to shut
up yes well then I don't know and then I
think we have to say then it comes down
to a matter of a personal psychology if
you if you if you want to keep talking
then you know does seem like you're
committed to thinking that there are
some values that are to be gained from
continuing talking and does seem like
you're still saying well there are other
people out there and I believe that they
are real beings and I believe that
language is a real phenomenon and I
believe that language communicates
something and so I'm going to continue
to try to use language to to communicate
with other
people now of course they might then
back up and say well you know this is
just a you know personal happens to
press my subjective value judgments you
know some people might you know go into
a studio and put paint on a canvas I'm
just going into my my office and putting
words on a page which makes me feel good
and at least intellectually that's the
best I can say about my about my project
James Lindsay postulates that with
intersectionality they made the one
sacred ground or the one real island to
stand on oppression and that's the one
thing that you can't question or that's
the fundamental value and that's how
they resurrected the project of
post-modernism and kept it from yeah
well there is that one
I think there's I think there's two
again again there we have a fork in the
ropes and the other one would be power
there are some postmoderns who will
argue this is not necessarily a value
judgment they'll say if we understand
the way the world works then the kind of
the ultimate substratum of reality just
is power power manifesting itself in in
various forms and this is then to take
the the Nietzschean route seriously so
there are no there are no entities there
or even ultimately aren't individuals
that we are all just vehicles through
which power the will to power is flowing
and manifesting now if you go that route
then you're still doing a certain amount
of metaphysics and I think Foucault
right on this score you know sometimes
he's saying that he really is just
carrying on the Nietzschean tradition
and so he's not a full-out anti-realist
but rather we will just reduce all of
what we think are other realities
material objects gods human beings and
so forth two manifestations of of power
now then to get to the the others right
those who
want to say that we do have another
bottom line and the problem is that yes
everything is power but power manifests
itself unequally because some of these
manifestations are some of these local
vehicles have a lot more power than
others and then power being what power
is the stronger power centers oppress
and exploit the weaker power centers and
that's our description of the way the
world works now if you are a full-on
Nietzschean then you will say ok so no
problem that's just the way the world
works and you might as well just embrace
the way the world works
power is a hegemonic dominating process
and so in some sense if you have
sympathies your sympathies are going to
be with the more powerful manifestations
and might makes right and it just ends
up that way so the analogy I sometimes
use is if we step outside of a human
framework and we look at say a predatory
species you know we look at the you know
the Serengeti and you've got lions and
jackals and zebras and antelope and so
forth and they are engaged in a power
struggle for survival and each of those
different animals is a different center
of power constituted differently and
they're in adversarial relations to each
other and you know one thing you can do
is say well so the lionesses chased the
antelope and they caught the Antelope
and now they are ripping the Antelope
apart so what how do you evaluate that
is that a good thing or a bad thing and
you say well there's not a good thing or
a bad thing it's just the way the world
works right it's just you know the today
the Lions were more powerful than the
antelope and you would say the same
thing you know the next day the Lions
are chasing the antelope and the
Antelope is faster and the Antelope gets
away is that a good thing or a bad thing
you say well the same thing it's just in
that case speed that power one and the
world just goes on so we don't apply a
normative value it's not that we're
supposed to be in favor of one side by
Gore or the other
I just power just continues now
so those say you know when I look at you
know animals like I don't know
wildebeests and zebras you know they're
kind of fine and so forth but I really
prefer lions or something majestic about
lions and the king of the jungle and
they're more powerful so really I'm
gonna pull for the Lions and so I like
because I there's something more noble
right about being a predator rather than
there is about being a prey and I think
Nietzsche if you push Nietzsche then
he's going to be more on that side of
the equation now to get to the then the
James Lindsay equalitarian people I
think what you would then say is you
have this understanding that the
universe is ruled by power and there are
unequal centers of power and it's all
adversarial and struggle and somehow you
find that your sympathies are with those
who are on the losing end of the
struggle so when the lion catches the
zebra you feel for the zebra and the
lion is kind of the big bad predator and
so then when we make the transference to
humans we didn't say okay some humans
are stronger than others and humans are
beating up on each others in the whole
history of the world is the history of
exploitation and oppression and we feel
for those who have been on the losing
end of the oppression now where that
comes from that's a that's another story
but then that will then be if you take
that as your universal value that a good
person feels for the exploited feels for
the oppressed feels for the meek then
you do have a value framework and that
will then say you can enter the power
struggle on behalf of those who have
been on the losing end of things and
that's okay you can use all of the power
tools against the exploiter against the
oppressors because you're on the side of
the sheep or you're along the side of
the zebras and so on I think there's
three versions of postmoderns and one is
to say there are no values everything
just is power right or everything is it
there are no pot values and there is no
reality even power we just have
different narratives and some of them
power scenario and some isn't and a
third option is to say power is the
substrate but we're on the side of the
victims of power do you think that that
same sort of logic or moral valuation is
what prompts people to choose reason
because they see that reason is
ultimately or logic and reason and
enlightenment values those are
ultimately the most powerful tool that
we have and so I'm gonna put my eggs in
that basket rather than the postmodern
basket even if even if they're equally
wrong no right yeah that's that that is
the camp in that I would be in so then I
would say well but I'm putting it in a
you know in a realist framework than is
to say when we study the human condition
we'll study the world if humans are
going to survive and flourish right in
the world as it actually is they have to
use the tools that are available to them
and reason is one of those tools and it
is the most important tool that human
beings have and if we can then show that
it is efficacious then that is the one
that we should commit to using so that's
the the old Francis Bacon line about
knowledge is power so the capacities
that are able us to get knowledge we
don't pursue knowledge just as an end in
its own sake or because it's kind of fun
or whatever even though it is fun
ultimately we want knowledge because
knowledge translates into practice and
practice makes us better at living our
lives is there something else that a
society needs other than just reason
then is there like subsidiary aspects to
a culture that need to be in place in
order for a reason to maintain its
efficacy and I'm just and I'm getting
back it's a loaded question cuz I'm
getting back wondering if the reason
that post-modernism came back was
because there was no religious structure
under girding or in conjunction with a
reason structure so it has to
revert back into a number of people
can't reason their way through things
they need to feel their way through
things and without that religious
substrate there's no place for those
people to define a home and connect with
the reasonable people well maybe we'll
ask you to say a little bit more about
what you mean by our religious substrate
do you mean a shared set of beliefs or a
shared set of habits or shared moral
framework is that what you mean by a
religious one
yeah fundamentally it would be a
narrative structure that ties a group of
people together like just a story of who
we are and that story would have
pictures and songs and all the things
that plug into that story that fill it
out and give room for all these
different characters to exist together
in a cohesive whole I just don't know if
reason alone can sustain a society and
all its different aspects okay so if I'm
understanding your your your your second
elaboration all right on that point the
key concepts in there were stories and
narratives and there the contrast is to
say that reason is very abstract and
stories and narratives are
concretization so we don't talk about
human nature we talk about Shakespeare
and we talk about Chaucer and we talked
about Canterbury Tales and so forth and
in that we're bringing reason down to
earth in a way that's understandable to
more people is that where we're going so
it's not just an abstracted theoretical
understanding of the world right and so
on oh no I know I think that's right
yeah I would say as human beings
at least my understanding of Reason what
I mean by reason is not something that
is only a set of highly abstract
propositions at a very theoretical level
my view of reason is that reason
operates at all levels of abstraction
including its connections to one's
perceptual understanding of the world so
I an empirical understanding of reason
not a purely abstracted or what
sometimes call
a more rational Avista core appurify
recent understanding of the world so yes
and I do think that stories and
narratives are absolutely crucial for
even the most you know intelligent
abstract ly powerful individuals because
we all and this is part of the knowledge
is power thesis I think that comes out
of bacon we all do need to understand
the world in principle in terms of
generalities in terms of abstract causal
systems that are operating out there but
we also need to be able to translate
that to the practical day-to-day events
in our lives and that's a that's a huge
project so you know if you if we take
one virtue for example and we can say
courage is important and you and I can
abstractly define courage and
distinguish it from brashness and
timidity and so on and we could have you
know beautifully worked out abstract
taxonomy of the virtue and the
corresponding vices but in order to
really understand courage we do need to
see examples of it those need to be
concrete eyes so it's got to be you know
do you remember
you know Benjamin or Steven when you
were in second grade and that kid came
up to you and tried to steal your lunch
money at that particular example and or
to have the bedtime stories where your
mom or your dad is reading you a story
about made-up characters who are doing
courageous things and contrasting so
those are the concrete examples then we
have the artistic narrative
representations but we also need to go
up and be able to define and
conceptualize it and put it in the
context of an overall moral theory so
yeah my understanding of reason that is
robust and it operates all up and down
those levels of abstraction so to come
back then to your question and I don't
want to put words in your mouth but it
started to sound like maybe there was a
intellectual history question there that
maybe
for post-modernism and it's skepticism
came out of the modern project of reason
being too abstracted or too purified and
that it gutted or dispensed with you
know some shared cultural understandings
that had been built up in the West over
the course of centuries some of them
religious some of them not necessarily
religious and so
we tried to get to scientific and to
rational I'm just reconstructing a
possible question to scientific and to
rational to quickly and we threw out all
of the traditions and that left a vacuum
where people felt empty and not knowing
what to do and post-modernism rushed in
to fill that vacuum something like that
yeah it is that plausible do you think
that you agree with that well I think
that's that's the story that
conservatives will tell and that some of
the postmoderns also will tell so if you
think about Nietzsche and his famous
phrase that God is dead now he does
think that it's a in one sense a good
thing that God is dead but he's also
recognizing that the the death of God
has happened too fast for most human
beings and even sophisticated
intellectual human beings who become
existentialists you know that for them
the death of God and all of the
comforting stories and narratives and
values that are part of that package if
you are raised with them and then
suddenly you read a few books and you're
20 years old and it's all wrenched out
and your reason is telling you that God
is dead and you don't have anything to
replace that with well then you're in a
pretty dark place psychologically so so
I do think no they're the important the
truth is that we do need to have values
in place as we are living our lives
and it's important that they are healthy
values so you know if you too quickly
destroy all of your value framework and
don't have anything to replace it with
then you will be very psychologically in
a dark place and culturally more broadly
of a large number of people who are
doing the same sort of thing then you
will destroy the institution's but my
view is not a it's not a conservative
one I think that you know as the modern
world developed a lot of you know
non-religious and more modern friendly
value stories were being developed so
there were lots of positive options
available to them and people when they
surveyed their actual lives they could
see the concrete improvements that were
going on so I don't I don't think as a
matter of intellectual history that
that's a very good account
I was asked about because I was making a
statement I don't know if we can counter
post-modernism as i think of it as being
rather destructive of our society
without a better story i think that the
ultimately they're telling a story
everybody's got these different stories
so what what's the bet the best story
and I understand that reason is what's
going to evaluate whether or not any
given story is good but somebody asked
me when will we ever let go of our
training wheels as a society when when
will humankind let go of our training
wheels meaning you know religion broadly
construed but it feels like we're in a
eternal September where there's always
just younger people or we're always
being refreshed with people who don't
understand life or who are fools that
need to be need that wisdom passed on
and I just see that narrative as the the
structure of passing on knowledge over
and over again through time right yeah
well I think one of the narratives is
historical and so where I think history
education is important so we do have a
very powerful narrative that starts in
the Renaissance
about taking the individual seriously
and that we want to live a full lives
and that we shouldn't be captives of you
know class gender and various other
restrictions that have been placed on us
that human beings are wonderful and with
good education they can really pursue
high dreams and make something of
themselves and that is a powerful
narrative that we tell and we tell it a
lot and it has succeeded very well or so
the last four centuries we also have the
the science and technology narrative and
I think that also has been very
successful at some level people
recognize that you know all of the
superstitions and all of the crazy
theories and the religion does get a lot
of blame here for holding us back on and
retarding the progress of science it's
not to say that all religion has to be
so antagonistic to to science but
there's a lot of blame to go around
there but we do have a positive science
and technology story and we recognize
that story so you know the Enlightenment
has been an awesome achievement the
Renaissance has been an awesome
achievement or just continuing to make
continue to make progress so I think the
fact that we have a great Hollywood
movie industry that's now expanding and
it's becoming multi-centered but you
know as much as we like to be cynical
and jaded and beat up on Hollywood
movies the fact is that we get wonderful
narratives from them that we resonate to
them we believe in the love story we do
you know except for a few people you
know gone through too many divorces or
bad breakups right and so forth but
that's that's a narrative it is possible
for decent people to find real love and
a happy ever after it's not easy but it
is possible and we believe in that and
we we love the action stories and you
know the competent resourceful smart you
know James Bond Jason Bourne you run
through it we love that story and it's
good versus evil
and the good guy wins we believe in the
triumph of good so we do have all of
these narratives the Renaissance the
Enlightenment the Hollywood movies I
think we still are largely in an
Enlightenment culture and you know as
you said it is cyclical we do have
people who long for the the good old
pre-modern days and the intellectual
framework that supports that we do have
people who are cynical and jaded and
just want to burn the place down and we
have those people in every generation
but you also have the people who want to
make a meaningful life and and we're
enabling them to do so you know in a
broad philosophical sense for those of
the who have studied the Greeks it is
Plato versus Aristotle versus the
Sophists right all over again in every
generation as all three contingents from
the otherworldly with this worldly and
then the skeptical relativists and I
think right now of course we're in a
somewhat cynical skeptical relativistic
place in intellectual and high culture
circles but we do still have a lot of
great resources in the broader
enlightenment culture
