well since two speakers have already
mentioned him I have to comment on those
two voices from Oxford interviews of our
famous Bailey old comedian for those who
don't know what that refers to
that is indeed Boris Johnson I tell you
he's a fantastic comedian and you
responded in the way you might expect a
good stage comedian to do to the opening
remark I'm a team you're not a very
gentle person
are you he groaned and as the groan
turns into a triumphant attitude on the
part of a politician that's right I know
what I am doing I just mentioned that
because that's not what I'm going to
talk about but I am going to talk about
a very different situation which
somebody's in a hot seat and but I
mention it in order to say that a speech
from Paul my goodness I think Paul
you've got a new job coming repetitive
captain tells the world that we know
where we're going and we know what to do
to get out big holders now I come to the
real point of my talk the person I'm
going to talk about is in a very deep
hole indeed and it's my job to getting
out of it because I want you to imagine
but this is a courtroom and the charges
sitting somewhere over there and my
clients the defendants some are over
there and the charge is about the worst
it can be murder premeditated so like
any good
I had my discussions with my client and
he's asked me to present his defense
which is not to challenge any of the
facts whatsoever about the
incontrovertible evidence that he did
what he did he's asked me nevertheless
to say that his plea of not guilty is
extremely well founded how can that
possibly be the case
well his defense is roughly as follows
Your Honor you see my client spent a lot
of time and was young
reading voraciously and one of the books
that he read very carefully indeed was
the Selfish Gene and he seriously
Scenic's you see that it should was
night they the funny things down here in
over there the DNA in your cell and have
created this body in mine and mine well
don't worry too much about that because
his defense is in part well I am the
product of my genes but oh my lord he's
long so simple-minded to think that all
there is to it because he realizes that
between the genes and him doing whatever
he did when he ended up killing somebody
and the word there was at least his
brain and all his trillions of neurons
involved and there he tells me your
honor that he was reading a very famous
paper by the American neuroscientist
Benjamin Libet in 1982 published a very
classic study he was according the
activity from the surface as a skull of
the brain while subjects were asked to
say exactly when as they press the
button at the time of their choosing
exactly what the time was and they
pressed the button and decided to press
the button and to remember I said he was
also recording from the brain and he
came up with a very interesting
observation indeed the brain fires
before subject recognizes that he has
made the decision to press the button
he's an extremely famous experiment
that's being used by many people to
argue that it therefore must be the case
that you are not in control your brain
determines what you do and my client
Allah thinks that that in his defense
it's very clear as I said he doesn't
challenge any of the facts about the
case he just simply says it wasn't me
now I'm going to take off my lawyers
happen in my looks I'm going to switch
to being a psychiatrist in just a moment
that while I'm just in it's Noble I want
to make a comment on this particular
defense you all know as I that that
defense would never work in a court of
law in this country or any in any other
country in the world and why is that
case the two thousand arms after that
one will be well if all of that is
correct and if we allow that as the
defense society would fall apart
there will be no law because that
defense could be used by anybody charged
with absolutely anything but of course
there's not the best way to tackle the
problem because that would be to say
that we've got to live with a very
strange mixture but on the one hand
we've got to say that that kind of
defense cannot be used
cannot be allowed in a court of law but
on the other hand
we recognize that nevertheless he was
right to think of he was thinking but it
leads me to the second point of course
he bothered right to think in the way he
was thinking because that knew has its
origin an idea in science and in
philosophy that was very common indeed
in the nineteenth century he was
encapsulated most famously by the great
French mathematician applause who is the
person who made the point that if
everything was Newtonian mechanics like
Athens like billiard balls running into
each other then if you solve the
differential equations for all those
movements you'd be able to predict the
whole of the future and we'd know what
Drummondville is going to say later
tonight or I'm going to say in ten years
time if I'd still here and so on and so
forth and of course that retro dick all
the way back to the past it would be
absolutely determined he put it in very
clear terms actually he said a
superintelligence would know everything
I will be able to predict exactly object
happened and exactly what has happened
now two things destroyed that view of
science through the universe at the
beginning of the last century and they
were relativity and quantum mechanics I
won't spend too much time on the
relativity side because it gets
extremely complicated but I will just
focus for a moment on the quantum
mechanics what does it mean that at a
very fundamental level the universe is
not determinant we have no idea
as physiologists which is what I am
we're are not that letters in relation
to brain function but what we do know
in relation to gene function and in
relation to brain function he said there
is massive randomness and stochasticity
now take a long book well locked up a
long book but quite a hook and to lay
out the reasons why that is important
and so he is already referred to it
Dalton in June of life but I won't have
to say this about it so that we can
return to our or defendant it is very
simply this that once you allow Charles
to come in there was a very nice comic
that's Drummond Lane about some parts of
his life being semi accident and I like
because you know we all live on the edge
of things that could go that way or
could go this way now I know as you do
have a lot on offer heard and many
scientists and say but actually firstly
possible if we knew enough you'd be able
to say that which direction we're going
to go
I don't but this returns us for a moment
and in closing my few remarks to our
poor defendant because it's now already
in prison of course and I've become his
prison psychiatrist and I'm working out
with him what his real problem here and
he tells me well you know terribly I've
seen isn't it to be told by scientists
and philosophers that really you're
naughty
but no okay my case didn't work your
defense wasn't good enough it didn't
pass and Here I am in prison and but to
be frank I was very depressed before
that now let me tell you just as an
interesting fact I would present a year
or so ago at a meeting in Holland the
big gathering of people to discuss the
launch of the Dutch translation of my
little book the music of life and the
philosopher who introduced the session
told the story of a very famous that
Dutch novelists who before he shot
himself explained why he was totally
convinced of what my defendant and now
my patient that was convinced of that is
that he really did not live in control
he can be a very depressing view and my
advice is this science is very very
complicated when you hear people say you
know the great certainty that they know
about how genes behave in our bodies how
neurons behave in our bodies and we'll
tell you that in goodness knows how many
as time your fire would reveal to
predict what you're going to do don't
take them so seriously think carefully
about what you feel as a person when
you're reacting in situations and if you
can't go this way or that way my message
you are in control is not to say that
you are entirely in control that would
clearly also not be true but if it were
not the case we were in control at all I
don't think we would be living in the
world that we know thank you very much
ah
