and let me begin by saying that you will
notice the presence of a number of
cameras in the room this is being
recorded by a project called voices from
Oxford and nearly a decade ago the
voices from Oxford project has one word
voices Oxford you can find it easily on
the internet and recorded an absolutely
seminal debate between two great
dinosaurs of evolutionary biology and
the blue corner Richard Dawkins and in
the red corner Lynn Margulis the great
champion of symbiosis that debate on and
over for hours without a resolution and
they said it's all recorded by voices
Roxanne we're very grateful to the voice
of some oxygen for recording today's
lecture too
I'm going to tell you that physiology
guides evolution
you see physiological scientists were
almost excluded from evolutionary
biology by a very simple idea which is
the blind watchmaker but the processes
that generate change in organisms which
can be inherited are totally blind to
function and of course physiological and
medical analysis inevitably has to deal
with function so how did we get into
this situation and the way I'm going to
explain that is to compare the 20th
century reductive approach in biological
and medical science blind chance
a variation followed by natural
selection evolution therefore has low
foresight with what inevitably
we I call a 21st century approach and I
call it an integrative approach because
I think it is much more integrative than
reductive and the take-home message I'm
going to give you is very simply this
that there is a course blind chance the
variations at a molecular level are
indeed unguided but organisms harness
that stochasticity that randomness to
produce function as we'll see and talk
is divided into two parts first of all
harnessing stochasticity then how that
is used in enabling organisms to respond
to stress in the environment in which
they live or produced by other organisms
to lead to genome reorganization and
then I'm finished with the question was
the watchmaker at least one I'd rather
than blind so the question with which
we'll begin is how did the integrative
approach to life becomes sidelined
during the 20th century then we make
clear that I greatly admire the
reductionist approach I've been a
reductionist myself in very much of the
work that I do on ion channels in cells
in the heart but it's an oversimplified
view of living organisms and we all use
this mantra don't we from molecules to
man and you notice the directionality in
that a one-way process and the problem
is this can't be true because molecules
are not alive if I took a DNA out of a
cell and I put it in a petri dish as
many neutrons as you like I keep for
10,000 years and do absolutely nothing
same applies to heart rhythm if I take
all the molecular mechanisms that
generate the transport of ions across
the cell membrane together with again as
many nutrients as you like there would
be no cardiac rhythm the rhythm is
generated as a consequence of an
interaction
so it's cells tissues organs and systems
that are alive through the processes
that they generate so how do we ever get
into the situation in which people
thought otherwise when it goes all the
way back to the great French philosopher
Rene Descartes in about 1664 in a
treatise on the fetus he wrote if I knew
enough of what was in the semen I would
be able to predict the behavior of the
adult organism that's 1664 and in
Laplace repeated the same kind of
message about the universe as a whole if
a highly intelligent being of course
some people might think of that as God I
don't know what your theorem is I don't
want to worry about that but if a highly
intelligent being could see the
equations of motion going forwards they
could also see in going backwards and
such a being would have a view a totally
clear view of what has happened in the
past and what would happen in the future
and so this leads us to the great
quantum mechanician herding it and
hiding up in 1943 gave a famous set of
lectures at the Dublin Institute of
Advanced Studies published as a book
called what is life and he pointed out
first of all that physics is the
generation of order from disorder and
what he meant by that is this that at
the molecular level like the gas
molecules in this room there would be
stochasticity the random motion that is
produced by any molecules that have
kinetic energy in other words not at the
extremely low temperature but of course
if the gas molecules are constrained as
the ones in this room are by the walls
of the room or in a balloon for example
something very interesting happens you
then get the beautifully smooth
determinate laws of thermodynamics of
pressure volume and
preacher so physics he said was order
from disorder but then he said but
biology is different it's order at a
high level from order at the molecular
level now how could he think that he
thought that because he made a very
important and in an absolutely correct
prediction which is that the genetic
material when it was found it wasn't
known in 1943 that it was DNA but when
it was found he will be found to be what
he called a non-periodic crystal and you
think of a long polymer in this case of
course as a nucleic acids as as it were
a kind of crystal then it's certainly
non periodic that's how it contains
information and so I think remember the
these were the days at which x-ray
crystallography was being used by people
like Dorothy Hodgkin to work out the
structure of vitamin b12 and many other
people using x-ray crystallography as
indeed did Watson Crick and Wilkins
Franklin later on to determine the
structure of DNA to determine the
structure of molecules so I think he
thought that that means that the reading
of the genetic material would be a
completely determinate process now
there's no way in which that can be true
either does biology generate order from
order or if you take the opposite view
which I do in both of my little books on
this music of life and the book has just
come out and available the back there at
the end of the advertisement and anyway
if you take the view I take it's the
biology also mostly and most of the time
has to generate order functionality from
this order at the bottom level because
there's no way in which the molecules of
a biological system can avoid the
stochasticity that molecules generally
show if they have kinetic energy which
means that they are at
high enough temperature and we can prove
that with physiological and biochemical
experiments because stochasticity is a
key feature of gene expression so I'm
going to come on now to finding
stochasticity very interesting study
done just a few years ago by three
hiring his colleagues and which they
investigated the amount of gene
expression of a particular protein
doesn't matter what the protein is that
CSCA one but you can do this with almost
any protein and you look at how the gene
expression levels vary in the different
cells of the same population so it all
derived from the same genome it's a
clonal population and what you find is
as you can see at the top there that
there's great stochasticity how great in
this case it one thousand fold the
expression that the highest expression
level is 1000 times the expression at
the low expression level in different
cells moreover we can prove that this is
a cell or rather multi cell level
attractor because if you go on to do
these interesting experiments in which
you take populations for example that
have a simple bell-shaped distribution
curve and you clone from the high
expression cells you will find it
initially they indeed do and Express at
the high level but within a week of the
cells reproducing themselves and
producing a larger and larger population
you're back to the original population
it's an attractor it's the property of
the population as a whole the population
as a whole I don't know why this
particular population is producing this
particular distributions but it's very
saying and I'm anthropomorphizing here
I need this distribution why should they
why should cells need that
just incidentally if you if you have a
population that is bimodal and you clone
from one of the peaks again you get the
same result initially the cells follow
the peak from which they were generated
but eventually you come back to the
bimodal distribution that also therefore
is a population attractor so the
question then arises how can
stochasticity be used by organisms
functionally and the answer is very
simple that provides a range of
expression to enable response to stress
so organisms with populations that are
diverse just through natural selection
of those cells that are most appropriate
for the challenge that they find those
will survive and reproduce they only
need to add natural selection within the
organism in this case to arrive at a
clear way in which the range of
expression can be used in turn to
produce functionality but then the
question is how do cells feed
information from the environment to
control the genome you see if we
represented a molecule as big as my hand
and you asked the question where is the
cell membrane in which that molecule
sits it would be somewhere up in
Aberdeen or down in Bordeaux cells are
that big viewed from a molecule so how
on earth in a signal right up at the
cell surface several on this scale
hundreds of miles away get transmitted
down to the genome to tell it what to do
and of course people once thought that
was impossible that's why people have
Richard Dawkins right and sealed off on
the outside world as what you can say
about the genome well the answer is that
physiologist and biochemists have
beautifully worked this out I'll take
only one example this happens to be an
example from one of my former
elaborate collaborators diction now
working in New York University and what
they did was to show that the entry of
calcium through some channels right at
the surface membrane so that's way up in
Aberdeen can then trigger a biochemical
cascade which then produces a molecule
that can be attached to one of the
motors that goes down on the tubules to
be transmitted right way down to the
nucleus and that can be that information
can be specific so the answer is the
microfilaments form the roadway the
communication line and it's possible
therefore for in this case the genome to
know about micro events right up there
in Aberdeen or way down in Bordeaux so
there's no there many other studies of
this kind I just quoted one so there's
no problem any longer in understanding
how cells can sense the environmental
challenge as they do for example with
the immune system and how that can be
triggered to produce change in the
genome and in gene expression and even
to direct mutation and that's the big
thing that was forbidden by the modern
synthesis new Darwinist view of
evolution and we all know how that
happens and it happens in many cases by
targeted hyper mutation I'm going to
give one example from the immune system
and then indicate with a few examples
how it also occurs in whole organisms
and how does it work
well immunologists have learn is very
many years if you take the sequence
either the genome sequence or the
protein sequence for an immunoglobulin
they're two parts
one V is the variable part of the
protein the other part which give this
immune globulin characteristic enables
it to functions named immunoglobulin
doesn't change the mutation but is
triggered by the signal in this case by
an antigen arriving of course is
restricted to the variable region that's
where the functionality comes in
it's stochastic so far as we know you
know as the wheel turns there and it's
random but what is not random is the
targeting it only to that region of the
genome now one other thing to say that
change in frequencies looks like a
simple curve here at the moment but that
change in frequency of course can be up
to a hundred thousand times normal even
up to a million times normal so it's a
huge hyper mutation if that was
happening in the genome as a whole the
organism wouldn't survive and you and I
would not survive because our immune
systems would not be able to be
sufficiently selective if you want to
follow up on that I got that particular
diagram from this beautiful review by
Odegard and shirts
as they say somatic hypermutation needs
to be targeted specifically to
immunoglobulin genes and moreover to
only the variable part of the
immunoglobulin gene it's not targeted
everywhere you can begin to see
therefore where my concept of there
being a kind of one I'd view the
situation a directional view is coming
from so and I see this as a bit like the
old fashioned fruit machines as a fruit
machine opened up to reveal these cogs
and wheels and of course what you used
to do was to put a coin or two in spin
the wheels hoping to get three lemons or
three pineapples or whatever it is and
of course if you've got two lemons let's
say and you wanted a third what you
would do be to hold the two lemons
constant you'd put more coins in to spin
the third wheel until eventually you've
got a lemon well of course you might
find you spend more money doing that
than what you get out evolution is a bit
different always wins
well not quite always of course species
die out and so on so you take my remark
there with a pinch of salt and now we
come to that's in of course evolution of
cellular genomic information in response
to stress in cells in a particular
organism that is not necessarily
transmitted down through future
generations now coming on to the last
examples I'm going to give in the talk
which is examples that organisms do
rearrange genomes and we've known that
they do so in response to stress we've
known that for more than seventy years
the great American biologist Barbara
McClintock showed that way back in the
1930s working on corn she was able to
watch how parts of course she didn't
know about DNA in those days not only
was a genetic code but she observed
parts of the chromosome here moving to
incorporate itself in a different
chromosome in corn in 1957 she was
warned that the papers she was
publishing on this were not to be
believed and who were better if she no
longer published on that thirty years
later the age of 81 1983 she received a
Nobel Prize precisely for mobile genetic
elements if anybody ever tells you that
the genome is actually isolated as
Richard Dawkins tells us from the
outside world the answer is it was shown
that is not as long ago as 70 years ago
and it won a very important Nobel Prize
from Edison why did the Nobel Prize
Committee end up giving her the prize
because everybody else had found it too
and she wrote a very perceptive article
in science this was her Nobel Prize
lecture
she wrote we will have a greater
appreciation of its epigenome
significance as a highly sensitive organ
of the cell she got the idea of write
something she didn't know what was
responding in those cells and enabling
their chromosomes to rearrange in
response to a challenge in the
environment if that sounds familiar
inheritance of acquired characteristics
you can see where I'm coming from and we
can prove that that must have happened
in evolution because if you go to the
paper published in nature on the
sequencing of the human genome
celebrated in 2001 with great fanfare on
both the American side think those are
the days of presidents like Bill Clinton
and over here it might have been Tony
Blair a car I think it must have been
you know they both announced this great
achievement at last we're reading the
book of life that genome with sequence
will deepen those papers you'll find a
very interesting comparison this is
actually from chromatin protein
sequences and each of these little icons
if you like is a particular protein
domain and of course has a particular
DNA sequence encoding for it each of
those is functional now the interesting
thing is you go from yeast to worm to
fly and right the way up to the human
you observe not just gradual
accumulation of point mutations whole
domains
have moved around Gino I'm going to
highlight them now they are ones that
have been as it were brought in by a
crucian by a response to the environment
a reorganization of the domains that
make up this kind of protein and here
they all are or many of them now what's
the significance of that I like to think
of it rather like giving to children
Lego bricks and to one child you give
the original Lego bricks the little ones
that had to be laborious we put together
to build an arch or a column or whatever
it might be as an architectural feature
and to the other child you give
preformed arches and you ask them to
build a bridge this is indeed instantly
is an image of a lego bridge you know it
is blindingly obvious that the child has
got the preformed bits will get there
fastest and that's exactly what
evolution has done
that's why evolution does what Eldridge
and Gould
showed way back in about 1972 with their
concept of punctuated equilibrium
because you see what the fossil record
shows us is that over long periods even
hundreds of millions of years species
can stay pretty constant that's the
period of stasis that there can be
periods ten million or so years in which
there's rapid mutation I think that
evolution is playing just like the
children with the Lego bricks and
getting there much faster so it's not as
the original neo Darwinist instances
said always gradual accumulation of
point mutations now there are examples
where that is true hemoglobins a very
good example where we can trace the
accumulation of point mutations the
point is it's not always like that
now one or two examples to finish with
I'm going to take this mostly from
bacteria this is a lovely example
where the response to stress leads in
this case in response to chemotherapy
drugs and antibiotics to the rapid
evolution of genomes change in response
to unfavorable environments and we know
as medical people but this is what's
giving the world a health scare the
antibiotics are producing precisely this
kind of response and I'll show in a
moment how rapid the change can be in
response to a challenge from the
environment at the level of bacteria and
this does it this is a study that's
published just a year or so ago it's
actually to a team working in ready
and what they did they took bacteria
that have got Swimmer for jelly swimming
around with their flagella waving around
to swim around and they removed the DNA
for one of the regulatory proteins in
the network switches the flagella
production on so you get bacteria with
no flagella we can't swim around you
then allow them to breed within four
days the flagella are back now remember
they didn't knock out the DNA for the
flagella themselves I think it had done
that you could predict it might be a
thousand years before they came back
four days how was that done a totally
different regulatory network normally
involved in nitrogen synthesis sorry
nitrogen metabolism and was as it were
recruited with indeed some mutations but
here's where the targeted hyper mutation
must be coming in because those
mutations weren't everywhere in a genome
which enabled that regulatory mechanism
that regulatory network to take over the
function or
triggering the production of the jelly
that's four days and that gives us pause
for thought and that's why bacteria can
manage to do things very quickly one
final example and this is from another
very recent paper quite a lot of this
work is very recent I'm referring you
see in this talk to work that was shown
way back 70 odd years ago as with
Barbara McClintock but also showing how
recent experimental work is fully
confirmed many of the things that she
and other biologists claimed was
incompatible with the standard theory of
evolution and to what Jack and his
colleagues conclude in this article in
PNAS is that cells possess specific
mechanisms to optimize their genome in
response to the environment so I'm going
to conclude now and leave plenty of time
for questions and comment and discussion
was the watchmaker blind well you know
what makers usually don't use both eyes
they are usually squinting down a tiny -
playing around with the mechanism to see
and so I rather think that we can say
that the watchmaker well he was one ID
new whereabouts in the genome he should
work and is another one again using the
one-eyed approach I think one-eyed
because of course it is not somebody
saying well we need to evolve arms and
legs and creatures that need arms and
legs that used to have things and
therefore we will do it the following
way
it's not full vision in the sense that
somebody can draw up the blueprint and
give that to the evolutionary process
the reason I call it one-eyed is that
organisms themselves did the seeing but
they didn't do so in a way that made it
possible to see immediately what to do
they saw how to harness stochasticity
with targeted mutation in order to
produce the consequences which we see
today which is easily provisioning
processes produced us so one final
inverted languages to the book that's
available at the back is only just being
published a month or so ago and you're
welcome to purchase copies or just take
notes down about it if you wish
after the Megatron discussion and at the
end of my talk I could say much more as
much more in the book but I hope I've
said enough to prevent you that the
world of physiology and medical research
is back and seen to be highly relevant
to the evolutionary process and
therefore to the study of evolutionary
biology thank you very much and I'm open
to questions criticisms comments and so
on thank you
