the shock is so great in quantum
mechanics that we still have not figured
out how to really process it how does
quantum mechanics confront our view of
reality even shattering it Amanda gter
science writer and author of trespassing
on Einstein's lawn dismantles long-held
Notions about quantum mechanics
proposing a revolutionary perspective
where observers don't just perceive
reality they actively participate in its
Creation in this episode we'll delve
into how our beliefs shape the quantum
World why decart's subject object split
is fundamentally flawed and how
emergence could redefine our scientific
understanding prepare to have your
concept of reality transformed as we
venture into the quantum realm where
nothing is quite as it
seems probably the most formative
conversation that I had even though it
was a very very brief
conversation was one with the physicist
John Wheeler so wheeler was this
legendary American physicist who you
know this is who came up with the terms
black hole and Wormhole and he did
revolutionary work in in uh everything
general relativity Nuclear Physics
quantum mechanics and had a very sort of
profound philosophical mind but also
spoke in this very enigmatic Yoda like
way
and um I had the chance to meet
him well this is a whole long story but
I my father and I snuck into a physics
conference that was being held in in
Wheeler's honor it was in honor of his
90th birthday at Princeton and this is
in 2002 I believe and it was this
amazing conference and all the you know
best physicists were up there giving
talks and everything and Wheeler was
just sort of sitting at the front and
you know he was n at this point he was a
bit hard of hearing but he was still
deeply obsessed with all of these big
questions about you know how come
existence and why the quantum and all of
the questions that I think you Kurt are
interested in and so you know at some
point after the talks we kind of waited
our turn and we got to go up and talk to
him and and Wheeler had had this idea
that somehow observers are implicated in
reality in the nature of reality and the
question that I really wanted to ask him
was if observers create reality where do
The Observers come from so I asked him
this we had to repeat it a few times
because he was a bit hard of hearing and
then he said the universe is a
self-excited
circuit okay and then we said okay and
then my dad and I were very obsessed
with this question about what is
nothingness and Wheeler had talked a lot
about nothingness and so our second
question was you know does everything
come from nothing
and he said the boundary of a boundary
is
zero and we said okay thanks and we
walked away and then we were sort of
what the hell just
happened so he wheeler had
basically presented us with these kind
of riddles and um I in a certain way
have spent like much of my career trying
to figure out what he meant by those
phrases so I think that was definitely
the shortest strangest but most influen
conversation that I had so what's meant
by it's a self- excited circuit and the
boundary of a boundary is zero how's
that at all connected to your question
so wheeler passed away in in 2008 um but
he throughout his whole career had kept
journals these very very detailed
journals every conversation he ever had
every thought he ever had are in these
notebooks um and he donated them all to
the American philosophical Society
library in Philadelphia so you can go
there and read through all the journals
so I spent a very very long time combing
through these journals trying to figure
out what was he really getting at and
yeah so the idea of a a self- excited
Universe I mean in a nutshell he had
this notion that well first of all he
saw quantum mechanics as as giving us a
kind of participatory reality as he
would put it where you don't have some
reality that's just sitting out there
some particular way independent of
observers but Observers
and the universe sort of come together
and participate in the creation of
reality and reality is sort of ever on
the make in this story and so he wanted
to give a story there's a famous diagram
he drew that was a u the letter U with a
an eyeball at the top and this is
supposed to to capture this idea of a
self- excited universe so the U is for
universe and the idea is kind of the
universe comes into being and gives rise
to an observer and then the Observer
looks back in time this is related to
Wheeler's delayed Choice experiment so
the the observer looks back in time and
through the act of a Quantum measurement
participates in creating the very
universe that created The Observer so
it's this kind of strange Loop and this
was his idea of a a self- excited
Universe which he never fully was able
to flesh out but that was the he called
it like an idea for an idea and then the
boundary of boundary is zero this is a a
trickier one there's a sense in which
it's a it's a very basic um Concept in I
guess topology that once you bound a
space you you don't have to put a
boundary on the boundary the boundary of
the boundary is always equal to zero
which apparently you can actually derive
a lot of physics out of this very sort
of tological statement but he wanted to
say something a little deeper with it
like that there are ways he called it a
principle of austerity that there are
ways that you can get so much out of so
little so he he he was trying to reduce
physics essentially to something like
the identity of like Z equals z and then
be able to say that you could derive all
of physics from the I mean this was just
one program that he worked on that again
it was an idea for an idea yeah I mean
it's not that I don't think these were
the answers but but they were um very
inspiring to me in my thinking and also
just sort of presenting physics as this
great mystery that needs to be solved
John Wheeler one of the most influential
physicists of the 20th century proposed
a controversial idea that physicists are
still debating to this day the idea that
we live in a participatory Universe
wheeler said to imagine a cosmic version
of the double slit experiment where
light from a distant quazar passes by a
gravitationally lensing Galaxy it can go
either to the left or to the right of
the Galaxy now here's the twist we could
choose to measure which path the light
took or we could choose to observe an
interference pattern after the light has
already passed the Galaxy but this
choice where we determine if a photon is
a so-called particle or so-called wave
is made billions of years later after
the light began its Journey this idea is
captured in his self- excited diagram
where the universe creates Observer
participan which in turn creates
information which creates the universe
are we pass passive observers of a
predetermined universe or active
participants in an Ever evolving
interdependent web that we call
reality so the participatory universe is
just one of several interpretations of
quantum mechanics can you explain what
are these so-called interpretations of
quantum mechanics and then what is the
participatory universe and transition
into
cubism yeah so quantum mechanics
it's funny I just watched there's a a
mathematical physicist Marcus applebe
who gave this talk at Dartmouth College
last week this past week who he was
comparing our understanding of quantum
mechanics to long covid so he was sort
of saying that you know there's been all
these Revolutions in science over the
centuries and normally it's you know
cernus comes along and you know it says
oh my God everything you thought was
wrong and and there's this initial deep
deep shock which is sort of a disease
that you have to get over eventually you
just get over it and you you move on and
he said quantum mechanics is is unlike
that because you know it's been well
over a hundred years and you know and
and we're still suffering from from the
disease he called it long classicality
interesting so it's the just the shock
is is so great in quantum mechanics that
we still have not figured out how to
really process it and and because of
that we have all these different
interpretations that try to give
almost a narrative account of what the
mathematical formalism of quantum
mechanics is trying to tell us about
reality um and so you have you know the
many worlds interpretation you have
objective collapse you have relational
quantum mechanics you have Boman
mechanics you have cubism so there's all
these different interpretations that
that try
to say what it is that quantum mechanics
is really really telling us and they
defin they they differ substantially I
mean it's sort of remarkable that you
can give such radically different
interpretations of the same Theory um
and in a sense
it's philosophical temperament it's what
what do you want your reality to be and
then you try to construct a a story
that's consistent with quantum mechanics
and the thing about quantum mechanics is
it makes it very very hard to give a
consistent story you have to
I mean I think the the central lesson is
whatever the story is it can't be
classical physics it we can't go back so
something has to give and so for
instance people who like you know bowan
mechanics or something they I would say
I I imagine they would agree really want
something as close to a classical
reality as possible so they they really
want there to be a a freestanding
reality that just is some particular way
and if we have any uncertainty it's just
because we don't know what the truth is
but there is a truth out there with a
capital T and but you know when you look
at what you have to do the kind of
contortions you have to twist yourself
into to say anything that I mean they're
so extreme you have to give up on
relativity you have to allow for you
know crazy non-local effects you have to
allow for what they call
non-contextuality you have to or sorry
you have to allow for contextuality um
what you end up with is still not a
classical reality it's something
incredibly incredibly strange the same
with many worlds many worlds also kind
of has a
classical impulse there um but the price
that you pay is this you know infinite
number of of universes where everything
that can happen is happening and an
infinite number of you in all these
universes so so the point is these
interpretations make it very clear that
whatever Quantum reality is it's not
it's not your grandfather's
reality what's interesting is he called
it long classicality so he sees
classical well our adherence to thinking
classically as the disease yes he
doesn't think of quantum mechanics as
the disease that needs to be tamed no no
I mean I think and that's that's the
real Spirit of of cubism which we can
talk about is cubism is sort of saying
okay let's let's Embrace what quantum
theory is saying and and and just get
over these kind of classical impulses
that we have so there's someone named
Richard Hamming I'm not sure if you know
who that person is he's a physicist
engineer has a fantastic series on
YouTube about learning it's from the 80s
I believe it's just a fantastic watch he
said that people form their
interpretations of quantum mechanics
based on their prior metaphysical
beliefs so he said this is true of
Einstein and this is true of bore
Christopher had this lecture on
cubism he said that what was different
about cubism is that it started with
let's take Quantum mechanic seriously
and then let's see what occurs from
there let's let that dictate our
interpretation rather than our prior
beliefs dictating it at least that's
what he said but that's how most
scientists to view their work is they're
the rational person who goes in without
preconception then and then I let the
data tell me and I am so disjoint from
my eego that I'll follow the data
wherever it goes okay so I I take that
with a grain of salt when he says that
you know the history much more so please
outline what cubism is and if my
reiterating of Christopher's story is AP
yeah well it's funny I mean to defend
him a little I would just say I mean I
think he does he does sort of freely
admit a certain philosophical
temperament so you know he talks about
really wanting Free Will for instance
and and really in that sense not wanting
a block un Universe story you know where
the world just is sitting there
deterministically and and just sort of
is some particular way and and our
actions have no no real Hold On The
World um so I think I think he would
acknowledge some of his sort of
philosophical you know biases in that in
that sense and he also you know to
connect back to what we were talking
about earlier he studied a bit with
wheeler when wheeler was at the
University of Texas at Austin so this is
Leon wheeler career um Chris fooks was
was there in Texas and so I think he was
very deeply influenced by wheeler and
then also he read a lot of William James
and early American pragmatist philosophy
and is very influenced by that too so I
think that's sort of wonderful wonderful
where that's coming from yeah so cubism
yeah I mean
cubism so so yeah what what Chris to say
is
that the name is similar to to KFC where
it originally stood for Kentucky Fried
Chicken but at some point they just
decided to it's just KFC it doesn't
stand for anything so cubism is like
that it originally stood for Quantum
basanis but now it's just cubism okay
well why don't you start with it
historically because why was it called
Quantum basanis and why did it
change yeah so quantum mechanics is very
much about probabilities right classical
mechanics just gave us values for things
you know this is the position this is
the momentum and quantum mechanics gives
us probabilities for what we might
measure and that's part of why it's so
strange as a as a theory because
probabilities sort of normally are
thought of as reflections of some kind
of ignorance on the part of the Observer
but these probabilities seem to sort of
be fundamental to the world in some way
and so then the question is are we
talking about the Observer are we
talking about the world and then you get
into all these deep questions and so how
to understand probabilities you know the
the there's a something called the wave
function and in quantum mechanics which
is the most you can say about the state
of some Quantum system is encoded in
this wave function but the wave function
just gives
you probability or gives you a way of
getting probabilities out of it and so
so how to understand probability becomes
really essential to how to think about
quantum mechanics and so there are
different philosophies of probability
and so you could say you know I think
probably the intuitive one that most
people have is what's known as the
frequentist interpretation of
probability so if I say you know the
odds of a coin flip Landing heads is 50%
what do I really mean by that well I
mean if I flipped the coin an infinite
number of times it would come out to
5050 right um and that's like
philosophically a really
complicated story to defend because
first of all nobody can do anything an
infinite number of times second of all
like why does that tell you anything
about what's going to happen the one
time that you do it and then also what's
the causal story you're giving about why
that probability has any hold on what
the coin actually does and so then
people talk about like the coin has a
propensity you know because it's a an
unbiased coin it has a propensity to do
a certain thing and then it's like now
you're like imbuing the world with
propensity like it's just like a whole
complicated thing as we're talking about
probability and wave functions later
Amanda will discuss the born rule but a
preview is warranted
now the born rule is something you'll
hear plenty about in quantum mechanics
and what it is is a method from
translating from the wave function to
probabilities also the topological
principle of the boundary of a boundary
is zero has deep-seated Connections in
physics and we'll explore that later
Bourne proposed that the probability of
finding a particle is the absolute
square of its wave function this forms a
bridge between these abstract so-called
wave functions and measurable
probabilities though the rigorous
treatment of this involves fancy
machinery called projection valued
measures and density functions that's
for another episode though now the
boundary principle where the boundary of
a boundary is zero stems from
combinatorics so counting principles in
something called homology in
differential geometry which is the
language of Einstein this becomes the
statement that the differential of a
differential is zero also known as the
poer Lemma when applied to General
relativity's remon curvature tensor it
leads to energy and momentum
conservation in SpaceTime in
electromagnetism it gives us Maxwell's
equations these principles demonstrate
how the cosmos speaks an obscure yet
simple
language it's just like a whole
complicated thing and so a very
different way of looking at probability
is is basian probability where you just
say I have some prior expectations based
on my prior experiences flipping coins
and then I'm going to you know assign a
probability and I'm going to flip the
coin and then based on the outcome I'm
going to update my prior
probabilities for the next round and
that and so then now you can talk about
like
well if I take that story objectively
then I would say the more I learn the
more I act on the world and get
consequences of my actions and update my
beliefs I like inch closer and closer to
some truth about what the coin really is
right um and then that's problematic too
and so then there's a a variant of
basanis called personalist basanis okay
which says I'm never really trying to
get to the truth of the capital T I'm
just trying to make my own beliefs
consistent with one
another um and and I'm doing that
through acting on the world and then
updating and but I'm not claiming that
my beliefs have some antic hold on how
what the world has to do um as a result
and aticle just means it's corresponding
to some capital T truth out there yeah
either corresponding to or compelling
the world to do something um a law of
physics would compel the world to act a
certain way or something um so cubism
came from a personalist basian
interpretation of probability so the
idea was let's treat probabilities in
quantum mechanics in this way and and
that way you don't run a foul of things
the noo the like a you know a bell
inequality or something like that where
if you really think that like basically
like if you really want to say my the
probabilities I
assign or the uncertainties that I have
come from my own ignorance about the
actual state but the actual state is
something I just may not know what it is
um you know we can do these experiment
these Bell experiments that show you you
get into trouble if you think about it
it that way um so just a moment are you
suggesting that Quantum that cubism I'm
not sure if we're at the point where
we've transitioned but let's just say
it's cubism does cubism get over
so-called get over Bell's theorem or
Bell's in equality does it get over it
somehow does it bypass it does it give
it a different interpretation like what
does cubism have to say about Bell's
theorem yeah so so the idea of bell
Serum is like you have multiple
assumptions that you put in and those
assumptions are like locality and
realism okay in in Belle's
version and so you say I'm going to
assume the world is local so things
there's no spooky action in a distance
and I'm going to assume realism meaning
like things have some state in and of
themselves regardless of
measurement I'm going to assume those
things and then I'm going
to calculate like an upper limit on how
distant um events might be correlated
this is how Belle like worked it out
right so then he says given those
assumptions there's some upper limit for
those correlations and then you run the
experiment and you see it violates that
upper limit the it's much more strongly
correlated than that and
so the world and Quantum the Theory
violate Bell inequality and with that it
it's such a complicated way of talking
about it this is how physicists talk
about it but it's like this weird double
negative it's like hard to think about
but the point is just that the
world and quantum theory can't be both
local and
realist yeah at least one of those
assumptions have to be false one of
those assumptions has to be false but it
doesn't tell you which one you like it's
up to you to pick pick which one you're
willing to give up
and this by the way gets like is said
wrong all the time and it makes me
crazy it's like one of my like Pet
Peeves in science journalism because
people say like oh it proves that the
the quantum mechanics is non-local but
like that's absolutely not true it's
like you could have locality or you
could have realism it just proves you
can't have both um
so so one thing that many people do is
say okay I'll give up
locality um but then you have a real
like problem I mean you have to give a
story of that you know you end up viol
like you don't have relativity anymore
because you don't have lorenza Marius
anymore and you have a preferred frame
and it's this whole complicated thing
where that
nobody's given like a convincing account
of what what you do if you give up
locality in that way and then it's like
so weird that
like the world's non-local but only a
little and only in these rare circum I
don't know that to me that's like not
not a convincing story so the other
option is you say I'm going to give up
realism I'm going to give up this idea
that there are outcomes that are just
determinately sitting out there and um
so that's what cubism does so cubism
it's not getting around you know Belle
it it's just the choice that cubism
makes is to give up the realism not not
the locality so cubism is still local
in your book just to bring it to
something that the viewers may want to
look up there's a book that you have
called trespassing on Einstein's lawn
and we covered it in the introduction
but please outline for us in the book
it's a personal Quest that you embark on
with your father and I want you to tell
us about this fatherdaughter Dynamic and
how that influenced the writing
especially the writing of
physics yeah so the book
tells this story it's sort of this weird
mashup of like a physics book and a
memoir and um it tells this story of
like when I was um it starts when I'm
like 15 years old and um my father who
was this very like had a very Zen Guru I
mean still does has a very Zen Guru kind
of vibe about him um you know took me
out to to dinner at a Chinese restaurant
and and says how how would you define
nothing and we end up having this like
whole deep conversation I mean I was
like this really rebellious kid I was
not taking physics I was like in like
remedial science like I was like failing
math like you know I was like not the
person you would like talk about physics
with for sure um but I think I I think I
always kind of had
like philosophical leanings and I think
he sensed that and he did as well and so
um so he asked me this question about
nothing and we ended up having this
whole long conversation he had had this
idea that he was very excited about
about how to define
nothing it's usually defined in the
negative so you would say like nothing
is the absence of everything um and then
if you try to ask a question like how do
you get something from nothing you're
sort of like foiled from the beginning
because you've defined nothing as
like know something and so like how
could you have something so he wanted to
Define nothing in the positive and say
what it is not what it isn't and so he
had had this idea that like nothingness
is a state of complete sameness that
extends without bound infinitely that
that would be nothing um and so I mean
this is not physics this was just like a
an idea um but
we started talking about it and it just
triggered this like insane thing where
it was like well
you know if the universe came from
nothing like how do how do scientists
think that that happened and like I
don't know let's do a little research
and like you know yes cut to like many
many years later I'm like still doing
the research but basically we like just
went on this like insane Journey that we
really like doubled down on of like
trying to understand teaching ourselves
physics and trying to understand you
know cosmology and and and physicists
think about all of these ideas and then
crashing conferences like I was telling
you and then I I had always wanted to be
a writer but at some point I sort of
realized you know we I snuck us into
these conferences by claiming to be a
journalist and then I was like oh
there's actually this field called like
science journalism where you can do this
and then you know like when when we have
a question like we can just ask the
physicist like we don't have to
read popular books to try to find this
one little thing just like ask somebody
so basically like little by little this
like fake career that I had invented for
myself like morphed into an actual
career in science journalism and then um
and then I it it was the dream I mean I
got to interview all of these amazing
people and and so the book just like
tells this whole story but the physics
part of it is basically we realized
early on that
um that physicists have way of defining
what's real in like a pretty rigorous
way so I always thought this question of
like what's real seemed kind of vague
and philosophical but um you can define
something as real in physics if it's
invariant in any reference frame um and
so with that definition in mind we were
able to sort of like you know we made
this list of like here are all the
things that you that could be the
ingredients of reality so like particles
fields forces space time um the universe
whatever and the Wii is your father in
you yeah um and so we were like in a
restaurant we wrote this on a napkin and
then we were like okay we're going to
just figure out like each one of these
things is it real or not and then we
start going through it you know and that
took us through these Amazing Ideas in
at The Cutting Edge of physics and
little by little it was like Crossing
one after the next office list and
realizing like none of these things are
invariant but what is invariant is this
state of nothingness that my dad had
like started with like that by
definition is kind of like the ultimate
invariant and so anyway so it became it
became this whole uh this whole wild
Journey but through it like I got to
really learn some like deep physics and
so I wanted to take the
reader you know I didn't feel like I was
in this position most like popular
science books are like written in this
like Professor model you know you know
where it's like let me tell you how the
world Works um like the reader the
student and the the writer the professor
but it was like you know I had come into
this as like this kid who was just like
messing around and like sneaking into
conferences and like I I was in no
position to tell anyone you know here's
how the world is so instead I was like
let me just tell you the story of what I
did and like you can learn the stuff
that I learned with me um so that's how
I wrote it I remember watching a of
yours and saying that there are these
unconnected facts when you first learned
physics plenty of new terminology it's
difficult to make them into a coherent
framework and then the Insight dawned on
you or was given to you about what is
real is what's invariant in any
reference frame and then that helped you
crystallize and connect different facts
yes were there any other insights that
helped you see almost all of physics or
almost all of philosophy perhaps because
you have a degree in philosophy almost
all of a certain field was made much
more simple and more easy to be digested
because of a single Insight I mean
that's the one like that that
Insight it sounds so simple but there's
no way I would have learned the physics
I learned without it because it just it
cuts right through like I mean if that's
what you're obviously if what you're
interested in is like engineering
something this is not this is not the
insight for you but but if what you're
interested in is like what's real um you
know this idea of like what's real is
what's invariant it just it's exactly
what you said it like cuts through all
the complication and lets you see what's
important so like for instance um I
remember coming across like Stephen
Hawkings work great and like obviously
Stephen Hawkings was like the most
famous physicist since Einstein and and
everyone's heard of Hawking if you ask
them like what did he do that was so
important like people kind of know like
it might be like something with black
holes and then it's like even if you
know like okay he discovered the black
holes like
radiate it's like it's not obvious why
that's such a big deal all right black
holes radiate like we thought they were
black they're not really black like yeah
and even if they're not black they're
still mostly black even if they do
radiate yeah exactly like for you know a
long long millions of years they're
going to be pretty much you know dark
dark dark brown um but yes exactly and
it pales in comparison to thetion disc
which is around it anyhow right right
which exactly so like you could imagine
being like all right that's cool but
like with this idea in mind of like
things are real if they're invariant
when you look at what's really happening
in the situation with like Hawking
radiation these are particles that are
being created at the Horizon of a black
hole The Horizon of a black hole is not
invariant so if you're outside the black
hole which means you're in like an
accelerated state of motion from a
relativity perspective because you have
to like keep yourself out um then
there's a horizon it's very real to you
if you fall in you're an inertial
observer in like a uniform motion you
just sail right through there's no
Horizon it doesn't exist so the Horizon
is not
invariant
and what that means is these particles
of Hawking radiation which are created
by the Horizon are also not invariant so
so if you're an accelerated Observer
outside these particles exist if you're
falling in these particles don't exist
and so all of a sudden you have this
scenario which has never happened before
Hawking where particles which is
supposed to be like if you had to pick
one ingredient of like what's everything
made of what is stuff like what am I
what is this what right it's
particles they're not invariant so
they're not ultimately real and we were
able to like cross that off the list and
that is a huge deal it's just an example
of like being able to look at something
that's like this really complicated
physics that you might just be like oh I
all right that's weird um and be like oh
I see what's happening here and this is
a big deal yes so this Insight is it
what you would say allowed you as
someone who doesn't have a background in
math or physics when ordinarily you need
one of those to understand High LEL
physics or ideally both is it this
Insight that which is real is invariant
in any reference frame that helped you
yes 100% so that was a serendipitous
Insight if you were to engineer such an
insight to someone who's listening maybe
that Insight resonates with them maybe
it doesn't but they're looking for such
a level of insight yeah how should they
go about getting this piece of
information or this different
perspective that would align different
views and align different pieces of
terminology help them grasp it yeah
that's really interesting I mean you
have to figure out what question you're
trying to answer um because the question
we were trying to answer is
like what is something right we had come
up with like this idea of what is
nothing and now we needed to know what
is something um which is another way of
saying like what is real what's the
stuff of the world and so by giving this
definition oh something is real if it's
invariant then we had this way of
cutting through all the complicated
stuff and was seeing what we needed to
see to answer our question so I think if
you just have maybe you have a totally
different question but whatever the
question is is going to define the thing
that you need to look for and then
that's going to let you cut through
because if you're not trying to like do
science as as a working scientist every
day in the lab is trying to like just do
something if you just like are trying to
ask some kind of philosophical question
about like what does this all mean then
the question should steer how you make
your way through all the science right
right so there's this word that keeps
coming up philosophy or philosophers so
many people see philosophy and physics
as distinct some people see them as
overlapping and those people tend to be
philosophers of physics surprise
surprise so help me understand this
amorphous perimeter between physics and
philosophy how do you see
it yeah so I don't think there's any
real difference between the two and I
think the reason it seems like there's a
difference between the
two is
because okay so for the most part we're
all operating with a philosophy if you
think you're not using philosophy is
you're just wrong I mean like so Neil
wrong Amanda gter said it yeah that's a
point if you think you're not using
philosophy you're probably using bad
philosophy I don't think I'm the first
person that said that but um but I but I
buy it um so like for the most part the
philosophy that we inherited from like
17th century thinkers like Alo dekart
like the start of that was the start of
modern science it came out of a
philosophy like very specific
philosophical
ideas that philosophy
underlies most of everyday science um
and in most of our everyday lives which
is like where we can use classical
physics that philosophy works well
enough and so we think it makes it seem
like you don't need philosophy you could
do science like independent of
philosophy but it's just because your
philosophy is like good enough that you
don't that you can like keep it in the
background and not think about it and
what happens when you get to like
starting with relativity but then like
even more so in quantum mechanics you
you find yourself in these places that
are very far from our everyday
experience so like you know extreme
gravitational situations speeds very
close to the speed of light or scales
that are like you know getting
comparable to like a plank length um
right at those in those
regimes it's not just the physics that
breaks down it's our philosophy that
breaks down that 17th century philosophy
doesn't work anymore and so all of a
sudden you feel like you oh my God I
have to confront not only my
understanding of phys but also my
philosophical assumptions and it's the
reason you have to confront both is
because they're all mixed up from the
beginning it's just that like you were
able to pretend that they were separate
so I think you know and Bell's theorem
which we were talking about is like a
perfect example like that's like a key
result in quantum mechanics right and
that led to like it's not just
philosophical it's like it led to
Quantum Computing Quantum cryptography
teleportation like all these um Quantum
Technologies that we have that came out
of out of work from from Bell's theorem
but Bell's theorem is a theorem about
realism and locality which are
metaphysical philosophical assumptions
that you're making about so you're
testing your philosophy and finding this
philosophical world view can't hold and
then like where do we go from there um
so like is that physics well yeah
because you have to run a physics
experiment but is it philosophy yeah
you're testing metaphysical assumptions
like there's no way to distinguish the
two at that level so I really think that
the big takeaway is like they're always
in combination with one another and and
honestly like all the best deepest
thinking physicists like Einstein and
bore and Wheeler they they that's how
they were thinking they were thinking
about the philosophy and the physics
together because you can't separate the
two and and if you do then you're just
you're just working under all these
assumptions that you're not
acknowledging basically okay so you're
just philosophizing with physics it's
just that you're unaware of it yes I see
okay so let's continue philosophizing
there's there's a phrase Quantum state
which most people think of as the wave
function so that's an embedded question
to this you can distinguish the two if
you like but some people say the quantum
state is
informational some people say the
quantum state is knowledge based or
epistemic is the fancy word
or that it's belief based or doxastic is
the fancy word or they'll say that it's
metaphysical like there's something real
that it corresponds to so information
knowledge metaphysical and and doxastic
so belief based yeah what would be the
difference between these for Quantum
States like different interpretation how
different interpretations see that yeah
what is meant when someone says the
quantum state is just informational or
someone else says no you're wrong the
quantum state is episte
no you're wrong Quantum state is
doxastic no you're wrong it's actually
metaphysical yeah yeah I mean this is
this is like the the thing that all
these different interpretations like
disagree on is exactly like that's the
heart of it is like how would you
understand the quantum state or a wave
function um so like if I if I take it to
be a metaphysical thing like there's
actually a wave fun like that is that is
you know reality is this wave function
well then you're like ever already in
many worlds person so the idea is like
the universe just is this Quantum State
that's like evolving in this Hilbert
space which is you know this
mathematical space and it's just this
you know Vector in Hilbert space and
that's all there is uhhuh so it's a
realist view it's a realist view yes
yeah is that what you said realist view
yes yeah yes yeah so paradoxically
enough even though it sounds the most
anti-realist of almost any of the
interpretations the ever writing the
Multiverse from quantum mechanics is a
realist interpretations interpretation
of quantum mechanics yeah it's a funny
like yes that that's definitely correct
I mean it's taking the wave fun this
mathematical object to be the real thing
um like sort of ironically that ends up
making like all the stuff that we would
normally sort of think of as real in our
everyday lives not real yes like
interestingly enough in the evering case
unicorns are real so it's just there
would have to be some other Universe
where un yeah right sure but unicorns
are actually real and so it's quite
unintuitive to to call it real but in
the technical sense it's a realist
interpretation yes yes um yeah if I
think it
is I mean so objective collapse would be
another theory that's realist in that
way where you would say the quantum
state is a real thing or at least is a
representation of a real thing um no I
think they would say the quantum state
is a real thing the wave function is a
real
thing
um but at certain scales like for
whatever reason either like gravity
comes into play this what Penrose would
say or
um I don't know if there's a certain
amount of Deco I don't know these
theories well enough to say but like at
some for some reason at some scale this
thing which is actually real actually
collapses um and then you get some some
classical outcome in some sense um so
that's another way of taking it to be
real without being like ever readying
about it so if you're ever ready and you
say it never collapses it's just like
the way function is eternal reality
great now the information people would
be who some people say the quantum state
is just about information maybe it's a
subset of knowledge or a subset of
belief I mean I think probably carll's
interpretation of um like relational
quantum mechanics would be that sort of
a thing where you say I mean he would
say this is also a little related to to
Everett where Quantum states are
relative States um so in Everett like
the big wave function the the ultimate
one is is real and absolute and
invariant um so that's the real thing um
but then there's all these like relative
wave functions within that and so then
relli does away with the big real
absolute thing but just deals in
relative so so the idea being like you
and I don't have to have the same wave
function for the same object so I can
describe an electron with a wave
function you could describe an electron
with a wave function but based on the
information that we have about the
electron if we have different
information we can give different
Quantum States for that thing um so so I
think that would be a very
information based approach and this
becomes really relevant because there
are these paradoxes like the viger's
friend Paradox if you don't mind can you
outline viger's friend yeah so it's this
very
mind-bending Paradox where let's say
okay you're my friend Kurt and you go
into a lab and you're going to measure
you have a cubit so like you know a a
Quantum system that can be in one state
or other and it's an electron that can
be spin up or spin down along some axis
and um and you're going to make a
measurement and and say you know the
electron spin up or it's spin down
but I'm vigner and I'm standing outside
the lab and the lab is like a completely
isolated
system
so from my
perspective quantum mechanics should
tell me that you as a physical system
and the electron as a physical system if
you interact you just become Tangled
with each other and you just end up in
this big superposition
of uh Kurt has seen the electron spin up
and the electron is spin up plus Kurt
has seen the electron has spin down and
the electron is spin down and then I can
make a measurement and then I'll find
like one of those or the other um so
it's a scaled up version of shinger cat
it's just instead of the cat it's you
and then you have another friend who's
wondering well what's going to happen
with the super position like the cat's
in the box but then shinger is in a box
too so yeah it's like these nested
measurements and like you you what you
realize is like the friend can assign
one state to the thing like the friend
says the electron is spin up that's the
state um whereas like vigner is like no
the electron's still in a super position
of up and down and so is the friend um
and so then you're like well if the
quantum state is supposed to like say
what the state of the electron is whose
Quantum state is right because I have
one and you have one and they're
different um so it sort of points to
this fact that you probably can't treat
Quantum States as as not relative in
some sense um as being absolute like
this is the Quantum state of the
electron and so different
interpretations have to get around this
in different ways
um and so like many worlds like Everett
would just say well no worries like in
one
Universe uh you know one outcome happens
in the other Universe the other outcome
happens and we're always going to end up
in the universes where we agree on our
things and so like you just sort of
sweep all the disagreements into
different universes and then it's fine
um but you know or you could have
objective collaps people would say
well a friend is a big macroscopic
system and when they make the
measurement the thing actually collapses
and so vigner can't really describe it
as being a big superposition because
that would just be wrong um do you have
yeah okay let's get well basically what
I was going to ask is do you have a
favorite interpretation but maybe you're
about to answer that I'm sympathetic to
to rll's relational quantum mechanics
um but U but cubism I think would be my
like preferred um
I don't you know as a journalist like
I'm I'm supposed to be like neutral
trying to give this classical third
person story of like what's really H
what's the real state of the electron I
think it's just the wrong question um
and again it just goes back to these
like 17th century philosophical ideas
that we have about what how reality
Works um and so I would prefer to you
know not suffer from long classicality
and just say you know the world is is
quantum and um and so I can write down
one Quantum State and you can write down
another quantum state so so what what
cubism says is my my Quantum state is
not a description of the thing so if
we're talking about shirting or cat and
I say I'm going to write down a Quantum
state that has the cat in a superp
position of dead and alive that is not a
description in cubism of the cat that
tells me nothing about the state of the
cat hm what it tells me is about the
state of my various degrees of belief
about what might happen when I interact
with the
cat okay so it's a very different story
um it's not describing the cat it's
describing my beliefs and
then but the but the sort of interesting
content comes from the fact
that while I can have whatever beliefs I
want
um my beliefs have to be related to each
other in a consistent way so it's not
completely unconstrained it's not like
well I believe anything I want you know
what happens in cubism is the born rule
which is this like sort of fundamental
rule in in Quantum Mechanics for how
normally the born Ru is taken to be like
how you get probabilities out of the the
wave function so like you square the
amplitude of the wave function and that
gives you the probability that's the
born rule
cubism sort of mathematically rewrites
the born rule in terms of just how
different probabilities for different
measurements you can make on the same
system relate to each
other and this is a really really
interesting move
because what it says is like the
difference between quantum mechanics and
classical mechanics is in classical
mechanics I can make I can measure
anything of a system I can measure its
position and its momentum no big deal in
quantum mechanics you can't do that
there's certain measurements you can
make that clude you from making other
measurements at the same time and and
that ends up being like really
fundamental that that's how you get the
uncertainty principle and all this stuff
so so that's the like Central difference
and and so because I can make you know
if I'm vigner I can
measure I can open the lab and then say
hey Kurt what did you get when you
measured your electron that's one
measurement I can make or I can measure
the whole U and the electron in like a
superposition basis and get an
interference pattern and I and so I can
do these different types of measurements
but I can't do them both um and so my
beliefs about what I think I'm going to
see when I do one type of measurement is
constrained by how it's related to the
beliefs about what I could do if I take
these other
measurements and and that constraint
ends up being in cubism like sort of the
the real content of quantum mechanics so
it's just really interesting because
it's a totally different way of looking
at at the physics well the word belief
here must be used in some abstract sense
because if I was to ask my mom mom look
I have a quantum mechanical experiment
it's either going to be spin up or spin
down what are your beliefs about this
what are the probabilities you're
signing to this she's going to cook me
food and she's going to think that I've
lost my mind it's a good mom yes exactly
she'll have no idea what I mean I said
the word quantum mechanics I I she has
no beliefs about that I said spin up
spin now she doesn't know maybe she
would say 50/50 but that may just happen
to be actually what the probabilities
are but it could be 75 25 or what have
you could be 99 whatever so what is
meant when we say look the way function
represents our beliefs we didn't have
any beliefs about wave functions prior
to wave functions being invented in the
1900s and presumably the world was still
operating prior to then so what is meant
by the word belief yeah so what's sort
of remarkable is really just means
belief um it does it means like a numer
it's a belief that you can put a number
on so so I mean that's like the bare
minimum I guess um but it really is your
belief so it you it could be it could be
your mom coming to if she's willing to
put some numbers on it the thing is is
that the born
rule what she has to do is
say okay I believe you know I 90% that
this would happen if I did this I
believe 10% that this happen if I did
this and I believe 20% this would but
then if she plugs all those beliefs in
the BN R is going to
either say you know proceed or like stop
and rethink so if it doesn't fit this
equation it's the born Ru is going to
say hang on your beliefs are not
self-consistent so you're not just
referring to that they don't add up to
one you're referring to something else
it's related to the fact that they don't
add up to one but it's
yeah they've Rewritten it in this way
that they they have to yeah okay so the
fact that they have to add up to one is
like the law of total probability right
if the world were
classical that's all that's that would
be the the the the whole constraint you
would just need the law of probability
total
probability the born rule is an addition
a slight addition to the to the law of
total probability so it's classical
probability Theory plus this one EXT
constraint which is like an empirical
fact that comes from the fact
essentially that like Plank's constant
is not zero
so again it comes from the fact that our
probabilities don't add in the way that
they did classically like that's what we
see in the double slit experiment it's
like your probabilities right there's
interference with the probabilities yeah
they interfere and so Richard fan was
like this is the whole mystery of
quantum mechanics is like why do
probabilities not add in a classical way
it's it's similar to like the whole
mystery of Relativity is like why do
veloc velocities not add in a classical
way so you
say okay what I have to do to make my
beliefs consistent is it has to conform
to the law of total probability plus the
born R yes now Amanda I still don't see
how this helps my mom because my mom
will say okay okay Kurt okay son 65 25
I'm like Mom that doesn't add to one
we'll normalize it mom she's okay okay I
don't know what that means and then
she'll just throw out some other numbers
how is she supposed to know if it adds
up to the born rule how am I supposed to
know it can't be belief means belief in
it does though it does help me through
this the amazing thing about cubism is
like they mean what they say it really
is um so so the idea is the Boral is
going to
say look if you were if you were
betting if you were placing bets like
think about it like you're betting on
like that outcomes of all the different
types of measurements you can make on
this system you're saying like if I
choose to measure position I'm going to
get this if I choose to measure momentum
I'm going to get this and then you're
putting like a dollar amount sure on
like each thing that you could do if you
violate the born roll it means you've
you've subjected yourself to a sure loss
no matter what you do you're going to
lose money so your only goal here is to
just not have a sure loss you want to
just like adjust your bets so that
you're not you're not open to to just
losing no matter what happens um so so
if your mom like comes up with some
numbers and you're like hold on this
doesn't fit you have to one of these has
to be a little lower let's say and then
she can search her soul this is how
Chris always says it she can search her
soul and make a decision you know what
I'm going to put more on this one A
Little Less on this she she tweaks it
that's it nothing compels her to believe
any particular thing but quantum
mechanics compels her to make her
beliefs coherent with one
another
and and this is a you know they
emphasize this in cubism this is a
normative rule so this is not an
ontological rule this is not saying like
this is how the world is it's saying
this is what you should
do as an agent in the world who is
trying to bet on the outcomes of your m
measurements and that is the whole story
yes Chris says throwing some holy
water like quantum mechanics compels you
quantum mechanics compels
you okay so let's imagine he's doing
that to my mom but it would take two
years before she was to articulate by
chance some set of probabilities that
would happen to align with the born rule
yet the universe is still moving and
trucking along and presumably at any
given instant we're making billions of
quantum mechanical measurements and
observ ations and so on so this is
happening under the hood it's not just
physicist in a lab writing it down when
I'm looking at you there are many
quantum mechanical effects occurring and
this desk here and same with you and
same with the people listening so at no
point are the people who are listening
making beliefs about quantum mechanics
consciously in fact some of them are
finding out about quantum mechanics
right now yeah so help me understand how
does belief conscious belief or what we
ordinarily colloquially think of his
belief yeah have anything to do with a
Quantum system so I think the the
question comes
from usually seeing Quantum States as
being like reality or a description of
reality and then you're saying well like
how could reality be my beliefs right
but here in cubism it's not that's not
what reality your Quantum states are
just tools that agents use to make
better gambling decisions
um about the measurements that they're
going to make and that's it and I mean
there's a sense in which um cubism they
they say like it's a small Theory
it's that nobody's saying that's what
reality is they're just saying quantum
theory the everyone is confused by
quantum theory because they think
quantum theory is describing reality and
quantum theory is not describing reality
it's describing how we ought to bet on
our measurement outcomes and if you're
not not doing a complicated like double
sit experiment or something you probably
don't need to write down a Quantum State
and you probably don't need to make
these bets and that doesn't mean the
universe is going to fall apart it just
means you're not doing Quantum mechan
like you're not an agent who's gambling
on these things so okay then you could
say well hold on now we've just made
this so small that like who
cares but the deeper point is the fact
that your beliefs have to be consistent
with one another in this way something
about that mathematical structure tells
you about the character of the world so
you're not learning about reality from
the wave function that's not what the
wave function is doing if you want to
learn about reality you
say why should I bet this w why am I why
am my bets constrained in this way
that's weird what kind of work world is
this such that that would be the best
way to gamble on measurement outcomes
and then that's the road in to asking
these kind of like deep ontological
questions about reality but the road in
is not to say like what does the wave
function what does it
represent nothing it represents our
degrees of belief about measurement
outcomes so
cubism it's the wave function is not
describing reality but that doesn't mean
that it doesn't tell us something very
deep about the nature of real it so um
when we look at the fact that we have to
organize our bets in this particular
way um that's telling
us something about the character of the
world so it's it's very similar to um
like Chris books likes to use this
example of the ugina which I think is
some kind of microscopic organism the
ugena tail um so you can look look at
the ug's tale and it's just it's just a
a feature of the ugina it's not about
the world but the fact that this is a
useful tool for the ugina to navigate
its World tells you something about the
world like indirectly and so the idea is
supposed to be the same in cubism that
the fact that the born rule constrains
our beliefs in this particular way tells
us something about the character of the
world that we're that we're having
beliefs about and so what does it tell
us well this is something cubism still
trying to figure out um but the the Deep
Point seems to be that it tells us that
the world is not divisible into subject
and object in the way that we have
thought and Sak heart so it tells us
that reality is participatory in this
really deep sense um it tells us that
there's not just some way that things
are sitting out there independent of us
but that we and the world together
through these like concrete interactions
these measurement interactions are
creating something genuinely novel um
sometimes the cubus describe it as like
there's a spark you know there's this
novel little bit of creation almost like
a little big bang every time there's a
measurement and um and so it's not that
you know like Kurt when you asked you
know wasn't the universe just going on
you know before we were making bets and
and writing down these wave functions
um so the wave functions are not the
reality and and that the cubus would say
like that's the mistake these other
interpretations are making it's not the
reality but the fact that we should
structure our beliefs in this way does
tell us that the reality has this
character of subject and object not
being like neatly neatly and
unambiguously divisible um so that does
tell us something very deep and then you
know cubism is hoping to go on with this
this kind of ontological project of
trying to say more about the nature of
that reality but it it gives this um
participatory story because you can't
say you know when you make a measurement
you can't say that you're
revealing something that was already
there you're not finding out what was
already there you're participating in
the creation of that thing but the key
is also it's not in you right it's in
the interaction between you and the
world that's where the novelty is
happening it's in the subject because
again the subject and object can't be
like neatly divided in this way and so
some people hear about cubism they say
oh it's it's solipsistic because it's
all about beliefs and and it's not just
anyone's beliefs it's my beliefs right
so if I write down a wave function it's
my beliefs and they don't have to be the
same as yours and so people think that
they hear that and they think like
because they're so used to thinking of
the way function is like representing
reality it's like well then it's only my
universe and only your universe un and
like no that's not what's happening it's
my beliefs and your beliefs it's my way
function and your way function but what
arises through measurement is something
shared between me and the world when I
make a measurement um and what arises
through measurement is something shared
between you and the world when you make
a measurement and then if you and I are
interacting with each other we're
creating something shared together so um
so there's this participatory story
and sometimes I like to think about
wheeler used to tell this anecdote that
I
love um just going back to John Wheeler
for a second so wheeler liked to tell
this story about playing a game of 20
questions so he would he he tells the
story that he was at a a dinner party
and they're playing 20 questions they
would send someone out of the room and
they would decide on like a word and the
person would come back in and start
asking yes or no questions and they
would have to have 20 Questions spell to
guess the word so then it was Wheeler's
turn to leave the
room and he leaves and when he comes
back in he
starts he said okay he leaves he leaves
her room and it takes very long time it
seems for them to decide on the word and
so then he goes back into the room and
he starts guessing he says you
know is it an animal and they say no and
then he says okay is it
green and the next person thinks for a
second says no you know he says is it
white and the next person thinks they
say yes and this goes on and he's
noticing that the answers are taking
longer and longer each time and finally
he says is it a
cloud and the person you know thinks for
a long time and then everyone bursts out
laughing they say yes and it turns out
that what the game was was when he left
the room they decided that they weren't
going to pick a word they were just
going to answer questions on the
fly but the rule was that whenever they
answered a question it had they had to
have something in mind that was
consistent with all the previous answers
so that if he like challenged them they
would be able to like come up with a
word that this thing could be so for
wheeler this like was the like a perfect
example of what happens in Quantum
mechanic because the point is the word
cloud didn't exist before he started
asking
questions but he didn't come up with the
idea that it was a cloud because he was
asking questions in response to the
answers he was getting from the people
but they didn't come up with it either
because they would have given different
answers if he had asked different
questions and so the word
cloud was this sort of participatory
creation that came about between you
know the person making the measurement
the person asking questions of the world
and the world responding in turn and so
it's like in the end shared between all
of them
that's right so this is Wheeler's idea
of like a participatory universe and
this is really the kind of ontology or
the kind of reality that cubism gives
you because you're asking questions
about the world and yes you're
structuring your wave function in terms
of your beliefs and all of that but
that's not what's happening in the
actual measurement in the actual
measurement you're asking a question of
the world the world's responding back
and the two of you together are like
creating something new um so that's the
real story that like cubism is trying to
tell and the whole thing about beliefs
is just a way of telling that story
really really
consistently um and and I guess the
other thing I should
add is you know in terms of the basian
part of the story
you know you yes it's true that like
your beliefs can be anything you want as
long as they're consistent in according
to the born rule but they're they're
informed by all your prior experiences
so the whole idea of basian probability
is that you make a measurement you get
an outcome and then you update your
probabilities that you're going to
assign so you update your beliefs in
reaction to what the world has given you
um um so so the interesting thing here
is like in terms of solving Like the
quote unquote measurement problem is
that like other interpretations what
they would call the collapse of the wave
function in cubism it's just an agent
updating her beliefs right so she gets
an outcome changes her probabilities
that's that's it that's the whole story
of like the the collapse of the wave
function um it's not a big deal because
the wave function doesn't refer to
reality but that means that like your
beliefs even though like you are free to
believe whatever you want as long as
they fit together in this way prescribed
by the Bor R your beliefs are not
subjective in the sense of being like
just you know made up in your head
because they arise from your whole
history of like prior concrete
interactions with the world and so in
some
sense the beliefs already straddle that
subject object divide because they
already
incorporate these interactions that that
straddle that divide themselves and so
so I think you know it's personalist and
it's important to say that but it's also
important to realize that like those
beliefs you know you're not just like
coming up with them in your head you're
interacting with the world and updating
in response to that and then like the
last thing I should say about about
cubism is
um it's not just the quantum State
assignment that you give to a system
that's
personalist but the out come is personal
too so again this like is what helps us
get out of like a vor's friend Paradox
is like you can make a measurement and
get an
outcome and it doesn't mean that outcome
is true for me when I'm over here and
I'm vigner um so outcomes are personal
just like Quantum State assignments are
personal and so um in cubism like to be
consistent you you end up with all these
levels of like personalism
um but again you don't want to think of
it as being in some agent's head it's
not like the world's in your head it's
you're interacting with the world in a
very real way and the outcome is
something shared
between the people participa
participating in that interaction which
is like you and the world or you and
another agent if you're acting on each
other um but anyone who's not in that
interaction like bner standing outside
this is not you know
an outcome for vigner so it's it's
personal in that
sense okay let's go through a side door
with all these different interpretations
of quantum mechanics there are other
foundational issues at the heart of
quantum field Theory which is said to be
the deeper Theory have you heard of some
interpretation of quantum mechanics
solving any of the foundational problems
in qft any of the interpretations yeah
any of them I haven't seen any
personally but I don't know about the
relationship between interpretations of
quantum mechanics and the foundational
issues of quantum field theory in qft
it's almost like you're already telling
a kind of real story about like what's
happening in the world cubism wants to
just be like measurement we're talking
about measurement that has to be the
foundation of of of anything you're
talking about so I would think like well
I don't know tell tell me what you have
in mind well actually one of the
interpretations so Penrose makes some
claims about quantum gravity so then
that has to say something about Quantum
field Theory but then there are other
issues like how do we rigorously Define
the findan path integral or what about
existence of mass gaps or problems with
renormalization and it doesn't seem to
me like interpretations of quantum
mechanics have any bearing here but it
seems like they should to me because
quantum mechanics is at the higher level
than Quantum field Theory Quantum field
theory is more foundational so we're
stuck up here trying to interpret when
we should be over here
interpreting it's like the the
interpretation is going to set the terms
for what you're counting as real what
you're counting as it's going to sort of
set like the the really really
fundamental terms in which like any
theory that you talk about in physics
then has to apply like so for example
people talk about in quantum gravity or
something like MH or not even quantum
gravity like talking about like like
vacuum fluctuations let's say yes okay
so you have like because of uncertainty
you have vacuum fluctuations you have
pair production of particles and like so
you can tell this whole story but
really if you're thinking in like terms
of like Quantum foundations and
interpretations like what are those
fluctuations fluctuations of right
because it's coming out of uncertainty
so it's is it fluctuations in your
beliefs is it fluctuations
in your knowledge and information is it
like cuz if you're saying it's
fluctuations of a thing that's just
sitting out there fluctuating like
you're already either like a Boman
you've already picked an interpretation
at that point do you know what I mean
yes so the cubis would say cubis would
say you got to talk about where's your a
the agent has to be in the story from
the beginning and what are they
measuring and how are they betting on
the outcomes of those measurements
so would the cubis say that your beliefs
are actually fluctuating no um I realize
I said that but no
um they would say the the fluctuations
come from uncertainty Quantum
uncertainty and in a Cuba Story the
uncertainty comes in with the fact that
you can't make certain measurements
simultaneously and I mean that's what's
happening right like when you get like a
vacuum fluctuation in the standard like
story it's um coming about because of
this non-commuting nature of like time
and energy right so you say oh on really
really really short time scales you can
get these like huge fluctuations of
energy um and
so but what you're really saying that's
like again it's like you're just trying
to tell a very realist story at that
point because what's you're really
saying is if I were to measure the time
I could get this thing if I were to
measure energy I could get this thing
and then those are related in this
strange Quantum non-classical way but
like the whole story has to be like what
are you actually going to measure and
and you can't talk about like what some
field out there is doing independent of
what you're
measuring Amanda to get into some less
well we'll see it could be less hairy or
more hairy ground what is your view of
Consciousness oh boy that's yeah that's
more hairy
um my view of Consciousness is is
related to all of this great and let me
try to think of the least painful way of
explaining it um to put a name to it
like the The View that I I find
compelling is um usually called the
inactive view or an activism um and this
is in the world of like what's sometimes
called like 4E cognition so this is like
embodied embedded extended and active um
it's related to ecological psychology as
well so anything that starts with an e
um tends to fall in this camp and
um and
so yeah I would I of of the ease I would
I would choose anactive
um but can I give a historical aside for
please please because I find that this
really really helps explain where I'm
coming from um this idea that we have of
Consciousness was invented in the 17th
century oh okay it does not it was not
always with us and I think that's like a
really key thing for us to remember
because it seems like oh that's just so
intuitive but it's not um this was like
an this was an invention um and it was
invented mostly B by
dekart um even though were like
predecessors in like going back to Plato
and and Augustine and stuff but
deart is the one I think we can blame
most significantly and
um what you have to remember and what
people seem to have forgotten is when
dekart came up at this
idea that the mind is in the head and
that there's this sort of firstperson
story cojito osum this whole thing he
was not coming up with this to explain
the mind which was not yet a
problem he was trying to invent a new
Theory of
physics so the physics that existed at
the time was Aristotle's physics and
when you look at that there was no real
subject object
distinction um so for instance
like you
know we now thanks to Dart make this
distinction like primary qualities and
secondary qualities right and um like
subjective objective so um in Aristotle
you know redness or sweetness or all
these things were not like in our heads
they were just like part of the world
but also like objects did things because
they had like internal motivation like
things fell because they like yearned to
be close to the Earth like so there was
objects weren't really objects and
subjects weren't really subject it was
all mixed up and
and decart came along and he had come up
with cartisian geometry and cartisian
coordinates and he thought to himself
like if everything were just size shape
and motion if that's all that existed
then I could describe the whole universe
just using my coordinate system and I
would have this new physics um but like
unfortunately there's all this other
stuff like thoughts and ideas and colors
and sounds and like and none of that
fits that story so I need somewhere else
to put them and then he has this
realization of like oh you know
I I can doubt everything that I see but
I can't doubt my doubting so there's
this difference between the things that
are like self- knowing and then the
things that are only known and so so he
creates this distinction between like
the cojito which is like the self-
knowing self-referential thing
the I the capital i i and and the
objects in the world and so then he
takes all this subjective stuff that
doesn't fit in his coordinate system and
he sticks it in the head and then he
takes everything else that's left is
just objective and so he write like the
words coo osum like this first appeared
in A Treatise on physics this was a a
move for physics and so and his physics
wasn't great but it it did displ
aristotles very quickly and then Newton
came along and Newton fixed it basically
and it became Newtonian physics but new
Newton's physics would not have existed
without dick hearts and and so it set
the stage for classical physics and at
the same time and in the same move it
invented this idea of Consciousness as
being something self- knowing that we
experience directly but the world we
only experience indirectly and that
there's qualia and that there's objects
and those are different this whole story
that we tell about Consciousness came
from this one move which was to say I'm
going to make a split between subject
and
object and so you get from this one
single move subject object split you get
Consciousness and you get classical
physics and so when quantum physics
comes along and goes wait a minute
classical physics is wrong this story
doesn't work and if you look at like
bore and you look at like the origins of
quantum mechanics like what they're
realizing is the issue is that subject
object distinction the world cannot be
divided up that way you can get away
with it for so long but when you look
really really
closely you get this little H bar uh
planks constant which tells you this is
measuring like a a subject object
overlap that you can't get rid of and
and so all of a sudden that story was
wrong and you need to remove that
subject object split but where We've
Ended up is in this really confused
place where we kind of see that on the
quantum mechanic side but we're doubling
down on the Consciousness side so we're
walking around with this very incoherent
metaphysics where we're
saying okay yeah like in quantum
mechanics like objects aren't really
just objects but subjects are still
really subject like it just doesn't make
sense like if you we need to be like
that split was the wrong move you can't
carve the world up that way it doesn't
work and so you have to fix the story
you've told on both sides yes and so
what fixes it on both sides okay so from
my perspective cubism fixes it on the
physics side and an activism fixes it on
and do they play well with one another
is an activism somehow interpreted in
cubism or vice
versa so they're doing very different
things
but when you really look at what they're
doing they're both
just trying to like in activism is
trying to understand mind without the
subject object split and cubism is
trying to understand the world without
the subject object split yes I see I see
so Carl fron has something called active
inference is this
related sort of um I think it depends
how you interpret his stuff interesting
their interpretations of Carl
friston of another podcast yeah right I
mean I think like the way it's usually
talked about is
um like he talks about right these marov
blankets as being like these the split
which I I think that's very cool um but
then it's like you're sort of trying to
infer like he usually refers to like
hidden states on the other side um and I
think in like these other stories you
wouldn't want to talk about like hidden
like the world's not hidden to you like
I think that idea that that like I'm in
my head and all I know is my own
experiences and the actual reality out
there is something hidden that I have to
infer like I think that's already a
problematic story um but I think
probably you could talk about free
energy without using that kind of
language and then maybe it would be fine
so the solution to not dichotomizing the
world into subject and object yeah is
what everything is object or everything
is subject or something else something
else so I think like I think that's the
problem we've all gotten into is like
jakkart was like here's the dinner menu
you may have subjects and objects and
then people like are like well wait a
minute like this is dualism I don't want
two things like that's crazy I will just
take subjects or they're like I will
just take objects but then there's like
a few people that are like you know what
maybe these aren't the options like why
do I have to pick one of these things
like yes interesting so I think that the
issue is I don't think it's it there's a
reason those are the options which are
like in any perception you have to make
a subject object distinction in any
Quantum measurement you have to make a
subject object distinction but the
difference is you want to
say in a participatory way I am enact in
that distinction as my way of making a
perception or as my way of making a
measurement you don't want to say that
distinction is given to me from the
beginning in some like absolute sense I
know I'm speaking very abstractly here
but like I think that's like the issue
is like you want to you you you don't
want to take the subject object
distinction as pregiven and absolute and
fixed so you definitely don't want to
say it's all subject and you definitely
don't want to say it's all object
because that's already assuming that
distinction is fixed you want to say
it's it's movable and in any given
situation I can carve it up in different
ways does that mean you can carve
yourself out of the situation can you
carve it up in any way in the sense that
it's just assigning different weights to
subject and object so I'm going to think
of this situation as 99% subjective 1%
objective or I can think of this
situation as entire 99.9 and I thus I'm
minimizing my own contribution to the
point you could make it 100% objective
I've never thought of it that way but I
think that sounds right to me in some
sense I mean you can't take if you take
yourself out of it entirely you're
you're dead in some sense right so like
you can't do that bore loved to talk
about like a blind man with a a cane
like a stick um and he would say if the
man holds the the cane very tightly he
can use it to like touch the world and
in that sense the the cane is part of
the man and so it's on the subject side
of the subject object of VI but he could
also hold it very Loosely in his hand
and like consider it as an object and
then like he's not touching the world
with it he's touching the cane and so
now the cane is on like the object side
of the subject object VI so it's the
same cane but it could be on either side
so that division is like movable and and
bore thought that was really the essence
of quantum mechanics was that that
division is not fixed and in cubism this
becomes important too because the cubis
says the measuring device is an
extension of the
agent um so so the the the line can be
drawn you know very differently in a
given measurement scenario depending on
like what how how I wanted to be up okay
I'm much less
confused good that's interesting in the
same way that if you start writing you
become accustomed to writing the pen is
then an extension of you you don't even
think of the pen you don't think of your
individual fingers on the keyboard so
the keyboard is akin to an extension of
you yes so some people would say it's
not just Akin it is so John Veri may say
that that's a cognitive science
scientist who is also an advocate for 4E
cognitive science by the way ex yeah you
have just outlined that the Cubist view
is that in quantum mechanics we're
making measurements the measurement
device is at that point an extension of
you actually I'm still confused so I'm
gonna get some clarification on that
afterward this is how I feel every day
like I almost NOP yeah exactly okay well
anyway Amanda thank you for spending so
much time with me I appreciate you
taking time out of your day for this and
Amanda please tell me what is it that
you're currently working
on so I am working on a project that's
been 10 years in the making um that is
related to all of the things that we're
talking about um
because it's basically
um I was telling you about Wheeler's
journals in John Wheeler's journals I
found reference to the student of his
named Peter putam who I had never heard
of and I sort of went down this Rabbit
Hole of like who is this guy because
wheeler students were all like you know
richer fman and whoever and these like
very famous people and it was like who's
this Peter putam
and long story short
found that putam was you know the
student of wheelers he did his PhD in
physics but then he became very
interested in how the mind works and
came up with his own theory of mind um
and then he and Wheeler throughout their
lives had this like really intense
correspondence because Wheeler's trying
to understand like the
nature of quantum mechanics and like
what role The Observer plays and like
what's an observer and then putam is
like working on a theory of the Observer
and they're trying to like put these
pieces together um and in the meantime
putam ends up um moving down south in
like rural Louisiana and working as a
janitor and living in like total poverty
and writing all these papers but not
publishing any of it and then he's
killed by a drunk driver in the 1980s
and when he dies he leaves $40 million
to the nature nature conservancy which
it turned out he had made in the stock
market but never touched any of it
and then his papers all his stuff ended
up like tucked away in this like storage
unit and so I found all of his
unpublished stuff and I've been trying
to reconstruct like what was his theory
of mind which I think is very related to
these inactive embodied ideas that we
were talking about and um and trying to
relate that to Wheeler's
participatory uh understanding of
reality which is very related to qism
which we were talking about and how to
piece those stories together Amanda
thank you for spending so much time with
me you're very welcome I hope I didn't
just add to confusion beautiful it's
beautiful thank you I appreciate it
firstly thank you for watching thank you
for listening there's now a website Kurt
jungle. org and that has a mailing list
the reason being that large platforms
like YouTube like patreon they can
disable you for whatever reason whenever
they like that's just part of the terms
of service now a direct mailing list
ensures that I have an untrammeled
communication with you plus soon I'll be
releasing a one-page PDF of my top 10
toes it's not as Quinton Tarantino as it
sounds like secondly if you haven't
subscribed or clicked that like button
now is the time to do so why because
each subscribe each like helps YouTube
push this content to more people like
yourself plus it helps out Kurt directly
aka me I also found out last year that
external links count plenty toward the
algorithm which means that whenever you
share on Twitter say on Facebook or even
on Reddit Etc it shows YouTube hey
people are talking about this content
outside of YouTube which in turn greatly
AIDS the Distribution on YouTube thirdly
there's a remarkably active Discord and
subreddit for theories of everything
where people explicate toes they
disagree respectfully about theories and
build as a community our own toe links
to both are in the description fourthly
you should know this podcast is on
iTunes it's on Spotify it's on all of
the audio platforms all you have to do
is type in theories of everything and
you'll find it personally I gain from
rewatching lectures and podcasts I also
read in the comments that hey tow
listeners also gain from replaying so
how about instead you relisten on those
platforms like iTunes Spotify Google
podcast whichever podcast catcher you
use and finally if you'd like to support
more conversations like this more
content like this then do consider
visiting patreon /k jongle and donating
with whatever you like there's also
PayPal there's also crypto there's also
just joining on YouTube again keep in
mind it's support from the sponsors and
you that allow me to work on tow
fulltime you also get early access to
adree episodes whether it's audio or
video it's audio in the case of patreon
video in the case of YouTube for
instance this episode that you're
listening to right now was released a
few days earlier every dollar helps far
more than you think either way your
viewership is generosity enough thank
you so much
