this is a conversation between the first
physicist who made the explicit link
between quantum mechanics and
Consciousness sir Roger Penrose and the
inventor of the microprocessor federo
fagin who is also a physicist and has
just written a book about his own
quantum theory of
Consciousness why should Consciousness
even exist if he has no causal power
that that's my my question I would agree
that clearly it does exist I think I'd
agree with you there the fact that it
can have a causal effect is the only
reason why beings have evolved with it
Roger Penrose and fedo Fen agree on one
important point when it comes to
Consciousness it cannot be computed a
computer in the sense that we mean it
which is a computational system will not
ever be intelligent understanding
intelligence Consciousness are words
that are often used interchangeably by
Roger Penrose and according to to him
they involve Quantum Mechanics for more
than two decades he's been working on a
theory about Quantum effects in micr
tubil in the human brain that recently
seem to be substantiated by empirical
findings now Federico Fen in a sense
Builds on penrose's ideas but not in the
way you would think according to fine
Consciousness is not caused by wave
function collapse it's more fundamental
Quantum Fields themselves are
Consciousness collapse then is just
Consciousness Express exing itself
Consciousness and Free Will must be
postulates it must be a postulate in the
sense that Consciousness and Free Will
cannot be explained in any simpler ways
than the fact that they exist if you
start with Consciousness and Free Will
existing we can then explain why quantum
physics has to have the crazy properties
that that they that it has here pen
disagrees mainly because he is
dissatisfied with quantum theory
altogether according to him it's not a
complete Theory because it leaves out an
understanding of what wave function
collapse actually is well as Einstein
and Schrodinger said about it it's an
incomplete Theory I'm not as polite as
they are it's they were saying it's
incomplete I would say it's actually not
even quite correct so what has to go on
in the brain in the conscious being what
has to be something which is not just
evolving according to current Quantum
Mechanics it's evolving according to
that theory we don't yet have which is
the more complete theory in which the
collapse of a wave function is part of
that theory as a philosopher moderator
who understands quantum theory we had
Bernardo castrip join in who stirred
things up a bit federo and I and I I
dare be with federo on this one not with
sir Roger I I don't think collapse
really happens I think uh if we
eventually get to a deeper understanding
of what's going on I think we realize
that uh there is no collapse it's an
epistemic it's it's a transition from an
epistemic idea to an ontological one sir
rer is raising his hand to his
forehead but but I don't see how you can
say it doesn't happen I mean you have to
have something which looks more or less
like like the classical world and if you
don't have the collapse of the wave
function the quantum evolution of a
state does not look like the classical
work in this conversation between
Penrose fine and castri we hit on the
mysterious divide between the quantum
and the classical world and how it
relates to Consciousness Penrose perhaps
the oldest and wisest made a confession
namely that he once tried to close the
quantum classical Gap by believing in
the many worlds interpretation of
quantum
mechanics is that it's a good thing to
have had in certain stages of your life
to have believed in the many worlds and
interpretation of
qu the shorter period the better I did
go s through such a stage myself
believing in the many world
interpretation welcome to the essencia
foundation's YouTube channel and before
you watch further may I ask you to like
And subscribe because it really helps us
to produce content like this and I
advise you to turn on subtitles below
for a better viewing experience enjoy
the conversation first first of all a
very warm welcome for sir Roger penro
who's joining us from Oxford and known
to be one of the greatest physicists of
our time a noble laurat and someone who
has made huge contrib contributions
outside of physics as well um studying
Consciousness and coming up with a
testable theory about relationship
between quantum mechanics and
Consciousness then we have um f frin
inventor of the first microprocessor the
touchpad technology and the touchscreen
technology and one of the founding
fathers of neural networks who now also
has a theory about the relationship
between quantum mechanics and
Consciousness and to me sort of the
Catalyst in meeting both of you
gentlemen has been this gentleman here
sitting next across the table uh
Bernardo castrop um and Bernardo it was
through an episode I did un La this AI
that had you in it sir Roger with your
chessboard position and Bernardo you
knew F feder Rico and now we are sitting
here and I just find that beautiful and
I want to really give um the three of
you time to get to know each other and I
yeah I think it's good to first start um
with your theory sir Roger and um I
previously interviewed you in 2021 and
then in 20 22 I followed this news
website that said that your colleague
laros josi had come up with experiments
that made it very difficult to um have
your theor still be credible because it
would say that um Quantum effects cannot
be possible uh in microt tubulus but
then two months ago I read in a journal
paper coming out saying that these
effects are now experimentally
established so I thought surer must now
be triumphant that the experiments are
now in favor so I'm very curious where
you now are with your
theory well as far as experiments are
concerned I think one has to be a bit
cautious about it all um so I I I'm not
an expert on experiments but I certainly
have a colleague who although the recent
experiments you refer to seem to be
supportive of the point of view I'm
putting forward he was a bit skeptical
thinking it might be a bit wish wishful
thinking experiments so I just have a
neutral position on this I I can't
really judge the
experiments and exactly how one might
make observations experimental
observations to see whether the well the
argument would have to be that one has
Quantum effects in
microtubules these little tiny parts of
cells and uh
this has been the argument for quite a
long time ever since I had a
communication from Stuart Hammer off I'd
written my book The Emperor's New mind
which was trying to put forward my
viewpoint with regard to
Consciousness and uh at that time I had
no idea how you could find anything in
the brain which seemed to support what I
was doing and it was interesting to hear
from Stuart Hammer off who read my book
and he uh his job was to do with
Consciousness namely to turn it off in a
reversible way because he's an
anesthesiologist uh he was at the time
he's now retired at the University of uh
Arizona
and
he he introduced me to the notion of
micral which of which I was completely
ignorant previously I'm not a biologist
I'm not a physiologist
I don't know the details of what's going
on so I have to trust other people when
it comes to that but the arguments that
I had originally came from mathematical
logic I had attended as a graduate
student three courses that were nothing
whatsoever to do with what I should have
been doing which had to do with pure
mathematics algebraic geometry at the
time and one of the lectures I went to
was a lecture given by a man called
Steen on mathematical logic and he
explained how the girdle theorem worked
and what comput the notion of
computability I learned from him too as
a definite thing in mathematics and that
there are certain mathematical
problems which don't have a computer
computable solution I mean they have a
solution of some sort but they're not
solutions that you can put on a computer
so I was aware that there were such
things and that what I found most
striking about steen's lectures was when
he came to the Geral theorems and I was
a little bit disturbed by the idea of G
the because i' heard about them before
going to un to to graduate work and I
wasn't very happy with the idea that it
seemed to show there were things in
mathematics who couldn't prove what I
found reassuring was that the actual
argument the girdle argument is to show
if you have any system of proofs you
accept as acceptable as proofs and you
could in principle put them on a
computer then what gerle shows how you
construct a sentence very clever way
which you could see is not provable by
those rules but what I struck as struck
me as most remarkable and most
reassuring in a way was that your
understanding of why the rules work
enable you to transcend the use of the
rules so it's understanding why the
rules work which enables you to see why
the girdle theorem is true you don't see
that you see that it's true but not
derivable by those rules but it is
derivable by your understanding why
those rules are
actually correct for the mathematical
results yeah this also leads of course
to that chess position that you showed
me then which had to do right with AIS a
halting problem is triggered so to speak
and the human mind somehow because it
understands chess can solve the puzzle
whereas AIS will just start Computing
forever well yes but that I guess examp
that particular example probably the
computers have grown in power since then
and it may well be that they could solve
that particular problem but that any
specific problem in chess is a
computable I think nice nice because we
have a founding father of the
microprocessor sitting uh on the side of
the table federo to share with sir Roger
your
view about why Consciousness cannot be
computable
yeah well my my
ideas uh start by saying that
Consciousness and Free Will must be
postulates it must be a postulate in the
sense that Consciousness and Free Will
cannot be explained in any simpler ways
than the fact that they exist and we
have the proof within ourselves it can
be a subjective proof but it is a proof
within ourselves so if we for for a
second then we start there and by the
way that that postulate is self-evident
because we all know that we are
conscious and we all know that we have a
certain modicum of Free Will so uh
starting there then together with the
professor jakomo Mao darano which you
may know is a is a expert in uh in
information Quantum information and is
is the one that actually show that if
you start with six postulates that are
informational Quantum informational base
you can derive quantum physics out of
them so with darano we came up with the
with a a a way of thinking about
conscious
that makes a lot of sense to me and and
that is that that if you start with
Consciousness and Free Will existing we
can then explain why quantum physics has
to have the crazy properties that that
they that it has specifically we can
explain why Quantum information has to
have has to have the no cloning theorem
and Olivos theorem uh which you can
discuss a little later and then why the
collapse of the way functions cannot
really exist as such but it is a
expression of a free will decision of a
field that is that has Consciousness and
Free Will so conscious and Free Will are
then causing in a sense the physics
which is the the the informational
aspect not the meaning aspect not the
semantic aspect but the informational
the seman IC aspect of reality to
manifest the way it does um so you know
with this Theory then not only does it
make sense to start with a conscience
and Free Will existing you know existing
and being true by definition and being
fundamental properties of all the fields
of quantum
Fields the you know the quantum field of
electrons is conscious it's self-
knowing is in within the Consciousness
itself uh and the symbols used to
communicate which must be sharable
existing in SpaceTime are the excited
states of the fields which are what we
call electrons but the electrons then in
this idea this this way of understanding
reality are just the symbolic aspects of
reality where the semantic aspect of
reality are within the field itself so
this Theory seems to you know to then
explain to to really show
that our conscious experience is in
particular qualia that is the perceptual
way in which we understand reality we we
begin to understand reality we have
these Sensations and feelings that allow
to us understand reality that perceptual
qualia are represented by Quantum
information because Quantum information
is private it cannot be reproduced no
cloning theorem and also what we can say
say about or we can measure about that
state is only one bit per Quantum bit so
which is exactly what we do because what
I feel when I transform what I feel in
symbols in outer symbol sharable symbol
classical information those symbols are
in fact uh only you know a small portion
of what I feel the love that I feel
Within Myself for a sun for example in
not a number and he has Dimensions that
go Way Beyond any you know possible
measurement is is a dynamic form has
depth of perception that that I need to
understand Within Myself so qualia uh
can be represented by a Quantum State a
pure Quantum state so anyway so this is
the essence of this Theory sir Roger
before I give you an opportunity to
reflect on this because this is of
course a whole theory in our I think
aund things to say about this proposal
feder is making may I ask you Bernardo
you have an understanding of Sir Roger
work and theory and an understanding of
feder Rico where do you see the main
differences and what do you think is the
good question now for S Roger to reflect
on hearing this new Theory Of
Consciousness yeah I can't compare to
these two giants but I I I'm looking in
from the outside and I try to make sense
of what they've been saying so Roger in
um the emperor's new mind which I think
is from 1988 or
89 um 88 right I think yes I don't is
around about that yeah um the the key
point I think he makes is that um
Consciousness can jump out of the system
Consciousness is not a formal system in
other words a system of axom and rules
of derivation that you can produce
theorems out of it uh Consciousness can
step out of that formal system and
acquire a form of sit that cannot be
formalized that way and that may have
something to do with quantum mechanics
because quantum mechanics doesn't seem
to match with Aristotelian logic so it
gives us an opportunity or a way of
thinking about how physical systems or
how natural systems could not be just a
formal system so that's the link there
it's the the jump outside of formal
systems that is linked with quantum
mechanics in some way federo comes at it
perhaps from the other side and and and
and meets s s Roger s Roger's ideas fedo
says things as they are in themselves
are conscious States and our best model
of these conscious states of things as
they are in themselves is a quantum
mechanical description of a Quantum
state in Hilbert space so what is the
his interpretation is that uh quantum
mechanical descriptions of systems in a
super preposition
uh are our models of things as they are
in themselves and things as they are in
themselves are experiential States uh
and what we call physical States or
classical uh uh classical States uh
after decoherence or after collapse
whatever happens actually there they are
symbols syntactical representations of
internal Quantum states which contain
much less information than the internal
Quantum State because a Quantum state is
a you could say it's an infinite
superposition of possible States while
when you make a measurement of that you
only get one bit per Quantum bit which
is much less information in a certain
way of interpreting information so
federo makes the same link that um it is
the known classic classicality it is the
known the aspect of a system that isn't
just captured in a in a formal set of
rules of derivation and axioms that is
linked with quantum mechanics and that
touches on Sir Rogers idea as well uh so
Rogers comes from the opposite side and
I think they may meet in the middle
maybe it's a naive perspective but
that's how I interpret them I think so I
think that there is a lot in common sir
Roger I would give you uh please give
you the opportunity to reflect or maybe
ask questions if there are there must be
questions I think hearing all of
this well I think I'm afraid I'm
thinking that I have a very different
view from the ones expressed by the
other two or yeah I mean my view
certainly is not that it's quantum
mechanics because quantum mechanics as
we currently understand it is well as
Einstein and Schrodinger said about it
it's an incomplete Theory I'm not as
polite as they are it's they were saying
it's incomplete I would say it's
actually not even quite correct and it's
not correct because quantum mechanics as
it currently exists does not have a
theory of the collapse of a wave
function now you see you have in added
quantum mechanics you have the
description of the world according to a
thing called the quantum State the
quantum State evolves according to the
shreding or equation which is a
deterministic equation completely
computable as well however it is not the
way that the world evolves it when as
long as your system is small in in some
technical sense of the word small then
it does behave according to the Shing
equation but when this system gets too
big big and I could be more explicit
about what I mean by big when it gets
too big then it doesn't follow the
shring equation you have the this
phenomenon of the collapse of the wave
function and my argument is that it's
not just that quantum mechanics is
important for Consciousness quantum
mechanics on its own is not wouldn't
give you
Consciousness it's how quantum mechanics
has to be extended to a better Theory as
it as it exists it does not would not
explain Consciousness quantum
mechanics follows the Shing equation and
following the Shing equation doesn't
give you uh what I need you need
something which goes beyond that which
is not computable and this the argument
is has to be in the collapse of the wave
function so I'm arguing it's worse than
quantum mechanics if you like I'm saying
what has to go on in the brain in the
conscious being whatever its brain is
like that has to be something which is
not just evolving according to current
Quantum Mechanics it's evolving
according to that theory we don't yet
have which is the more complete theory
in which the collapse of the wave
function is part of that theory but that
needs to be there and current Quantum
Mechanics doesn't have a theory of the
collapse of the W yeah you're
dissatisfied with the theory but please
please reply fed yeah no I I think sir
Roger is perfectly fine in fact I I
don't think that uh quantum physics is
uh is really complete exactly because
you cannot tell what causes the collapse
of the wave function we only know that
the uh collapse of the wave function
involves pure Randomness which is
non-algorithmic which is the only way
that you can explain the behavior you
know according to the B theorem is a
long story but you you know that's the
characteristics of of the collapse of
the wave function and in my Theory
actually we solve that problem because
by saying that a Quantum field first of
all we don't start by trying to explain
Consciousness and Free Will by quantum
physics because we we believe that
Consciousness and Free Will are
fundamental therefore they exist as a
postulate and then because of their
existence we can explain why quantum
physics must be the way it is because it
must reflect the existence of the
comprehension qualan comprehension and
meaning that exist in
Consciousness and the fact that there is
Free Will which accounts for the
collapse of the wave function but I
think we touch here don't we touch and
please reflect on this Bernardo sir
Roger when you you you you uh speak
about your dissatisfaction and remembers
when you in our previous interview you
also told me um how shinger with his
Shing or cat didn't want to point to
what the theory means he want to point
to its
absurdity um and he wanted of course and
but then when I write or read sort of
the early stuff and the philosophical
thoughts that these founding fathers had
you see of course the same discussion
and what what I found sort of
interesting is that shinger also started
saying stuff that maybe Consciousness uh
is one in the end and there's a unitary
field of Consciousness stuff like that
so we see I was very curious to ask you
that question um because this really
feel feels as if you're hitting ontology
here isn't quantum theory weird as long
as we want to keep up sort of an
einsteinian realist world viw of which
you are perhaps more in favor of and
then of course sitting here is is our
two gentlemen perhaps a bit more in the
other camp but I want to let the three
of you talk talk about this before there
is one more thing that I want to say
very quickly okay no no very quickly it
is the point that the the fact if you
start with Consciousness and Free Will
the fact then the quantum information
has the same characteristic of of a Liv
of the inner
experience that fact is is allows you to
then to then say that the collapse of
the wave function can be a the result of
a free Free Will decision because Free
Will without Consciousness would not
make any sense you see it is exactly
because you can explain Consciousness
that you can then explain the collapse
of the wave function as a free will
decision yeah
let's very clear very different from my
point of view do you see yeah yeah I'm
curious curious on your thoughts
Roger yes well you
see I would say the collapse of the way
function is a physical process which is
a long way away from explaining
Consciousness and the physical process
is something one can get
towards I have arguments which I put
forward quite a long time ago to show
that the the two great theories of 20th
century physics or the two great
contributions Revolutions in Quantum in
in physics were a quantum mechanics
which came first and B Einstein's
general theory of relativity and what
I'm saying is that those two
theories have an
incompatibility Quantum the quantum
mechanics is based on the theory or the
basic principle of superposition you
could have a particle in one location
that's one Quantum state or it could be
another location that's another quantum
State and according to the basic
principle of quantum mechanics you can
have states where it's there and there
at the at the same time so you have all
these superpositions between different
Alternatives and that's very fundamental
to the framework of quantum mechs and
you the fact that you don't see most of
these super positions is not explained
by Quantum accounts
now uh on the other hand general
relativity has its basic
principle which is the famous well
Galileo Einstein principle of
equivalence well Galileo explained it
very well you imagine dropping a big
rock and a Little Rock from the Leaning
Tower Pisa and he knew that air
resistance would make a difference and a
feather would drop more slowly but if
you had no air resistance they would
follow fall completely together so as
they fall there is no effectively
canceled out gravity so gravity is the
one force if you can call it a force
which I'm a little bit dubious about
it's the one feature of physics which
you can cancel by free fall and that
feature is incompatible with the
principle of superposition and you can
make a little argument to show that
they're inconsistent with each other and
to make them consistent with each other
you have to introduce this collapse of
the wave function it also gives you a
measure of how much when do you expect
the collapse to take place and it's not
a not a complicated form there's a
formula I produced which was actually
not original with me because aosi had
already found this formula about two
years earlier than I did I didn't wasn't
aware of this work but I had this
particular argument to show that his
estimation of how long it takes for the
wave function to collapse is in
accordance with what my argument now if
I have an object a big object say like
this magnifying glass of mine and I put
it in a superp position of here and here
that superposition would not last well
it be a tiny tiny tiny fraction of a
second
if if on the other hand it's a carbon
atom or something and here and here well
it would probably that superposition
would last for longer than the age of
the universe so it's a but there is a
genuine formula which you can write down
which tells you how long that super
position would be expected to last
before it collapses to one or the other
and it has nothing at that level nothing
whatsoever to do with Consciousness it's
a physical formula is something which
could be measured in experiment it has
not yet been because experiments as they
exist have not quite reached the level
of sophistication in order to be do this
there are experiments which are
currently um
under being being done I mean not
they're not there yet but they're aimed
at looking at this effect and my hope is
that they will see this effect when they
get a little bit more sophisticated than
they are just yet and it won't be too
long when I say not too long probably
within the next 10 years and then to
summarize summarize you and then give
you to the opportunity to respond to
this what I understand from this uh so
Roger you have uh uh making a plea to um
I've heard you say we should not
quantize gravity but we should gravit
gravit uh the graviti of quantum theory
right so you see a much larger role to
play for Gravity there and of course
this this this this has to do with
quantum gravity so in a finding a
unifying Theory what s Roger is talking
about which different uh angles or
approaches do we have and what do you
see what would you response be to this
well I I I'm I'm an outside Observer but
I think um the difference that sorger is
highlighting between their positions is
not so much about you know the way
function itself but uh collapse being an
objective phenomenon so Roger holds the
position of objective collapse so he
doesn't think that the collapse of the
wave function is a is the consequence of
a free willed Choice he sees this as a a
physically determined moment related to
gravitational Mass if gravitational Mass
crosses a certain threshold the
superposition will collapse into itself
into a defined State um so there is no
free will there it's it's it's a
physical event um as a philosopher uh
the only conceptual it's not a problem
but an issue to be discussed that I see
there is um can we speak of physical
quantities or physical variables before
collapse can we speak of gravitational
Mass before collapse um before a
measurement is done but uh I think that
that is the key difference it's not so
much on um the notion of what um a wave
function is a description of MH there is
very little doubt that the wave function
has a deterministic evolution we know
how to calculate that it's linear it's
the nonlinearity process that uh that we
call collapse uh that is at stake here
and the interpretation of it being an
objective physical process or a free
willed choice of the interiority of a
system um federo and I and I dare be
with federo on this one not with sir
Roger I I don't think collapse really
happens I think if we eventually get to
a deeper understanding of what's going
on
I think we realize that there is no
collapse it's an epistemic it's it's a
transition from an epistemic idea to an
ontological one so rer is raising his
hand to his
forehead but but I don't see how you can
say it doesn't happen I mean they you
have to have something which looks more
or less like like the classical world
and if you don't have the collapse of
the wave function the quantum evolution
of a state does not look like the
classical work it just doesn't I mean
there are arguments which people use
which are sort of approaches to this but
you can look carefully at these
arguments and you see they don't do it
you have to have a development of
quantum theory which has not yet been
formulated in the complete Theory all I
can do is say the level at which I
expect collapse to take place I say the
collapse if you have a physical
situation where the parameters are so
and so then I might expect collapse to
take place within 10 minutes say and
that calculation could be done but it
doesn't tell you when it exactly when it
happens it doesn't tell you which way
the collapse happens it doesn't give you
a mechanism for collapse it's just a
formula which tells you how long a
system can remain in superp position
before it collapses through one or the
other and the AR the connection with
Consciousness you see in my view is
quite secondary and it's very important
I think I would certainly agree with
both of you it's very fundamental in the
way the universe operates U
Consciousness is playing big
role but it but it's it's a subtle role
and it doesn't reveal itself until you
have elaborate systems like living
beings I'm aware animals maybe for all I
know plants might possess it to some
degree but I don't see it in inanimate
objects they're not sophisticated enough
somehow to take advantage of the
collapse of the W function
for them it's just a random process but
if we do you think that if we would
reach a deeper theory that maybe goes
beyond quantum theory U we would would
we find out that Consciousness is truly
epiphenomenal um at the end of the chain
so to speak in our universe or could
such a theory point to the
fundamentality of Consciousness where
would you put your chips oh yeah I think
it could be I mean if if if we
understand well we need to understand
the physics better but I would regard
that as a small step we don't have the
theory yet but I would think within the
next 50 years we will have such a theory
I think that tells us we will understand
Consciousness in that time it's a much
more sophisticated concept but what I am
saying is the other way around that
whatever Consciousness is it's something
which depends on that phenomenon so
we're not going to have a a physical
understanding of what things in the
universe are conscious um I mean even
things like you see when I mentioned
steuart hamov earlier I think I
mentioned him but anyway the connection
with the uh microtubules was something I
learned from him and his job is he's a
is an anesthesist or or
anesthesiologist he likes his job was to
people to sleep except he doesn't call
it sleep it's a different phenomenon
General anesthetics are particular
substances and they have a very curious
relationship to each other for example
Zenon which is an inert gas doesn't seem
to have much in the way of chemical
interactions nevertheless is a general
anesthetic and what is the connection
between these different substances which
act as general anesthetics as far as the
chemistry is concerned absolutely
nothing it doesn't seem to be they are
chemically connected nevertheless there
is some physical connection and the view
is that say do his View and I think he's
probably right his view is that these
General anesthetics do um affect
microtubules and it's the microtubular
activity um which probably does involve
the collapse of wave function in their
function um is something which general
anesthetics effect but that's a subject
which is
active at the moment and needs to be a
lot of work to find out what's going on
but it's a long way from understanding
Consciousness I think that's much more
okay federo please reply to sirer yeah I
I I have two main points uh the first is
that uh I feel that uh Consciousness
without Free
Will is not useful is not useful in a
sense that if you cannot you know if you
are conscious and you know you probably
should know your intentions and you
probably should know what what the
reality in which you exist is so that
you can decide how to you know how to
proceed in in your conscious living but
if you if you don't have free will
Consciousness is is really not useful
and so I don't see any reason why you
should exist so that's one and the two
things is that I start I don't want
quantum physics to explain Consciousness
I start by assuming that Consciousness
in Free Will exist and I arrive at
describing why quantum physics must have
the C the crazy properties he has to to
justify the existence of Consciousness
in free will they I taken as a
postulate so here we really hit on
ontology also right in your
interpretation of quantum onology is not
in the quantum State the ontology is in
the meaning that the quantum state
produces within the consciousness of the
field which is assumed to have
Consciousness in Free Will yes so yeah
it's basically a phenomen
phenomenological approach you say I see
phenomenology of Consciousness with a
private inner state that is non-
clonable which can hold sort of a free
will that manifests in a certain action
and then you say that resembles very
much what we know about Quantum Theory
so why not investigate corre
and that it could be that and that also
explains why we have apparently two
physics we have quantum physics and
classical physics connected by the
collapse of the wave function so the the
quantum physics describes the
interiority of Nature and the classical
the classical Theory describes the
exteriority of of of of of nature one is
described within you know in the real of
the hilber space the in space and time
the the sharable information the bits
deriv from the collapse of the way
function according to the current theory
but in in my theory they derive from a
free will decision of the quantum field
that wants to pursue his own self-
knowing his own process of of you know
of understanding about reality yeah so
Roger I'm just very curious I know this
is not your ontological position but I'm
just curious in
trying to solve the the quantum
conundrum if you think it could be
fruitful to pursue this route of saying
maybe on an ontological level we have to
say the quantum fields are conscious and
out of that Consciousness the the the
classical World sort of comes to us as
some of the founding FS themselves seem
to suggest I mean Marx plank saying
Consciousness is fundamental derivative
matter is derivative of Consciousness
what are your thoughts
here well I think I mean I think these
things are very
different I think France there's one
confusion here which I think I'd like to
uh get rid of in a way see in the early
days of quantum mechanics people worried
about the collapse of the word function
but not thinking of it as a physical
process I mean many people including
most particularly vigner I think because
I talked to him quite a lot when I was
in Princeton I had conversations with
vno which were very interesting and he
had the view as many others did that
somehow the collapse of the wave
function was an effect of qu of
Consciousness that is to
say the terminology in quantum theory is
very much suggestive of that because it
says you make an observation and this
observation induces the collapse of the
wave function now that you see sort of
rather suggesting that the collapse
doesn't take place unless a con
conscious being comes along and looks at
it then that measurement that the
conscious being makes by looking at it
you like collapses the wave function so
it's as though it's the Consciousness
which causes the collapse of the wave
function that's very different from my
view it's almost the opposite of that in
my view is saying no no no it's not that
Consciousness causes the collapse the
collapse would take place quite
independently whether they're conscious
beings or not I like think of a
particular example Ian just a sort of
thought experiment if you like I imagine
that there's a very distant planet
somewhere which has very very much like
the Earth uh it just happens that no
life no conscious beings ever came about
on that planet but it's otherwise like
the earth now the weather on the earth
is supposed to be very delicately
dependent upon very small effects so the
people talk about the butterfly effect
if the butterfly's wing flaps one way
then the weather goes one way and if it
flapped a different way then the weather
might have a completely different effect
so it's a thing which means that the
behavior of the system depends very very
delicately on the initial State okay now
this planet that I'm imagining has no
life on it no butterflies nevertheless
you have weather on this planet but
since there is no conscious being or no
um beings which which
uh collapse the wave function according
to that view collapse of the wave
function doesn't take place therefore
you have weather which is superposition
of all different weathers and you have a
space probe which GES to this planet and
takes a photograph of of the weather on
the planet now that weather it hasn't
there's no being no conscious being on
the space probe it just takes a
photograph now as it returns to the
Earth it transmits this photog gra which
is now of a superposition of different
weathers and somebody on a SC screen
looks at the signal on the earth and and
soon as that being looks that human
being looks at the picture on the screen
suddenly collaps wave function happens
because only then does the conscious
being become part of the system and then
the weather becomes one weather to me
this is completely ridic ridiculous the
weather is going to be one weather
whether there's a being on his or not
it's not because of living beings on the
planet it's not because of Consciousness
on the planet it's because the collapse
of a wave function is a physical process
which takes place when L Things become
large enough super superpositions become
large enough in a way which I could be
very explicit about if necessary but I
mean by large enough and it would
collapse the wave function quite
independently of conscious beings yeah I
think that's a clear clear position and
it also sort of me reminds me of
Einstein right I like to think of the
Moon existing if I look look or not so I
think you're in a very good good company
with this position
Bernardo Bernardo please respond to this
thought experiment of s no not not not a
direct response just just an observation
I think we may be limiting ourselves to
a dichotomy that maybe we don't need to
limit ourselves to the dichotomy I I
sense is is is it Consciousness that
causes collapse or is it collapse that
leads to a moment of Consciousness there
is a dichotomy there um but the
dichotomy presupposes the wave function
to be ontically real in other words it
presupposes that the world out there is
actually in a superposition of States a
physical superposition of States if
that's what we start from then of course
as s Roger mentioned earlier then of
course there has to be collapse because
when we look around we see a world in a
definite state mhm um I think where fed
R is coming from may be wrong about this
but that that's what I think and
certainly that's where I am coming from
is I I don't think the wave function is
ontically real I think the wave function
is a model of the best of our knowledge
about the world in other words the
superposition of states is our own
gambling strategy about what we are
likely to see next it doesn't mean that
the world is an actual superposition and
if the world is not in that actual
superposition
in that sense then there is no collapse
collapse is an epistemic transition it's
the transition from what we anticipate
to see and the probabilities we lay out
about what we are likely to see next and
an observation of what is actually next
and you see what I mean so maybe we we
don't need to limit ourselves to that to
that dichotomy just a clarification
Point that's what I'm trying to do and
federo yeah well I I have just a very
simple point to add in my theory the
ontic state is not the wave in the pure
Quantum state is actually the experience
of the pure Quantum state which is in
within Consciousness and that's the one
that then could cause the collapse of
the wave function which is not a
collapse of the w a decision of the of
the field to decide what to manifest in
space and time yeah so so the atic
aspect of reality is not in Quant Quant
Quantum quantum physics is epistemic in
fact that it can only tell us what we
can know about reality it doesn't tell
us what reality is so the actual reality
is is is determin if you start again
with Consciousness and Free Will by
those two properties that you have
postulated from the beginning
interesting sh where are you on the
these epistemic versus atic
interpretations of the wave function
well the see there is a very
important development in my thinking
which I I don't quite know when I first
within the last five years i' say
certainly I think the first thing I
ever talked about there was a conference
in Arizona I think the idea but it got
developed since then that you can't talk
about reality quite like that there are
two kinds of reality there's Quantum
reality and classical reality and they
are not quite the same and Quantum
reality behaves in a way which is quite
strange um it's the notion of quantum
reality actually comes from Einstein in
a certain sense he talked about a
Quantum State he say does it is the
Quantum State real or not and a good
example is the spin of a spin half
particle they take an electron now the
spin of an electron the different
possible spin states are spin
right-handed about all POS possible
directions so I can move my thumb about
the axis and it spins right-handed about
that axis now all those different
possible States those are the possible
spin states of an
electron now what you can't do is ask
the electron what your spin state is or
you can try but it doesn't give you any
answer because that's a Quantum reality
however if you do have a theory which
says by now the electron ought to be
spinning say about that particular
direction and it has all about the same
amount that's in electron it's always
the same amount about that direction now
what I can do is I can confirm it and
this is the antin's Criterion I can say
to the electron I'm going to measure the
electron spin in that direction and if I
have it right it will say yes you got it
right with 100% certainty and it will
not disturb the system you can measure
it again and again and again then each
time it says yes if I measure in a
different direction it will give you a
probabilistic answer will maybe say no
maybe yes depends on you do experiment
many many times it will give you
different answers now the quantum state
is something you can confirm in a sense
but you cannot ascertain it you have to
make a distinction between confirming
and ascertaining ascertaining would be
something you say hello state which way
you spin it doesn't answer questions
like that but you can explain these
rather puzzling things which is what
Einstein was worried about in fact these
things called Einstein podski Rosen
experiments where you can have a spin
state which is shared by two observers
or two people let's call them widely
separated and you know what the total
spin each one has a spin half particle
which has come from a spin zero initial
State and so they have to be opposite
each other now if one of the individuals
measure the spin in some direction that
instantly makes it the opposite actually
worse than instantly it goes backwards
in time along the past light cone and
the other one is fixed by the
measurement made by the one and the
other one if that other one could
ascertain what the state was you would
then have a contradiction you could send
signals fter than light but you can't
send signals fast the light it would
lead you into contradiction with
relativity however what you can do is
confirm that state if the other person
knew what the measurement first first
one they made then that measure be could
be confirmed but it cannot be
ascertained and if you could ascertain
it you could send signals faster than
light which would lead you into real
trouble relativity would work it would
be real trouble however you can make
this the quantum reality of that state
is projected
backwards along the past light light
current so it goes not just
simultaneously but even back in time but
since that's only Quantum reality you
cannot ascertain what that state is so
you have to make a distinction between
the quantum reality which cannot be
ascertained but it can be confirmed
classical reality can be ascertained so
you can ask the state what it is and it
tells you what it is so that distinction
is something which is has to be made in
to talk about reality so reality you
have it's a when you talk about quantum
mechanics the notion of reality you've
got to be careful about
it's not like classical reality where
there is any one I I
fully that distinction is very clear to
me and you're talking about the Bell
Bells inequality theorem right and the
loophole free Bell tests that have been
performed I think by now and then a
common thing I hear physicists say we
either have to let go of realism reality
or we have to let go of locality is that
is that true but I'm
curious you reality it's it's Quantum
reality is not reality in the see that's
the trouble turn word to reality then
you might lead to a confusion about this
but if you look at the the sort of more
uh hardcore so to speak antic
interpretations would you agree that
those end up with like many worlds
interpretations because you want the
wave function to be antic and what's
your what's your take on that not many
worlds no I'm dead against it well I I I
have to be careful about this I have a I
have a point of
view this has to be taken in the right
Spirit my point of view is that it's a
good thing to have had in certain stag
of your life to have believed in the
many worlds interpretation of
qu short perod The better
shter I did go s through such a stage
myself believing in the many world
interpretation but I hope I can't
remember how long it
was whether it was as long as a year I'm
not
sure and then one goes to a more adult
position of an epistemic interpretation
or well you you say no the theory is is
not really complete or you have to
understand that these Notions of reality
are more subtle and without having the
quantum mechanical picture you see I
don't think argue you philosophers could
argue with each other
endlessly without realizing this way
strange way in which quantum States for
hey and I think spin is a good
example and uh well this is the bone
version of the of the EP Einstein P but
I Einstein wanted to do it that way
originally but I think Podi talked him
as sure may I I lend your Your Beautiful
Mind on a question that's been sort of
stuck with me ever since we met and I've
discuss things with you um yesterday we
had an evening and we talked about
semantics versus syntax and we refer to
sur's Chinese room experiment right can
you get from Pure syntax to semantics
which is a deep problem what what do you
think there to me it seems impossible
that the two seem two different
categories and that's what why I it
feels as if I have to pick my ontology
is our universe in the end physical
material or is it conscious and it has
to do with meaning that's how it feels
to me but I'm curious here what do you
think about it experiment can we get
from syntax to to to semantics you're
talking about the reality of the world
in some can we talk about the reality of
the world in an objective way is that
the sort of question we mean yes but it
also has to do with what philosophers
call qualia the the the if I have a
taste of something can we ever have a
complete mathematical description of
what I've experienced which would make
it clonable uh copyable uh to another
and and then of course it would I don't
see any objections that then we can have
conscious AIS because then you could
have my conscious experience Le
completely described copied into a
computer but I sense that we have a
fundamental problem there well I think
there's some subtle differences here you
see see okay philosophers and and
physicists worry about different things
well I'm not quite sure let me not say
that too much but you see the
computability issue is a separate
question I mean that's that's a matter
matical
problem whether you can compute the
thing from your physical Theory or not
actually also when you talk about qualia
I mean we don't know I mean is the
sensation of
bless common to different people if I
see a blue entity and it creates a
certain impression on me and somebody
else looks at the blue thing and does
that person have anything that you could
say is the same as my experience I would
just say we don't know
it could well be that there is something
in detail which is the same we don't we
certainly don't know enough about that
but I find very curious things like what
synesthesia where you have parts of the
brain if they get it mixed up then one
sensation gets sort of confused with
another sensation it does seem to be
that there was something different
between one kind of sensation and
another kind of sensation which may be a
universal thing it may be that different
people you might say philosophically how
can you ever know well maybe someday you
will be able to know and maybe there is
something about bless redness or
greenness or something which is
universal and if you have cesy of some
kind maybe some people would see the
bless as green and so on possibly I have
no idea I can't see anything against
that though it seems quite possible that
these s s qualia if you like are things
which have some objective physical basis
I don't know I'm not trying to claim
that that's the case or not I certainly
think that as our presentant level of
understanding we're a long way from that
and we can talk about it in a more
philosophical mess and know okay this is
one person has a certain sensation of so
and so and that's individual to that
being and it's meaningless to say it's
the same as what somebody else feels I
don't know the answer to that I think
that pleas
yeah it's it's a clear Precision um fedo
you can respond or what yeah to me
qualia quala can be represented by a
pure Quantum state but a representation
of qualia is not the sensations of quala
you know etheral reality is not reality
right I mean the so the quantum State
pure Quantum state is the map of a
territory which can only be known from
within in Consciousness so Consciousness
is what allows you to understand to know
and understand what you feel which is
qualia and and Mathematics can only go
to that point of saying the
representation of qualia has to be a
Quantum feels because it has the same
characteristic is private and you can
only know a small part of what you can
know from within yeah so what sir Roger
was saying the bless of blue and we
cannot know for sure that is beyond what
you can test beyond what is testable and
um I guess this because when you say the
the mathematics is is the map and it
give cannot give us the
territory here of course sir Roger you
have uh sometimes said that you do Grant
mathematics and an antic status right
that that there somehow is a mathematic
realm of mathematics am I please correct
me if I'm I'm Mis representing your view
but I'm not quite oh sorry I was talking
about your anolog and I think you have
uh um sometimes said that you think
mathematics has some antic status in our
universe that there is a realm of
mathematics and that would say that it
isn't only a map of reality but it is
like it truly
exists oh I see that's a slightly
different question yes I would say it
has an existence an objective existence
well sure if somebody proves the theorem
I mean Andrew WS proved that there were
no x to the N there you can have a sum
of two squares which is another square
but there's no other power which the sum
of two that pow gives you another thing
which has the same power I mean that's
mathematical statement and that would be
true whether the universe had different
physical laws I mean it's completely
independent it's a mathematical
statement which is objectively
true how we come across to understand
why it's true may be a very difficult
question maybe very few people really
understand how many people have gone
through Andrew WS as proof for example I
mean not many but uh I mean I've never
been through it for example but I still
think he's right that
that FMA theorem that he established is
is objectively true and if you had a
different Universe well not even a
different Universe I'm not sure what
that means exactly but I could imagine
the universe with physical laws which
are not the same as ours and they
contemplate the possibility of conscious
beings in that Universe
possibly we don't know enough about
physics to know how unique these
physical laws are and could you change
the parameters which we have in our
physical laws to some other numbers and
have another perfectly good laws of
physics where the physical
properties will be different possibly we
don't know but the mathematical laws
will be the same so things like whether
or not we have a sum of two Powers which
are the
same for example um that's going to be
the true whichever Universe you're in
that I think that's the thing you're
referring to whether the mathematical
world is an
objective World independent of us it has
its existence which yeah that that is my
question and so you are saying that in
some sense it is like in a in a platonic
realm of of forms it has a place you say
yes yes Bernardo how do you listen to
this uh from as a
philosopher well
clearly the the theorems of mathematics
or the axioms of mathematics that are in
logic that are self-evident to us have
an application to the world because we
you know it creat these descriptions in
mathematics and they are incredibly
predictive so stuff that is merely
self-evident to us because you know we
are just primates why would stuff that
is self-evident to our cognitive system
hold for the World At Large right that's
that there was a paper written by Eugene
wigner in which he talks about this
miracle he uses the word miracle 12
times in 1960 paper um so I I think this
this
substantiates the point sir Roger is
making that the mathematics is not
arbitrary it seems to have an existence
independent of the minds that consider
those axioms self-evident to me but
that's just my philosophical position um
I am aligned with federo in this sense I
think the only ontological primitive is
is is a field of
subjectivity and since to be is to have
properties things that are are what they
are and not something else they
conceivably conceiv could be so to be is
to have properties and it so happens
that this field of subjectivity which is
mental therefore um has archetypal
patterns that are built in it has a
preferential way of mentation so to say
certain things that it considers
self-evident because it is what it is
instead of being something else and
because we are segments of this field
and so is the rest of the world what we
consider self-evident turns out to be
applicable to the world but we can
account for this without another realm
we only need that whatever the
ontological Primitive is whatever nature
actually is at the bottom level is the
same for us and the world and that we
have subjective access to it and then we
can account for it without anything
beyond nature uh I I have I have a
strange suggestion but tell me if you're
up for it Roger I'd like to have a bit
more of a poetic approach almost if we
read uh John Wheeler's with with his
notion of the participatory Universe it
seems as if somehow the universe is is
writing itself I mean that's the
classical world we perceive right and
whatever the universe is it the the
world we perceive as observers is this
classical universe and we know quantum
theory to be correct so someone is as if
the universe is writing itself and we
had a conference a while back with Lee
smolen who you must know and um also
seeing a a a phrase that really stuck
with me that universe is not but a
collection of partial views of itself
also sort of this we wheeler notion and
I'm just so curious what what do you
think is this all
physicists talking
poetry
maybe I don't know of course I I knew
weer quite well um but it was a hard
person to understand and I always found
it rather difficult he was always was
very ni and everything and I found it if
you talk to him you have a question or
you talk to him and his reply would be
about what 37 and a half degrees away
from your
question making that figure it's an
exact number of course but it was always
a little angled away from what you
thought and it was quite strange in some
ways talking interesting but
yes and but but that that whole idea of
of the the people saying the universe
wanting to know itself the universe
looking back at itself the the all those
stuff he he pondered about because he
did in the end also did he could not
give the clear answer right but what are
your thoughts there is it something that
sort of
also I don't know I got lost after all
he kep talking about it and bits and
things like that and I think I lost at
that
stage um I guess it got too philos like
I have to say I I
I don't know I just find it difficult to
uh I think quantum mechanics confuses
people too much that's the trouble and I
think trouble that confuses people is
not quite for the reasons people think I
mean it's partly because you have these
two kinds of reality and you can't
really ask of a Quantum State you can't
you can't measure what Quantum state is
you and it's the same thing I said
before you can't you can't ascertain the
state you can only confirm it so if you
think you know what it ought to be by
now then you can do an experiment very
very precisely test whether you got it
right or but if you don't have any
concept of what the quantum state
is well it may be that you you can't you
can't ascertain with these unan skosan
types of
experiments you have to and I'm taking
the view that you have to take this more
with quantum mechanics there is a notion
of reality which doesn't come about
until you think about Quantum I don't
think pure philosophy would give it it's
not a notion which comes from
philosophical thinking it's a notion
which comes of the
physics and it's interesting and
different from what we tended to think
before where reality is something you
might imagin
I've expressed myself on that before but
yeah it's it's it's it's very clear I
think um it would be nice to because s
Roger I I think we did not discuss a end
time or we have already crossed it so I
don't want to um I want to be respect
your time and energy so um if the two of
you have a final question for sh Roger U
maybe and I have a question to all three
of you to wrap this conversation up my
question would be uh simply that if uh
Consciousness existed without Free Will
what do you think what what good would
it do I mean I I I frankly cannot get my
my head around
that well you see I think it's not I
mean that it's an interesting question
because it doesn't seem to me
necessary that
Consciousness is is causing in some
sense I can imagine somebody being
paralyzed completely I mean you get this
this happens people are completely
paralyzed and nobody can tell whether
that person is actually conscious or not
and L later on you find that person may
wake up in some sense and you find they
were conscious all the time they knew
what was going on it's just they
couldn't influence him in some sense
this notion of being would be having
free will in the sense of affecting
things is not so obviously a necessity
from what I mean by you can I can
imagine one can have that subjective
experience without being able to use
that to effect way seems to be something
a little different to be able to use
one's Consciousness in an effective way
is a little bit different from actually
having Consciousness so I'm not sure I
would want to identify them perhaps as
strongly as I think may your suggest
yeah because to me uh Consciousness
without Free Will would have no causal
power so it would do no good to any
entity it's not causal power because if
you have this person who is in the state
I forget the technical term for it but
who is simply aware of what's going on
but has no control over emotions and
things like that that person is still
conscious yeah yeah no but but what
would be the point of being conscious if
you cannot do anything about it you you
see what I mean yeah that's right they
can't do anything with it but that's
different question well yeah but but you
know why why should Consciousness even
exist if he has no causal power that
that's my my question yeah I would agree
that clearly it does exist and I think
I'd agree with you there um it's the
fact that it can have a causal effect is
the only reason why beings have evolved
with it I me as you say there would be
no point in beings evolved who had
Consciousness if it had no effective
influence on the world so sure I I think
that's absolutely essential but it
doesn't seem to me it's quite the same
thing as being aware have your views
have your views on uh free will shifted
in the last decade I mean you have
opened the door I think here you say
that the doors open for you to Free Will
where are you now do you have free will
is that to question for me yes sorry to
you yeah yes well you said I'd have
thought a little bit more about free
will i' often thought I don't really
know what it means but I think I would
like to say that I have a better idea
what I think it might
mean and it depends
on you see you could say sometimes
people think Free Will is oh you can
have a will to do anything can you be
random something like this I keep being
reminded when I was growing out with my
little brother who was two years younger
than I was and he could beat me at
pretty well any game but the thing that
Disturbed me the most he could beat me
at paper stones and scissors you see now
I thought that game is a pure game of
chance how can he beat me at that game
so I went away and I got hold of a table
of logarithms as of my father's study
and I made made a lot of table you know
three means this and to and so I make a
long strip and I would follow the strip
and simply do what the strip said and
then I broke even so I got relieved you
see it's not that he was magic and it's
just that he noticed patents and what
when I was trying to be random you see
so free will is different from
Randomness you see sometimes people
suggest that Free Will is means you can
do what you like and therefore there's
sort of Randomness in it I think that's
the wrong way of looking at it I don't
mean that by the way I'm not saying this
is your point of view but I am saying
that it's if you like
the Free Will is to use to see if I
think action a is preferable to action B
and I have used my Consciousness to work
it all out and I say I believe I go
through it all I think no action a is
probably the better thing to do and then
when the moment comes then I do action a
I'm doing the action a because I had the
Free Will that was involving my
understanding of which is better to do
it's not that like when you touch the
stove it heart and pull your hand away
and things like that which are clearly
not free will actions it's something
where you're using your Consciousness in
a way which involves your understanding
of what's the right thing to do it's
more like
that it's not a complete answer to the
question I Dare by the way disagree when
when you both of you say there there
would be no point in you in in in no
Free Will and Consciousness because say
we have a movie theater I can enjoy a
beautiful movie without being able to
influence any of the scenes the thing
has been recorded and it's playing out I
could still enjoy it which would be a
conscious experience so
thate I agree okay there Bernardo yeah I
think this one is also hits on what when
you as a philosopher think about Free
Will versus Consciousness and you don't
see the necessity
of I I don't deny Free Will um I I just
think the concept is is is
not precise so people mean different
things like we think that if something
is determined then there cannot be free
will but that's not what we mean when we
talk about our free will it's like my
choices are not random they are
determined by me my tastes my
preferences my inclinations so it's not
like Free Will is is dichotomous with
determinism it's about what is
determining it and what we identify with
if we as if we identify with the causal
factors that make the determination we
say oh free will but if we don't we say
oh we don't have free will you see it's
it's it's not a dichotomy it's not
contradictory but but I am with you that
um I I think there is still well I think
the search for truth should not depend
on what makes us feel good or not the
truth is the truth of course um but even
if the truth turns out to be that the
universe is determined I would still see
um room for what we colloquially refer
to as free will because then the factors
that are making the determination are
those factors that I identify with I am
making those determinations now never
mind that I can't be other than I am so
my choices will always be determined by
that which I am I can't will my will
like schopenhauer said I can only act
according to my will but I can't will
myself to will differently so at the end
does it matter you know so um but I
understand how you use the word federo
you talk about Free Will as a a impetus
that leads to changes of States
absolutely yeah that's exactly right
yeah so that's I I could call that
determination too and it would still
have the same effect yeah but but but is
a determination that has origin on an
inner State as opposed to a objective
collapse of the wave function for
example an state that you identify that
I identify with which I have control
over which I have control over I can
choose where to look or I can choose
what I Fe what I what to say or what I
feel okay those are those are the the
bottom choices are only choices of what
do I communicate what I choose to
observe and what I choose to communicate
which is something which is within me
yeah so those are those are the only
choice that are considered free will
because the rest of it is it's just just
you know it confuses the idea of what
free will is so I'm I'm quite a quite in
agreement with both of you when you
consider Free Will I can do whatever I
want and that's absolutely silly okay
yeah and uh um one uh if we're all okay
still the uh in your book fedrico talks
about the fact sir Roger that we are
quantum
classical uh machines so to speak the
body our physical body is quantum
classical now if this evidence is right
that has just come out and we there's
now a branch a discipline called Quantum
biology that things these phenomena are
much uh broader we see them in nature
these these these Quantum classical
aspects would that mean could that mean
that Consciousness is not restricted to
brains I mean uh if in biology we see
Quantum classical phenomena on cellular
level what are your thoughts there sir
rer do you think Consciousness could
could could a bacterium be conscious for
instance or could be the thing is I
don't know you see I think Consciousness
is certainly not restricted just to
humans that I certain feel but how far
down if I can use the word down in the
animal even plant think and how far does
it go you see I think I think uh but
it's
people dog owners are very convinced
that they dogs and conscious and I
believe that is correct I have no reason
to disbelieve that um I think that dogs
are conscious I think that elephants are
conscious I think octopuses are
conscious they don't Happ to be melan at
all but whether an ant is conscious or
not I would worry more about maybe maybe
not whether a honey be is conscious
maybe a better chance I think they do
complicated things they seem to be able
to um even do simple arithmetic compar
so uh how far down if I can use the word
down in the animal kingdom it goes I
have no idea I think it probably goes
pretty far down whether a bacteria could
be considered to be conscious I would be
much more dubious about but I'm only
guessing yeah yeah but and and yeah
sorry just one because I'm so curious
what your thoughts are in and people
have like pan psychist ideas when they
think uh um let's say a cell is
conscious and then they have What's
called the combination problem because
how then does do do I feel like one
Consciousness hunts and not sort of a
sort of weird sensation of being
trillion cells at the same time are
these stuff that you think about or have
thoughts
on well it's got to be something so I do
think it's got something to do with with
Quantum State and um since I argue it to
be to do with the collapse of wave
function then You' got to have a wave
function to collapse and big wave
functions collapse more than Little Wave
functions in certain sense so according
to such a view you would have to have
quite a big coherent object you see it's
wrong probably to think of individual
cells it's probably Collective effect I
mean many Quantum effects are like that
when you talk about um super
conductivity
material there are many Quantum effects
which are quite big in a certain sense
of
extensive um Quantum fluidity fluidity
like that uh sure so it's not just
thinking there individual atoms how much
does each atom have and add it up that's
not be it's got to be some much more
collect collective Def and I have one
final question for the the three of you
maybe fed
nice if you can start we've um discussed
the the the the dangers and the threats
of AI especially as things are now
progressing so fast and especially and
here also sir Roger I I remember you
saying it's
not
um we don't have to fear computers being
intelligent what we have to fear is that
we start believing they are truly
intelligent so I remember you saying
saying that and uh
what if I ask the three of you um what
defines the human and could we say that
the era of computation points back at us
that we are are much more and so moreat
on a meaning purpose level what are your
thoughts here fedo what defines the
human if a human is defined by having a
Consciousness that is not actually in
the physical body is in the field the
controls the physical body um and so the
sensations and feelings and Free Will
are properties of the field is a Quantum
field doesn't exist in space and time um
so so if you believe that then a lot of
the our
intelligence our real intelligence are
you know what distinguishes us from
artificial intelligences is the
semantics is the fact that you have an
experience that you can comprehend what
you are experiencing uh you get the
meaning of it and and that of course is
the ontology as I said earlier so so
symbols follow the ontology of the of
the meaning so these symbols are in fact
in service of the fact that these fields
want to communicate with each other and
they need uh classical symbols which are
sharable symbols like bits that can be
copied to communicate they cannot they
cannot trans transfer what they feel
directly because that's a Quantum state
that cannot be duplicated so this is
impossible to communicate what you feel
to any other field but you can
communicate by translating some of what
you feel into sharable feelings and
that's that's also accounts for why
there has to be a classical World
classical world has to exist for two
reasons one to communicate feel to feel
to communicate their meaning with
classical symbols with sharable symbols
and the other one to store the
experience Because the actual experience
the quantum experience can only last a
very short amount of time so is actually
in the present so you need to store that
experienc In classical with classical
symbols that you can then retrieve in
the present in order to make sense of
what you of what of your life thank you
yeah and Bernardo how would you like to
close that what defines the human and
especially in relation to the era of
computation what defines us is our inner
life whatever it comes from what defines
us is what it what it is like to be us
right not how we present ourselves to
external observation but what it is like
to be us um I don't think there will
ever be anything it is like to be a
silicum computer in an of itself I think
uh assuming that there can be is
mistaking assimilation for the thing
simulated it's like thinking that if you
simulate a black hole in your computer
which you can do very accurately you
will be sucked into your computer
because your simulation is accurate and
I think the same thing with AI that it
simulates how the patterns of how we
associate tokens words uh word segments
the fact that it can simulate that well
because it has been trained on text
written by human doesn't at all mean
that what it is like to be it
while it is processing tokens is
anywhere near what it is like to be us
when we are speaking as a matter of fact
I don't think there is anything it is
like to be it in and of itself a large
language model is just a computer that
applies geometrical transformations to
tokens it's manipulation of symbols like
in s's Chinese room experiment and I
think it is a great danger that um
because those symbol manipulations now
can be done at such a large scale um
that l&amp;m's come across to us as things
like us the illusion is now becoming so
compelling that we will start thinking
that we are mechanisms or in sir s sir
Roger's words that we will start
thinking that we are FAL systems because
those llms are form of systems and they
seem to behave like us now where does
the illusion come from well it's obvious
it seems to behave like us because it
was strained on our output it was
strained on human text so it quacks like
a duck because it was made to imitate
the duck so the fact that it quacks like
a duck doesn't mean at all that it is a
duck anymore than because a shop window
mannequin that was made to look like a
human that similarity doesn't mean that
it is human it was constructed to look
like a human by humans by humans an LM
was constructed to talk like humans by
humans trained on human text so that it
quacks like us doesn't mean that it is
anywhere near us but the illusion is so
compelling that we may start believing
this kind of grotesque
nonsense so Roger would you agree to
this are your views on a AI still the
same even with the last developments I
think um I don't think that might view
has changed on whole the trouble is that
you can get device said think that
without being conscious these devices
will not
actually well put it the other way
around um but they won't be intelligent
if that and uh I think AI is is a
misnomer so it means artificial
intelligence I fact fact that when calls
it AI is rather suggestive that well is
suggestive that you just have your
powerful enough computer and then it
will become actually intelligent now you
see me this goes against I mean the
initial argument which I was trying to
make at the beginning of this discussion
came from the lectures given by Steen
which
I formulated my viewpoint there what he
showed is that that your understanding
really is not a computation so you can
you can put in as much in the way of
computational power you can make the
thing play J chess as well as you can or
you can make it play
so that it would be played these
moves better than any human being that's
quite possible but does it understand
what it's doing well it would have to be
conscious to understand what it's doing
of course it's hard to formulate this
because what does it mean to say it
understand something it might perform in
such a way that looks as understands it
and the trouble is that I could imagine
that the uh technology will get to such
a degree that it's very hard to tell
whether or not it's conscious doesn't
mean that it is conscious and I
certainly would argue that that a
computational system in other words
computer when we use the word computer
that's what we mean after all computer
in the sense that we mean it which is a
computational system will not
ever be
intelligent doesn't mean that it could
simulate the intelligence to a degree
that you might be fooled by I mean it's
it's a it's a difficult question but I I
would say that
AI I mean it has its dangers the dangers
are not that it will take over and
become more intelligent than us the
dangers are it will be Theus ways which
could fool us all that sort and yeah
thank you so much Roger and I I canot um
I find it very special that you took
time for us and I also find it just very
special I I contact your assistant and
he that you are still up for this
sitting down with us and I see a
bookshelf full of books are your days
still spent are you still every day
reading thinking how does that go on
your age I still have my book books
because I don't want to throw them out
but I have a difficulty that I can
barely read because my eyes S I have
macular degeneration
which means I have to magnify it up
hugely in order to see it I should
probably one of these reading devices on
my computer which can read to me done
that yet but your days your days are
still spent thinking over all these deep
problems you are in that sense still
working it gets more difficult as I get
older I think
yes I get more
easily thank you so much and um
yeah I
can I cannot do more than thank you very
much sir Roger because that has been a
very very good discussion I've enjoyed
it too yes I'm very grateful as well
thank you thank you so much Roger we'll
let you and your assistant know when
this video uh comes online and I wish
you all the best and both both of you in
finding answers to these deep questions
and it's also beautiful to just discuss
and ponder about these questions of life
thank you very much for watching and um
we will let you know uh when next videos
come up around all of these topics
thanks so much
