so we don't teach our children anything
handson stuff to teach him these things
not just reading out of a book which is
what's wrong with public school so it's
true my son cannot read it will come at
the right time I'm supposed to
notice I'm supposed to notice it
already did you know that 54% of
American adults can only read at or
below a sixth grade level
for reference some sixth grade books are
holes A Wrinkle in Time and the Percy
Jackson series and those are all great
children's books but imagine not being
able to read anything beyond them worse
imagine being an adult who struggled to
understand written words at all who was
functionally illiterate you wouldn't be
able to fill out a job application
follow a recipe you might not even be
able to sign your own name wouldn't you
do everything in your power to prevent
this from happening to your child well
not these parents
recently my YouTube homepage has been
filled with reactions to parents who
unschool their kids on Tik Tok and this
means that they pull their children out
of public school but instead of setting
up a homeschooling curriculum they let
the child decide what they're going to
learn and when doesn't matter what it is
if the child doesn't want to learn it
they don't I had heard the term
unschooling before but I've never seen
it in action and once the initial shock
of these videos were off I became
horrified thinking what future awaits
these children if they never learn how
to read so today I want to talk about
unschooling literacy and the effects of
illiteracy on a person's life and I'm
focusing on literacy not only because
this is a books and reading Channel but
because these parents by and large don't
seem to have any training in education
or in child development and therefore
don't seem to understand just how
critical it is for child to learn to
read because it is relevant quick
background on me though I'm not an
educator now I did study education
alongside literature at the undergrad
and graduate levels and I used to work
as an assistant in a remedial reading
classroom in an elementary school so I
do have a pretty solid understanding of
this topic in order to better understand
this situation we need to define a few
terms unschooling and literacy let's
start with
unschooling unschooling is a form of
homeschooling popularized by the
education critic John Holt in the 1970s
Holt began his career as an elementary
school teacher but when he noticed that
the school system focused on repetition
and memorization over critical thinking
and true understanding he became
disillusioned with formal education and
began advocating for homeschooling Holt
initially believed he could help reform
the school system but the less progress
he saw the more radical his views became
so he came to Advocate not only for home
homeschooling but a hands-off childl
approach to homeschooling he believed
quote children who were provided with a
rich and stimulating learning
environment would learn what they are
ready to learn when they are ready to
learn it this approach would come to be
called on schooling when Holt's
newsletter grow without schooling
launched in 1977 it's worth noting that
Hol did not have a degree in education
or psychology but rather studied
industrial engineering at Yale from what
I can tell his views about how children
learn don't seem to be based in anything
other than his own belief system and
some observations from his time as
teacher so you might be wondering like I
was how a curriculum free education is
even legal well in the US homeschooling
is perfectly legal in all 50 states and
because unschooling is technically a
form of homeschooling there are no laws
against it however each state differs in
how much proof of teaching hours and
progress they require New York for
example is on the strict end the state
requires an individualized home
instruction plan prior to every school
year and then quarterly an annual
reports on the actual progress that was
made Idaho on the other hand does not
regulate or monitor homeschool education
ah Idaho a neglectful parents
paradise and now that we have a
background on unschooling what do we
mean by illiteracy I brought up the 54%
statistic a minute ago but who are the
people who f fall into this 54% and what
did their reading skills actually look
like the statistic comes from a recent
study from the US Department of
Education who found that 54% of us
adults aged 16 to 74 or approximately
130 million people lack literacy
proficiency well that raises the
question of what is literacy proficiency
literacy is broadly defined as the
ability to read and write but it more
accurately encompasses the comprehension
evaluation and utilization of
information
in other words illiteracy is not only a
total lack of reading and writing
ability but also a decreased ability to
understand and use information in fact
the program for international assessment
of adult competencies say that five
times fast identifies five levels of
literacy with one being the lowest and
five being the highest they found that
one in five us adults fall into level
one meaning they struggle to read and
understand print materials though some
on the higher end could be able to
perform simple tasks based on the info
presented to them those at level two can
perform slightly more advanced tasks
like paraphrasing and comparing and
contrasting but aren't able to do so
with longer or denser texts we'll come
back to these categories of definitions
in a few minutes during the reaction
portion of the video but I want to
highlight a quote from Dr Iris fineberg
who's the director of the adult literacy
Research Center at Georgia State
University it's not just people who are
are poor it's not just people who are
racial minorities it's not just people
who speak funny because they're from the
south it literally can be anybody so I'm
not someone to throw around the word
privilege because it's kind of become
devoid of meaning these days but in this
case it does take a certain amount of
privilege and financial stability in
order for one or both parents to stay
home and homeschool or on school a child
rather than work outside the home as
we'll see there seems to be this
unspoken belief among unschooling
parents that illiteracy can't possibly
happen to their child and that couldn't
be further from the truth reading and
writing are not natural inherent human
skills they need to be taught and if a
child is not taught to read they will be
literate no matter their race or their
class okay you waited long enough for
the reaction portion of this video let's
start with uh the unschooling Tik Tok
that sent the internet a flame by a
Creator called momy onami there's a lot
going on in this video that I want to
address so we're going to break it down
in sections so we don't teach our
children anything everything that they
learn is in response to either their
interests or their questions we have no
curriculum we have no school hours we
really just respond whenever they want
to know something and do our best to
make sure they really get it and my big
fear about about free schooling was that
if my kids only went towards what they
were interested in saving all of their
real estate only for things they're
interested in not cramming it with
anything necessary I was concerned that
they would never be interested in things
like reading and writing and math so I'm
immediately noticing some
contradictions that I doubt this mother
is aware of herself she said she wants
to save all of her sons brain space for
the things that he's interested in none
of that necessary stuff
which like how do you how do you put
scare quotes around necessary but then
Express his fear that he won't be
interested in Reading Writing and math
so she must understand then that Reading
Writing and math are necessary skills
but is also admitting that if her son
does not express interest in them she
will not teach them like I just can't
imagine being a parent and having this
kind of cognitive dissonance like
knowing your son needs to learn these
essential skills and yet refus to teach
them if he doesn't Express this like
outright
enthusiasm it just like how how do you
really believe that that is the best
thing for your child not to mention
often as adults we have to do things we
are not interested in and don't want to
do I for one am not interested in math
or finances but I'm certainly glad I was
taught enough of both of those things to
you know have a budget and do my taxes
or else I would be in some deep trouble
now let's talk about that writing I
son's six and it took some patience and
not comparing myself to other mom's but
this is his book look at this
lamp
egg
jar
lion this is him doing this by himself
copying down words from other places
asking us more same with addition mom
what's 7+
5 uh this lady seems very impressed that
her son wrote egg and a lamp on his own
but at six years old that's not
impressive this reminded me a lot of the
children I worked with when I was a
remedial reading assistant uh you know
the handwriting looks very similar and
that it's nearly legible and it's not
you know staying on a straight line in
fact in the classroom I was in uh some
students would come in every day others
would come in two or three times a week
depending on their needs and this
strikes me as as an everyday student and
notice how she says he's copying
downwards copying is not writing and of
course copying down letters is part of
how you learn to write but just because
he can draw the letters that make up a
word doesn't necessarily mean he
understands how the language is working
and that he'd be able to identify those
words on his own you know like I could
copy down words in Russian does not mean
I understand Russian and the same thing
goes for the addition she mentioned
telling your kid that uh 7 + 5al 12 is
not the same thing as teaching him how
audition works so that he could get to
that answer himself finally let's look
at her closing statement it will come at
the right time but if you do not like
this idea of sending your kids away for
40 hours a week and then wondering why
they have no energy to do anything else
if you are not into your kids conforming
trust that you can follow their
interests and they will learn everything
they need to learn not what other people
need them to learn her small amount of
anecdotal evidence that it will come at
the right time is not nearly strong
enough to assert that if you pull your
kids out of school they will learn
everything they need to know and what
I'd really love to know is what exactly
does she mean by uh not into your kids
conforming and what other people need
them to learn she's already admitted
that Reading Writing and math are
necessary skills so like what does she
think is taught in public schools that
is so horrible she already listed all
the important things the main things
other than history maybe that's the
horrible thing I I truly don't have an
answer and as we'll see with the rest of
these videos it it seems like the very
idea that their child might ever
encounter a rule or ever be anything
less than entertained is what's so
offensive but real quick if you found
this video interesting so far I'll be
infuriating do consider hitting that
subscribe button I'm Kelsey Joe this is
thought Couture where the life of the
mind is down to earth and I publish
videos almost every week on book
recommendations creative writing advice
and literary commentary like this okay
now let's meet our next Tik Tock famous
unschooling mom Kelsey Ray uh I have
quite a bit to say about her uh first of
all as a Kelsey on behalf of all the
other Kelsey of the world we do not
claim her we have 52 days until I pull
my child out of public school and start
unschooling him he will be in second
grade but I want to share some things
with you guys that I'm going to be doing
to make sure I don't  up his
education or  up his future some of
you guys in comments not all of you most
people in my comments actually are
homeschooling or unschooling and I love
that we built this community of people
this community of like women that really
just think the same and I  love
that like that's been my goal this
entire time with this platform is can we
create a community of people that all
think the same and we've done that so
tell me in the comments if you
homeschool or unschool what are your
best practices your best tips so a right
off the bat she says uh make sure I
don't  up his education or his
future
failed you failed you failed at that I'm
also immediately concerned with the
language she's using to describe her
community people women who all think the
same that's been my
goal uh cult you just described a cult
my friend first off notice how she
specifies women that strikes me as a
subtle way of striking down any
potential opposition by appealing to the
the women supporting women idea I'm
willing to bet that if any of her
followers or community members dared
call her out she'd respond with oh your
mom shaming you're not a girl's girl
blah blah blah more importantly I have
no doubt that this mindset extends to
her children she wants to surround
herself with people who all think the
same well what place makes it very easy
to meet people who don't think like you
public school it's pretty clear I think
that this desire for Conformity and
pulling her out of a place of diversity
are related although this Pro Conformity
attitude is an interesting uh Point of
Departure from the previous video so
what are Kelsey's big plans for
unschooling let's listen so a couple
things that I'm going to be doing are
prioritizing to make sure that I don't
 up his education and he learns the
skills he needs to be a successful adult
is lots of time outside this is going to
allow his creativity to flow letting
children be children and not setting
them in front of a  desk or a
piece of paper or a book book for 8
hours a day is the best way to get their
creativity flowing and that matters in
life especially when you're trying to do
something that you love I'm going to
take him grocery shopping we're going to
start a garden doing lots of gardening
lots of handson stuff to teach him these
things not just reading out of a 
book which is what's wrong with public
school so I'm going to also teach him
about money that goes into grocery
shopping okay I'm going to teach him how
to be frugal teach him how to shop for
the things that he needs not always what
he wants I'm going to teach him how to
set boundaries with people I'm going to
teach them how to create friendships and
connections with people I'm going to
teach them how to bake and cook do you
know how many adults there are right now
that 30 40 years old don't know how to
 cook which is crazy to me okay
after a certain point you can't blame
your parents for that  no more you
can learn all right uh we're also going
to be doing lots of sports so he'll be
in any sport to every sport that we can
possibly think of because we will now
have time to do so I'll be taking them
to the aquarium and zoos and learning
through life experience es and that is
what unschooling is so we have time
outside creativity grocery shopping
gardening cooking money Sports uh all
things you can teach your kids outside
of school and things you should do with
your kids those are all great things you
know I'm totally in support of Hands-On
experiential learning and fostering a
child's creativity there's no problem
there with me but schooling and
creativity are not mutually exclusive
nor is it true that kids in school sit
at a desk for a full eight hours a day
uh recess exists gym class art class
music class theater programs field trips
clubs sports teams all sorts of special
programs like they already exist in
school now it takes a lot for me to feel
offended but I'm starting to feel a
little offended by the fact that she's
offended by the very concept of a book
we're not just going to sit in front of
a  book again like I agree that
not every student learns best by reading
and that book learning is only one way
to learn but at this age kids absolutely
need to be exposed to books and reading
remember those uh literacy levels I
mentioned a little bit ago uh well
because her son did attend kindergarten
in first grade maybe he's on track with
reading for his age I I don't really
know she doesn't say but he still needs
to work work on skills like uh
comprehension grammar and vocab
paraphrasing context clues synthesizing
ideas and not to mention also learning
to express his own thoughts and ideas in
writing and he just can't learn that
while at the grocery store or gardening
or playing baseball I also can't help
but think and suspect that this aversion
to reading is uh related to the previous
point of Conformity of thought aside
from school where else can you access
ideas that differ from those of the
people around you books it's just so sad
and alarming to see just how much this
mother is isolating her child and you
know she says she wants to Foster
creativity and and freedom but is also
stifling her child's ability to express
himself and use his imagination through
language this next thought is not like
fully formed but I do think there's this
overarching anti-intellectualism among
these Tik Tock unschooling moms that I
don't quite understand and like
anti-intellectualism in our current
Society is like a big topic I'm thinking
about a lot and like really trying to
get to the root of but I do know that it
is not benefiting these children at all
we have about another minute of Kelsey
Ray and her closing thoughts are
something is now a lot of people think
that unschooling and people will say
unschooling is giving your child
autonomy over what they want to learn
and yes that is true but if you sit
there and say what do you want to learn
today and your kid goes I don't really
want to learn today you're it's not your
job to say okay that's why no we're
learning something today but what do you
want to learn first okay that that's how
I'm approaching it I'm not going to give
my child full autonomy over dictating
his entire education or his entire
like little baby life because if he
chose he would choose to do nothing okay
um but I will have lots of stuff planned
out for us to do physically Hands-On
stuff and I believe this is going to be
the best thing I've probably ever done
for my kids and I'm really excited I'm
going to record everything so if you're
not following me you definitely should
be cuz I am documenting the  out of
this experience because um I have been
feeling in my heart for a very long time
that public school is just not it's just
not it it's just not and I and I think
that a lot you watching this you
probably feel the same way so I'll take
the lead I'll do this I I will lead you
on this even though I don't know what
the  I'm doing I know I'm going to
I'm going to figure it out and I trust
my instincts and and what I feel is best
for my child over anything else that the
government or Society has to say about
it so make sure you tap that follow
button and follow me if you relate to
this I guess I'm glad that she's not
going to let her son learn nothing which
is the absolute bare minimum but again
I'm seeing this cognitive dissonance and
these
contradictions so you know your child
would choose to learn nothing if given
the option so then you pull him out of
an environment of structure and put him
into a uh space a movement that is
focused on the child's desires you admit
you don't know what you're doing but
also think you know better than the
government and every educator that has
studied stud teaching and has been
teaching for centuries now remember when
I said cult you just described a cult
well I wasn't joking because I went to
miss Kelsey Ray's page noticed she has
an alarming number of followers got nosy
clicked her link and she's in a pyramid
scheme are you shocked aren't you just
so shocked uh it's Pro it specifically
which cells like ketones for weight loss
or something if you want to go down like
the whole Rabbit Hole of mlms and
specifically prove it
wild unbelievable I know I said I'm
focusing on literacy but I think it
would be irresponsible not to mention
that I do believe Kelsey Ray is grooming
her children into becoming her
downline and is using unschooling like
as a cover I also want to note here that
just because certain tenets of
unschooling are fine they're sound you
know specifically uh focusing on like
experiential learning and fostering
creativity unschooling lack of structure
and the lack of Regulation and
monitoring on the government's part lets
people like her get away with something
like that finally we're gonna go back to
momy oami for just a minute because she
said something very interesting that I
need to address quick side note there
are other unschooling parents on Tik Tok
but these two are Far and Away the most
prominent and therefore I think the most
dangerous which is why I'm focusing on
them I'm gon to play this one all the
way through and I want you to notice the
language she's using and the dichotomy
she's setting up so it's true my son
cannot read at age
six there's never going to be a time in
my life where I can say yeah my son
started reading when he was 5 years old
he's on the Walo and montauri schedule
it's different but here's the thing
about my kids
he's free he's always been free and
every single day of his life is a blank
canvas that he can make whatever art he
wants with Discovery Adventure art play
interest this is what his day is made up
of there's no Conformity there's no
needing to pretend that you're sick in
order to get a day off there's no Trends
there's no ahead or behind there's just
being
free exactly the way that you are free
to learn at your own pace and there are
so many inmates that will know so much
more than me inmates get law degrees get
all kinds of
stuff and there's so many inmates that
would say look this is just the way that
it is this has been a really good thing
for me everybody else is doing it we
don't live in a creative world this is
just what it is but would any of those
inmates not trade in all of these things
they've gotten used to for a chance at
being free for a chance to feel the sun
on their face every single day that's
what all of this is about thank you so
she finally says her son cannot read we
knew that we knew that but thanks I
guess for admitting it first off I have
a little bone to pick with the statement
uh he's on the Waldorf and montau
reading schedule uh full disclosure I
did graduate from a Waldorf School uh I
was not there for the elementary school
years but I do know that yes their
reading teaching schedule is a little
bit later than public school uh they
usually start teaching I believe around
seven instead of five or six but they do
have a formal reading education the
students are taught to read they are not
just sitting around waiting for it to
happen montau School on the other hand
at least according to my research
usually start even earlier than public
schools around four or five I point this
out because the attempt to piggyback off
of other education systems
incorrectly as a means of legitimizing
her decisions once again points to this
cognitive dissonance she knows deep down
probably very deep down that her son
should be reading but she's refusing to
put his needs over her own beliefs now
what I really want to focus on is her
use of the word free no her son cannot
read but he's free to turn every day
into a work of art and all of us who
went to school and conformed to the
demands of society are the inmates I
know someone who would wholeheartedly
disagree with this statement and you may
know him too Oliver James a Tik Tok
Stars documenting his journey of
teaching himself to read and inspiring
the entire internet in the process on
Tik Tok Oliver James is a personal
trainer aspiring motivational speaker
I'm here to motivate you and an open
book I struggle with reading especially
when it comes to books 34-year-old
Oliver James went viral on Tik Tok in
2022 when he confessed to the internet
that he could not read and he started
sharing his journey to literacy at the
time Oliver was functionally illiterate
meaning he had some basic reading and
writing skills but couldn't manage daily
tasks that required much reading
he has several videos on his page
talking about things that were difficult
for him before he could read so I'm
going to play some clips here so y'all
know I'm teaching myself to read and I
used to get a lot of anxiety going out
to eat because I didn't know how to read
menus I would just get familiar Foods if
I have to so we at the grocery stores
had to get some vegetable broth now one
of the cool things about learning to
read is these aisle things up here now
you know like these things right there
right them drones right there right so
you look up at those and and it'll tell
you exactly like where the products are
in the aisles and something I didn't
know so I'm here at the library right
now I have to go in here to try to get
some documents read to me because I
don't know how to read them I need
something read to me is it possible I
can give you like something to read to
me Oliver James says he never learned
how to read as a child and spent his
entire adult life finding ways to hide
that every situation needed a strategy
from job applications I got bad eyes can
you help me fill this out pay 20 bu like
you find ways a fast food menu if you
went in before me and you're like can I
get a number one with no ketchup then I
would order that way even dating my
friends used to text for me when I
remember that that was hard so we have
ordering familiar Foods or ordering the
same thing as someone else because it
couldn't need the menu being unable to
find the aisle or the product he needed
in a grocery store having friends text
for him asking Librarians to read him
documents does that sound like freedom
to you no no it doesn't
the definition of freedom is the power
or right to act speak or think as one
wants without hindrance or restraint
what is more of a hindrance than lacking
the language that will let you act speak
and think as you want but we are the
inmates right yeah speaking of inmates
um I misplaced the exact video where
Oliver discusses this but on his page he
does tell us that he was incarcerated
several years ago for I believe a track
tring firearms and talks about how part
of the reason he was arrested was
because he couldn't read and didn't know
what he did was a crime uh even while
being processed in jail he couldn't
understand his paperwork and didn't even
know why he was there in the first place
for that reason I think it's just so
nasty to call people who are taught to
read inmates when there is a strong
connection between illiteracy and
incarceration uh some studies show that
70% of incarcerated people can't read
above a fourth grade level and uh
literate inmates had a 16% chance of
returning to prison whereas the
illiterate inmates had 70% chance and
that is huge
clearly yeah so I bet your kids's going
to really appreciate these days of
Freedom when he's behind bars like
actually think about that for a second
just as important as the literal effects
of illiteracy are the emotional effects
here are some clips from Oliver's most
Tik
Tok I'm sorry I'm learning how to read
y'all it's either this or I turn off
turn off the camera and just be angry
and don't learn because regardless this
is why people give up when you see an
adult and they be like why you never
learn because this is what they would
have to go through I don't know if
they'll go through it like me but I'm
going tell you something if you don't
know how to read and you're adult and
you gonna start learning how to read you
will not get through
this without any vulnerability bro like
you you know
I'm supposed to know
this I'm supposed to know this 
already let's go you learning y you
learning how to read you're learning
that's what it is let's go let's go
supposed to know this stuff yo I'm
supposed to already know how to read I
supposed to get this let's
go so I am woman enough to Adit that I
cried watching this for the first time
and second time what's so affecting
about Oliver's videos is just how open
he is about the profound shame
illiteracy has caused him but so is the
joy of finishing a new book or finally
understanding a grocery aisle sign like
I I just I simply cannot fathom how any
parent could come across his page see
his struggle and think yeah I'll risk it
I will do nothing to prevent that from
happening to my own child for any
hardcore unschoolers still watching this
do you really believe that Oliver was
simply not ready to read until he was
34 isn't it obvious that reading ability
did not just like naturally manifest in
him that he's clearly working hard to
learn Oliver was failed by the system
because don't get me wrong the school
system can and does do fail students it
is not perfect but what makes you think
that you and your child are immune to
this Oliver's teachers refused to teach
him reading you are your child's teacher
if you do not teach them to read this is
their future if you can't tell I really
care about reading finally I need to put
out there that I have never been as
genuinely proud of a total stranger as I
am Oliver James yourself to read as an
adult is an incred in feet and I applaud
him for speaking publicly about an issue
that is so highly stigmatized I hope
he's out there having a great day and
reading everything his heart
desires I tried to come to this issue of
unschooling with an open mind truth be
told I do have a little bit a little bit
of sympathy for parents who are
considering unschooling I know from
personal experience that the public
school system is not the best fit for
every child as alluded to earlier I
switched from public to private school
in high school because my social anxiety
disorder was so severe that I I refused
to go back to Public School uh and doing
so saved my education I also think we do
need to address the elephant in the
classroom of a gun violence in America
I'm filming this just 10 days after the
school shooting in Georgia which was the
deadliest of 2024
so far and there are no words to express
the horror and the grief this crisis is
causing that our Administration refuses
to do anything about as a childree
person I cannot imagine the terror of
sending your children to school every
day not knowing if they're going to make
it back that that is something
absolutely absolutely no one should ever
experience and I do understand
completely the impulse to remove your
children from that environment for these
reasons I don't think homeschooling in
general is the worst thing I do think it
is possible for parents to know their
children really well and to be highly
engaged and structured in their
education and making sure they progress
as they should what worries me is that
if you're a parent whose child is
struggling for whatever reason or if
you're justifiably terrified for your
child's safety and you come across
someone like Kelsey Ray or momy Yami and
unschooling seems like this Saving Grace
like the answer and you just might not
realize that it comes with its own
extreme risks and consequences one of
the glaring issues with the philosophy
of unschooling is that you don't know
what you don't know how does a child
know what they're interested in if
they're not exposed to all the
possibilities you know say maybe your
kid has the potential to be the next
Emily Dickinson or women and but if you
don't have poetry books around how will
they know they love poetry plus most
knowledge is cumulative say your child
is super interested in American history
uh that's all well and good but to
really understand the founding of the US
for example they're going to need to
learn pretty much all of history prior
to that point but none of that can
happen without literacy there is a
reason reading is taught first and
foremost in schools it underlines
everything a person could need or want
to know or do in this world one of
Oliver's Tik toks that's been stuck in
my mind is where he opens up about how
reading has taught him just how much
goes on in the world that he never knew
before uh and and unfortunately lots of
it is awful you know reading The Diary
of Anne Frank for the first time and
then discovering the Holocaust but he
also understands that ignorance is not
really Bliss ignorance of the world's
complexities comes at the cost of being
able to operate in it what's ironic is
that the unschooling parents of Tik Tok
take Literacy for granted even though
they themselves were taught to read
literacy does not just naturally Dawn on
a person so structure and education a
now means freedom later and why wouldn't
you choose that for your child well
goodness gracious uh that that is it for
me today do let me know in the comments
have you heard of unschooling do you
know anyone who's either practice
unschooling or been through it were you
yourself unschooled I would love to hear
about your thoughts and experiences
reminder you can also follow me on
Instagram threads and Goodreads for fun
bookish extras and even more full
reviews if you enjoyed this video I
think you'll also enjoy this one as
always thank you so so very much for
watching I hope you have a lovely rest
of your day and I will see you in the
next one
