welcome to what lies Beyond
conversations on Consciousness science
the Paranormal and the postmaterial
future today's guest is Bernardo castrop
Bernardo is the executive director of
the asentia foundation and a promoter of
a philosophy called metaphysical
idealism the notion that reality is
essentially mental he has a PHD in
philosophy and another in computer
engineering as a scientist he worked for
the European Organization for nuclear
research at CERN and the Philips
Research Laboratories he's also been
active in the high-tech industry for
almost 30 years his ideas have featured
on Scientific American the magazine of
The Institute of Art of ideas the big
think and many other places we had a
wide- ranging conversation that began
with his experiences as a computer
engineer working on physics problems we
explored his idealist philosophy and it
applications for artificial intelligence
understanding Consciousness and
psychedelic experience as we spoke it
became clear that idealism is a
worldview that has world shaking
implications berardo thanks for coming
along could you start by telling me why
you decided to become a
scientist oh have I even decided that um
since I was a kid I always wanted to
find things out and then and then apply
that to building cool stuff so since
since as far back as I can remember I
wanted to find things out I wanted to
understand thing and use that knowledge
to build interesting stuff so I
I never
really the question was not even present
for me uh it was like something I always
took for granted that uh I would go on
and study science and engineering and
sure enough I had just turned 17 and I
find myself in computer engineering
school and as soon as I finished that I
wasn't even 22 yet I was just about to
turn 22 and um started working at CERN
in Switzerland hardcore science uh so
this things have always been with me you
know finding things out in science and
philosophy and then applying that in
engineering yeah so it sounds the
enormous particle accelerator isn't it
where corre associated with the he Expos
on is the main sorry M uh unfortunately
yeah they have done a lot more cool
stuff than just confirming the existence
of something we sort of knew existed um
but yeah yeah the bosen was officially
found and announced at CERN in 2012 but
I was already gone for several years I
was there between 96 and
986 and 97 and then 98 I I moved to um
corporate research so so just before but
but what you're saying is you have an
in-depth background in computers so
that's not just the software it it's
understanding the hardware as well first
and foremost it's it's the hardware um
when I was when I was at CERN uh I was a
scientist that was my official title but
I worked in the data acquisition system
of the LHC experiment The Well of the
atlas experiment of the large hydron
collider the the LHC particularly the
Colorimeter so we basically created
custom you know computers to process the
data generated by the experiment very
fast because the experiment would
generate and does generate many
terabytes of information per second so
you have to analyze all that uh uh
online you cannot store it for further
analysis later because it's
just a tsunami of data so we had to
build computers that understood the
physics well enough to make a decision
about can this be the hi bosen if yes we
store it if not we throw it away and we
had to throw away about 98% of
everything all the data generated but of
course you don't want to throw away the
Nobel Prize the Heen so those computers
needed to be sort of autonomous
physicists let's put it that way so
that's what I was involved with because
it merged my passion for physics and my
passion for
engineering so from the start you were
really doing multidisciplinary work so
you weren't just specializing in one
sort of narrow discipline it was
actually wider than that um do you think
that sort of affected how your sort of
thinking about the world developed as as
you went along did I'm sure it did yeah
of course until my 40s you know we are
who we are and we are our only reference
so we are not we tend not to be very
aware of the peculiarities that each one
of us in bodies we think everybody else
is like us at least I I I tended to
think like this most of my life so I was
not aware that um I have always had um
ATT tendance to sort of go across the
artificial boundaries between
disciplines because I never recognized
those boundaries as real they are merely
for convenience it allows us to give
different names to different aspects of
Nature and choose what we study with
more dep but I to me those boundaries
were never really real or solid so I
always went across to this day I keep on
doing that philosophy engineering
science Neuroscience physics um so I
have always had
this if you are a positive person you
would say this this ability to go to go
across boundaries if you're a negative
person you would say this lack of
discipline to not focus on the one thing
that you need to pay attention to and
instead sort of dispersing my attention
so whichever whichever way you like to
look at it they're both probably right
because there's there's still a lot of
pressure in Academia isn't there to sort
of very much focus on one speciality
probably I have never been employed by
Academia um so I never faced that I even
my two
phds um you know in the Netherlands
doing a PhD can be a job you get paid by
the government for five years um to
develop your your research um I never
did that I was always working for the
private sector in parallel with doing my
PhD again doing all four things at once
so I I I I don't know that from direct
experience I am I I I am
um and and I don't want to say that in a
negative sense but I am an extreme
individualist um I do
not um accept people telling me what to
do and what not to do um of course I had
bosses all my life and they give me
directions but in the Netherlands being
a boss is like being one of the pack
that has the responsibility to lead and
most of my bosses I respected um so I
was not telling that I was not doing
what they told me to do um uh because I
had to but because I respected um their
wisdom their
experience um so because I have always
been such an extreme individualist in in
in a positive sense I mean I I'm glad to
contribute a lot of my money to society
to make sure that everybody is okay and
even people I don't know but I don't
like people telling me where the
boundaries are uh I I like to explore
them myself and leave in my own unique
peculiar way and doing the things I'm
interested in and and I've always lived
like that so I never experienced
Academia telling me otherwise because I
was not I was never paid by Academia but
I believe that for those who are paid by
Academia and have their yearly
performance reviews and you know all the
criteria they have to meet that this
this could be constrainted
you so um over the last St will say
you've become very well known as a as a
philosopher of Mind who pushes an
idealist view of the world which is the
view that mind rather than physical
processes is sort of at the bottom of
everything so can you walk us through a
little bit of how you arrived at that
particular
position you know when I was at CERN I
was in my early 20s and as I told you we
managed to build this data acquisition
system system that was as smart as a
physicist just a lot faster than a
physicist to analyze data and figure out
what might be new physics and what is
old physics and doesn't need to be
recorded um once you do that the next
question you ask in your own mind is
well I made an intelligent computer
actually we made a version with
artificial neuron networks as well it
was not used but we did it illicitly and
it was just as good as the system that
was used um so you build this AR T
neuron Network that is as smart as a
physicist so it's intelligent for that
application and then you ask yourself
what does it take for me to make it
conscious and uh and I Tred to answer
this question for a few years and I
realized that you know whatever I
thought about whatever I would change in
the
architecture um it would only change uh
structure and function and it would give
me no less and no more reason to think
that it's
conscious uh you know the the the
engineering of the thing seemed to be
completely detached from reasoning
around what makes something conscious
and I realized that um that was between
a logical fallacy somewhere in my line
of thinking because if you face a wall
like this it's incoherent so you you've
took you've taken a wrong turn somewhere
so I retraced my steps back to the last
reliable point the last point where I
was not making a arbitrary assumption
without evidence or a rationale and I
realized that the arbitrary assumption I
was making is that a material
Arrangements uh generate
Consciousness if that's what you assume
you you end up with a contradiction I
mean David chers popularized that in the
famous paper on the heart problem of
Consciousness which I eventually read uh
uh in the early 2000s I think um and it
was sort of confirmed for me it it was a
revelation like yeah that's the problem
that's the wrong assumption uh the wrong
assumption is material Arrangements
generate Consciousness that if you
assume that everything becomes
incoherent because now you you change
structure and function and you're
expecting to change the qualities of
experience which are incommensurable
with structure and
function so I I I abandoned that
assumption and of course the moment you
abandon that assumption you abandon
materialism which I always had taken
sort of for granted without thinking too
much about it because everybody around
me was a materialist I was at the
Cathedral of materialism in CERN where
we studied
matter and uh if you abandon materialism
okay then then then how are you going to
live your life you need you need a
theory a hypothesis in terms of which to
go about your life in terms of which to
understand your own Consciousness your
own self and then your body and the
world and other people so for a few
years I struggled very hard not to write
write a book but to come up with a
sensible coherent alternative for myself
an alternative to materialism and I
eventually came to an objective form of
idealism uh and then I started writing
books first only for myself as a record
and then one got published and then
another 12 now are are
written so so there sort of shipped in
your sort of fundamental assumptions
about how the world Works was very
important and it sounds for me like
actually thinking about artificial
intelligence was right at the right at
the base of that obviously we're we're
in an era where there are all sorts of
very strong claims being made for
artificial intelligence like the claim
that artificial general intelligence or
AGI just around the corner and I you
know I understand you've got some fairly
strong opinions about about those
discussions very because I see the
developments in AI which I think are a
great opportunity for
humankind these are tools that vastly
increase our productivity and instead of
leading to unemployment what they should
lead to is um more Recreation and
philosophical time for everybody so
people have to work less hard
unfortunately there is Corporate greed
so what people want to make of it is a
tool to make more money and fire more
people so the profits uh get higher um
but AI is both a great threat and a
great great opportunity for philosophy
of mind it is an opportunity because it
brings philosophy of mind out of an
academic Niche and into the mainstream
everybody now is interested in what mind
is and are these things minded are these
things conscious these AIS yes when I
talk to chat GPT does it experience what
it's saying um that discussion is now
mainstream and no longer a niche thing
in the corner of a of a bookstore um
that's that that's a great opportunity
an opportunity for us philosophers of
mind uh to vastly enlarge the scope and
reach of what we are trying to do it is
also a threat in a very pernicious way
because it um compounds lack of
understanding to pretend to lead to
understanding it's like if you pile
understanding sorry if you pile
misunderstanding on top of
misunderstanding
eventually on the top of that pile you
think you got Clarity of course you
don't you just get crap you know you
swim in crap you swim in the sewer of
intellectual production but that sewer
can be mistaken for Revelation and
Clarity why this why am I saying this
because we we already have this
mainstream metaphysics called
materialism uh which is internally
inconsistent
empirically uh uh incoherent it doesn't
line up with empirical results it's not
even logical has very little explanatory
power but it is mainstream we think that
everything there is is matter and we are
also made of matter and the matter in
our brains somehow generate our
Consciousness that's what a lot of
people think now this is the worst
metaphysical option on the table it's
flat out Bo and demonstrably so but it's
popular because of sociopolitical
dynamics that have their origin back in
the 17th century and exhaust became
exacerbated when the Bourgeois you know
accumulated uh uh control over the
intellectual Elites in the second half
of the 19th century so there is a there
is an explanation for this it has
nothing to do with materialism being a
good option but it is mainstream um
materialism is a misunderstanding it's
part of the sewer of intellectual
production but when you have a material
thing like a large language model or a
Transformer of any kind an AI and seems
to talk like a human being and produce
answers like a human being the naive
person on the streets would think well
materialism is right because here is
something that Engineers just hacked
together and look it's like a person
it's conscious too so obviously
Consciousness is generated from Material
Arrangement now that's misunderstanding
piled on top of misunderstanding the
first misunderstanding is that
materialism holds any water it doesn't
even modern materialists acknowledge
that mainstream materialism is is is it
goes nowhere um and the other
misunderstanding is uh to think that a
silicon AI silicon computer U that we
have any reason to think of it as
conscious it it's a complete lack of
understanding of what's Happening an AI
does not reason Engineers call one of
the modules in an AI architecture the
reasoning
module but this is wishful thinking it
the reasoning module has nothing to do
with what we call reasoning in
colloquial language they also have
another module but we I'm also in AI
engineer by the way I'm building AI
Hardware right now um another module is
the attention module it has nothing to
do with
attention the relationship with the
colloquial meaning of the word attention
is marginal it's even forced um if you
if you understood what nii actually does
it's a series of geometrical
Transformations applied on tokenized
data let me impact this when you have
text text is written with letters and
alphabets and words that we understand
because we attribute meaning to them
it's a it's a convention we we come
together and we establish the convention
that t r e e means a tree with a trunk
and leaves and root systems it we could
have called it blah blah and it's it
would be equally valid because it's a
convention now an AI only sees blah
blah because it's strained on text and
not on what the text is referring to in
terms of the reasoning behind it you
know the logical steps and it takes
these words and tokenizes them
transforms these words into values
numbers that populate a a space an
abstract hyperdimensional space and then
it applies Transformations geometrical
Transformations on this numerical tokens
and then at the end translates back to
words in other words it's purely
mechanistic there is no reasoning going
on there is no logic thinking it thei
has no understanding of what it's
spitting out what it spits out is
coherent because it was strained on text
written by humans which is then coherent
because it reflects human intelligence
the AI only sort of re arranges human
output back to you in a way that looks
like it produced its own output no it's
just applied geometrical transformations
to previous human output if there were
no humans in this mixture the eye would
be spitting out incoherent numbers
because it doesn't know what it's doing
it it doesn't have understanding let
alone
Consciousness um yeah so if you
understand this then
AI will defeat to contribute to the to
to the defeat of materialism but it we
we got to a point now where you almost
need a PhD in philosophy and another one
in computer engineering uh to actually
understand what's going on most people
just do a chat gbt query and then we
think oh look it talks like a person so
if it squacks like a duck it's a duck
right it's conscious like a person
leading to the
cultural conclusion that oh no we got it
right materialism is right right no it
this is you're swimming in the sewer of
intellectual production and you would
think that you were no at the Leading
Edge of human understanding and that's
the great threat so that's interesting I
I did a masters in cognitive science
back in the 90s and we first of all we
we had to actually program a spal chat
bot but secondly we we did the thought
experiment of the philosopher called
John S all the Chinese room without
going into details it if the thce
experiment that showed that you could
have the appearance of intelligent
responses without any understanding at
all and one I play around the chat GPT I
always think of the Chinese
room you're you're completely right I
mean we can summarize the thought
experiment very quickly imagine that
there is a hermetically seed room and
there are only two little Windows two
two two slots like a letter slot in your
door where somebody can slide a piece of
paper in and and and the room can slide
a piece of paper out on the other slot
or maybe even the same slot uh so
imagine that you're a Chinese person
you're on the outside of the room so you
write a question in Chinese symbols on a
piece of paper and you shove it into the
room and then after a little while a
piece of paper comes out of the slot
with a perfectly good Chinese answer to
the question you asked in Chinese so the
Chinese speaker on the outside thinks
the room is is intelligent but what's
actually going on is that there is an
english- speaking clerk inside the room
who does not know Chinese at all but he
has an enormous Book of Rules telling
him if you get these symbols in a
sequence you write these other symbols
in a sequence and the book has as many
rules as the different sequences of
Chinese characters that you can get in
so the clerk just follows the rules
writes down the squiggles because for
the clerk who doesn't speak Chinese
Chinese symbols are just squiggled let's
call them tokens writes down the tokens
having no idea what has been written in
the in the paper coming in or what is
written in the paper going out he's just
following blind rules he slides out the
piece of paper and the Chinese on the
outside sees a perfectly reasonable
answer to the question and thinks
they're Roman intelligent the Roman is
not what is intelligent well what is
intelligent here is one the Chinese
speaker on the outside it is the Chinese
speaker who knows what the symbols mean
that go in and the symbols that come out
that's intelligent and the Chinese
speaker who wrote them manual that the
clerk uses in the inside that Chinese
speaker is also intelligent so all the
intelligence is in the Chinese speakers
uh uh and it's not in the room at all
that's exactly what a Transformer an llm
U is uh the Chinese speaker who wrote
who wrote the rule book W that's all the
text on the internet that uh that
companies use to train the AI That's the
rule book that's the manual the manual
is built from text found on the web
which was written by human beings
reasoning conscious human beings that's
your book and the llm just takes the
tokens in looks at the rule book which
is basically geometrical Transformations
and spit out a list of tokens which it's
us who attribute mini to when you read
the output of at GPT so there is no
reasoning let alone Consciousness going
on
here so I mean the operative word there
is consciousness isn't it and it's that
that missing part of the equation i i i
argued this in my very first book um
rationalist spirituality I argue that um
because you know when s publish
published his thought experiment in 1980
there were many
replies and uh some of the replies are
are are are interesting um people were
saying well
the problem is that uh the clerking side
doesn't know how to link different
squiggles or Chinese characters to
elements of the world it doesn't know
that this squiggle means a mountain and
that squiggle means a storm but if those
links were there then the room would be
intelligent and you could even go and
say perhaps there are new versions of
chat GPT and Lama now that can recognize
images so now you're linking tokens to
images and you get closer and closer to
being able to to say that it's
intelligent but it's not conscious at
least we have absolutely no reason to
think of it as conscious because all
that's going on there these mechanical
switches of of of transistors being on
and off that's all that's going on it's
like switches on your wall turning on
and off your light except that there are
billions of
them operating in an orchestrated way
but we have no reason to think of it as
conscious so I think what s's experiment
actually appealed to when he said the
computer will never be cons will never
be intelligent what he was appealing to
was Consciousness because the intuition
behind his experiment is that the
Chinese room the room never understands
anything well what he what he should
have said is the Chinese room never
consciously understands anything because
understanding is a phenomenon of
Consciousness it's hard to think of pure
clever data processing is understanding
anything right so what the intuition
behind the experiment is is that the
room will never be conscious because
that understanding c c appeal appeals to
is an element of Consciousness and there
I agree I mean maybe if we going to be
to focus to on idealism
itself why did you decide that that was
the the most plausible alternative to to
materialism so we've rejected
materialism and then we're moving to a
view that says that that everything is
mind or or Consciousness underlies
everything to that arrive all at once or
is it a gradual realization that you
felt that was the most plausible
alternative probably in between the two
options not quite all at once but not
too gradually either because if you
start from scratch I mean once you
realize that your entire world view is
is is untenable not only implausible but
untenable um you really need to start
from scratch now it makes me think of
the cart when he wrote discourse on the
method he started from scratch as well
and then made mistakes very quickly but
it was a honorable attempt so I I sort
of tried to start from scratch again and
the first thing we have to admit is that
conscious States experiential states are
the only given are nature's only given
they are the only thing we know
absolutely for sure to exist because
everything else is theorizing that
happens within our minds within the
field of our experience everything we
know we know in experience whatever you
never experien directly or indirectly
might as well not exist for you so
experiential states are nature's given
materialism invents a completely
different kind of state A material state
which has no experiential qualities it's
defined purely in terms of quantities
like x kilog y c
and know uh um T duration in
seconds so this is pure abstraction we
never have direct access to these purely
quantitative States they are
abstractions of our qualitative
theoretical
imagination um and the the reason we
invented them was the Prejudice that
experiential states are always in here
in our minds and not out there so there
are no experiential States out there and
there is obviously a world out there
that is not in my mind which is of
course you know it's also given of
nature um then that world can only be
made of states that aren't experiential
so there must be this material states to
account for the external world the
fallacy here is obvious to acknowledge
that there is a world outside my mind
and your mind and everybody's Minds
doesn't mean that that world is itself
not mental look your thoughts are
experiential they are mental States and
yet they are outside the my mind and we
all acknowledge that other people have
their mental states which are outside us
so we just have to uh uh understand that
you extrapolate this a little further
and you understand that all nature out
there is made of mental States not mine
not yours not anybody else's but mental
States at Large
that appear to us as what we call the
material world just as our own mental
States appear to others and to the
mirror as our material body our material
brain activity our material nervous
activity so matter is what mental States
look like when observed from the outside
that was the seminal um conclusion the
seminal understanding that motivated me
to idealism all there is is Nature's
given mental state but there are mental
States out there as well and what we
call matter in other words the contents
of perception the things we can see here
touch smell taste these are just how
mental States present themselves to
external observation matter is what
mentation looks like from the outside
and that's why our brain activity
correlates with our inner experience
brain activity is what our inner
experience looks like when observed from
the outside and the universe at large is
what the mind of nature looks looks like
when we observe it from the outside I
mean we are inserted in nature but from
the outside in the sense of our
subjectivity not
expanding into the rest of the universe
otherwise we would be the universe as
opposed to observing the
universe so this is very different from
say relativism or sism where you say
anything goes because it's all totally
subed there's still a law there are
still no laws of physics happening well
clearly I mean even Psych and Psychiatry
today know that there are laws to how
men mentation works and the the the
there are surprising
regularities um in how mentation Works
in human beings that's why psychologists
and psychiatrists can study and help
people based on what they learn
otherwise every person would be
completely different and there would be
no discipline to study um there are laws
that underly the the state transitions
of mental space let's put it that way
the Dynamics of mind and idealism is
certainly not solipsism because what Sol
solipsism says is that all there is is
your
mind my thoughts do not really exist all
that exists is the image of me on your
computer screen right now there is
nothing it is like to be me and for a
solipsist all there is to me is my
appearance in the mind of the
soopy so if I disappear from the mind of
the soopy because the solipsist is no
longer thinking about me or imagining me
then I disappear too and now that's not
idealism idealism acknowledges that
there is a world out there that does not
depend on our wishes our fantasies our
mourning affirmations our beliefs our
desires or fears no it is out there and
it does its own thing but it too just
like us is constituted of mental States
mental states that are not directly
access to us we can only perceive those
mental States indirectly through a
cognitive perceptual representation in
other words matter matter is what
external mental States look like when we
observe
them but there is still World there is
still a universe that unfolds according
to regularities we call the laws of
physics so in a number of your Works
you've actually discuss number
of well the experiments in in quantum
theory that seems to undermine the idea
that there's a real world out there and
could you say a little bit about why
those developments seem to undermine
realism the canonical experiment which
has been repeated for five decades now
and got a Nobel Prize in
2022 um is the
following two particles say two photons
are created together they are prepared
together that's the the technical word
for it emitted from a single Source U
and one is shot at the speed of light to
One Direction and the other one is shot
at the speed of light or near the speed
of light in the opposite direction so
they go to opposite directions through
say a fiber optic cable and after they
covered several kilometers in
Flight um there is a scientist called
Alice on the one side that will measure
particle a and another scientist let's
call him Bob on the other side which
will measure particle
B um it turns out that what Alice
chooses to measure about particle a say
the direction of angular momentum but it
doesn't matter what Alice chooses to
measure about particle a determines what
Bob sees when Bob looks at particle
B even if this choice is made only after
the particles are already in Flight even
after the particle particles were
generated and they are already flight in
the optic fiber cable only then Alice
chooses what to measure and it will
still determine what Bob sees on the
other side of the universe when Bob
measures particle B now this
contradicts a notion called
non-contextuality or physical realism in
physics which means that
physical entities are supposed to have
whatever properties they have
independent of measurement measurement
is supposed to merely unveil the
properties the particles already had
immediately prior to measurement now
this experiment contradicts a physical
realism because clearly what Bob
measures depends on a choice made by
Alice on the other side of the universe
how could Alice's choice on the other
side side of the Universe uh influence
Bob's measurement if what Bob is
measuring is what particle B already was
all along immediately prior to
measurement even if the choice was made
after particle a particles A and B were
already in Flight it doesn't add up so
the only way to escape from this
conclusion is to entertain one of two
complete theoretical fantasies that have
precisely zero empirical uh evidence
they're just fantasies I'm not getting
going to get into that uh what this
tells us is that
um physicality physical properties
physical entities are the outcome of
measurement physicality is a
representation upon measurement of the
thing that is measured but the thing
that is measured is not physical it does
not have physical properties because
physical properties are the
representation of a measurement
result whatever you measured whatever it
is it is there it's obviously there
because you made a bloody measurement so
there is something your measurement
apparatus interacted with to produce
this representation called a physical
property so it exists but it's not
physical because physical properties are
the representations of measurement
results why does this line Dove tail
with idealism because for an idealist
there is really a world out there a
world that we measure but it's made of
mental States experiential States and
experiential states are qualitative not
quantitative what is the length in
centimeters of your
thought what is the temperature in
degrees celsus of your fantasy what is
the weight in kilograms of your
theoretical abstraction now experiential
States mental states can be described
through physical quantities because they
are qualitative not quantitative so for
idealists analytic idealists at least uh
there is a real world out there and made
of qualitative mental States a physical
measurement is an
interaction between or across mental
States and when one mental state
represents a measurement result that
representation is what we describe with
physical parameters in other words it's
a content of perception even if it is u
a measurement made through the
intermediation of instrumentation like a
telescope or a microscope you still have
to perceive the output of that
instrument and that perception is a
cognitive representation of our mental
states trying to represent other mental
States out there think of it as the
dashboard of an airplane the plane has
sensors that measure the states of the
sky and the results of those
measurements are represented to the
pilots in terms of dashboard indications
indications in the dials of the
dashboard the dashboard represents the
sky that was measured represented it
accurately it conveys important and
valid information about the states of
the sky but the dashboard isn't the sky
it's a representation thereof and if
your airplane is not making measurements
then the dashboard shows nothing
the physical world is a dashboard
representation of the real world if we
don't measure there is no physical world
because there is nothing for the
dashboards to represent it doesn't mean
that there isn't a real world there is
it's just not physical because
physicality is a dashboard
representation um and
this provides a very promising Avenue to
make sense of all these weird results in
quantum mechanics and it does so
without the very Wishful fantasy that it
is our little Consciousness that causes
the collapse of the universe into a
defined State that's an appeal to Magic
unfortunately it's still popular in
physics people thinking that oh it's
Consciousness that causes collapse it's
Consciousness that defines the world but
well that would make us Beyond Superman
we would be super Gods right we have the
power to transform the state of the
entire Universe At a Glance no I think
that is absurd what our conscious
Consciousness does is create the
representation in other words it creates
the physical world it doesn't change the
real world at all it creates the
physical world the problem is that we
take the physical world for the real
world we take the dashboard for the sky
so if our little Consciousness
determines the dashboard we think it has
determined the sky which is absurd you
see it determines the dashboard because
the dashboard is our thing it is our
internal cognitive representation it
exists in us and in us alone so yes our
Consciousness determines it because it
creates it but it doesn't determine the
real world which is non
physical you know one of one of the
focuses of this podcast is is
parapsychology and there are a number of
experiments called micro DK experiments
where that seem to show that that people
can affect very slightly the output of a
random number generator so what do you
think of those results and how you
relate it to what you just
said well let me let me start first with
a a quick disclaimer uh probably because
of my history now landing at CERN I was
not even 22 yet I I consider the
ordinary incredibly mysterious if I
could only describe to you short in
short enough words that would fit in
this podcast
how mysterious what happens inside a
proton is how incredibly mysterious it
is how three quarks and force carrying
particles being exchanged between the
three quarks create inertial mass now
the inertial mass of a of a proton is
not mostly the inertial mass of the
three quarks it arises from the Dynamics
the interactions between the three
quarks and all the know the conservation
of momentum rules related to how Force
caring particles are exchanged it's
incredibly complicated and mysterious
what happens inside a proton and since
very early on I have been aware of that
so for me the ordinary is incredibly
mysterious so I have no patience for the
extraordinary if you know what I mean
the Paranormal doesn't attract me much
because I'm already overwhelmed enough
with the mystery of sitting in my office
talking to you or or
or tasting the the saltiness of salt
which is made of two atoms one which is
iner the other one which can kill you in
gas form chlorine um so I find that
massively mysterious life is massively
mysterious so I have little patience for
the Paranormal this this is a bit of a
Prejudice for me not that I'm passing
any kind of objective judgment in the
field I I I don't I think I know many
good people who are working in this
field um now regarding your question in
particular
under analytic
idealism life is a dissociative
mechanism in a field of subjectivity a
field of mind that's why I can't read
your thoughts and you presumably can't
read mine right now you are a
dissociated process I am another
dissociated process therefore we are
dissociated from one another and from
the rest of the world this is why we
perceive the world instead of being the
world we are separated from it by a
psychological mechanism that is well
known in Psychiatry called
dissociation uh which exists we can
objectively uh diagnose it since the the
Advent of neuroimaging 20 odd years ago
so my hypothesis that um we can't read
each other's thoughts or we can't
influence the world
directly without using our hands or our
bodies the reason we can't do that we
can't change the world by by a thought
is because we are dissociated from the
mental states that constitute the world
and therefore our internal dissociated
mental Dynamics does not have a direct
causal link to the mental states of the
world so to influence them we have to
use our body which are also the
representations of certain mental States
but a particular mechanism of influence
and not what we call Mind Over
Matter that's why s phenomena are not
rampant because without dissociation
everything would be one mind so s would
be everywhere it would be the modus
operandi of the universe but it's not
and it's not because of dissociation now
no process in nature is perfect in other
words when it stops
raining the the the the water on the
ground doesn't evaporate immediately or
completely when something burns the
combustion doesn't burn everything there
is to burn in it no process in nature is
perfectly
is is
perfect why would
dissociation so dissociation too
although it is precisely the thing that
we have evolved to maintain because
dissociation is life life is what
dissociation looks like and of course
evolution by natural selection tries to
preserve life therefore it seeks to
preserve and optimize the dissociation
because it's the same thing life is what
Association looks like but even after
four and now people are contemplating
maybe even 4.2 billion years of life on
Earth um there is very very little
reason to think that dissociation would
be perfect respiration is not perfect
ATP burning is not perfect uh DNA
transcription is not perfect why would
be dissociation so it stands to reason
that now and then under specific
conditions there could be traffic of
States across dissociative boundaries in
other words what you call Sai and people
could maybe
influence subtle delicate processes in
the world up there directly through a
mental influence that sort of percolates
through and across the dissociative
boundary because the dissociative
boundary of course is not perfect it
would be a miracle if if it were
perfect that that's a very interesting
response I think I wiy with the wonder
of the world I think one of the things
that that I know materialism does
particularly not so much in the
specialist but particularly in the
mainstream is it's almost makes the
world too M mundane and and detracts
from what what we actually observe but
um S one thing that you've also written
about Altered States Of Consciousness
and a little bit about near-death
experiences the implication for things
like psychedelic studies so could you
you tell me a little bit about how that
fits into your your ideas about idealism
and and the implication of that yeah I
I'm not a student of near-death
experiences at all and the paper you're
referring to was an invited paper from
um the Journal of near-death studies
because they had received a a paper by
other authors who were very critical of
the use of quantum theory in the Sai
community and they asked me to to defend
them um I think partly the original
paper had a point but um as it usually
happens in so called skeptical circles
they start with a good point but then
they go Way Beyond what is justified by
Logic and reason with that point and
that those authors had done that they
had gone too far and so I was invited to
write a defense which I did but I'm not
a student of ndes um I
think look under ordinary
conditions we are dissociative process
in the mind of Nature and that's why we
have a private inner life that's why you
can't can't uh think my thoughts
directly because of this dissociation
that we call Life biology biology is
what this dissociation looks like
um when you
take uh uh relatively strong dose of a
psychedelic such as psilocybin or ditho
tryptamine or uh what was the third one
that they studied escapes me now but
several uh psychedelics have been
studied I think it's LSD
LSD um when you do that and they measure
your brain activity and compare that to
your default brain activity in under
normal conditions without the drug um
the the most striking observation is
that brain activity is
reduced there are many other effects
like there is increased functional
coupling per different brain regions
there is a very very mild
almost non-measurable uh increase in uh
in entropy in other words desynchronized
brain activity uh but that's all
regarding the brain activity that is
left the the most know repeated and
clear effect is brain activity reduces
and
yet Consciousness expands I mean it's
it's cliche to describe a psychedelic
trance as Consciousness expanding um
it's not only cliche it's a vast
understatement I have taken psychedelics
myself as part of my research years ago
um and to call it a Consciousness
expansion it's like calling a drop of
water a major hurricane um sorry the
other way around cing a major hurricane
a drop of water um your mind expands
beyond anything that can be described
how can that happen with a reduction in
brain activity given that brain activity
is what your mind looks like when
measured from the outside shouldn't we
be seeing the opposite everybody thought
we would be seeing the opposite until
2012 when we realize no no it's a
reduction of brain activity how do I
account for that
tentatively if we are dissociative
processes then our regular brain
activity is not only what the contents
of our dissociation in other words our
thoughts our feelings our fantasies it's
not only what the contents of our
dissociation look like but it's what the
dissociative process itself looks like
the dissociative boundary itself must
look like something that we call brain
anatomy and brain
activity because we are not only the
dissociative contents we are also the
dissociative process so the image of us
the metabolizing body is also an image
of the dissociative boundary not only of
the dissociative
content my Hy hypthesis is that what
psychedelics do and cardiac arrest as
well because if your heart's not beating
there is no blood oxygenation in your
brain and your brain activity reduces
too it cannot do anything else but
reduce uh so both things cardiac arrest
and psychedelics reduce brain activity I
think what's happening is that the brain
activity that reduces is that which
corresponds to the dissociative boundary
itself so what the drug and cardiac
arrest are doing is they are making the
dissociative boundary
porous um
permeable allowing you to experience
stuff in your cognitive neighborhood
that does not correlate with your
physical body allowing you to pick up on
mental states that are beyond what you
normally call you accessing your
cognitive neighborhood uh beyond space
and time um and of course that is mighty
weird stuff because it's not human stuff
it's stuff that was there already before
humans evolved to filter it out and
dissociate from it and create its own
cozy understandable internal inner life
you take a drug that takes down the
dissociative boundary that keeps you uh
separate from that primordial stuff out
there that isn't human you will
experience it as profound weirdness of
course you will how how what else right
it's it's not your human stuff it's not
your normal stuff now of course there
are degrees of it we have internal
dissociative boundaries as well
psychiatrists and psychologists know
this we dissociate ourselves from the
skeletons in our cabinets right in our
closets our traumas and certain Memories
the drug takes down those internal
dissociative boundaries as well so first
you come in contact with the skeletons
in your closet uh which are still human
uh but at some point in during the trans
if you took a high enough dose you come
in contact with non-human stuff and
everybody would describe it that way
everybody will say Beyond this point
you're no longer human that's a
dissociative boundary that has been
temporarily incredibly weakened and now
you're coming in direct contact with the
world as it is in itself as opposed to
the world as your cognitive system
represents in the form that we call
physical you will become in direct
content with in contact with what is
really out there in your cognitive
neighborhood and its Mighty scary stuff
what you're saying resonates very much
with what William James who the great
philosopher and one of the founders of
psychology said in varieties of
religious experience and he was affect
he was inspired in turn by a man called
Frederick Meyers who they were talking
about the subliminal mind but the idea
essentially is that mystical states are
even drugs so I think he actually took
nitrous oxide and said there are many
worlds just parallel to where we are and
I think he likened it to that the self
is like something you know surrounded by
a rickety
fence um which surrounds it which
separates it from this broader reality
of course that's what the evolution by
natural selection would do um we the
first living organism was a spontaneous
dissociation right the ones that
survived are the ones of those
spontaneous dissociations that could
reproduce maybe only one of them and
evolution by natural selection would
make us change over time so as to
maintain that dissociation as
effectively as possible and as
efficiently as possible two different
words and I'm using them deliberately um
so Effectiveness means we should survive
efficiently mean means we should survive
with the least amount of energy or
effort how do you do that well you
create a cognitive system that
represents your surroundings well enough
for you to be aware of dangers and
opportunities so our visual system our
perceptual apparatus will represent the
external states of the world to us in
the form we call physical um in such a
way that threats and opportunities with
a bearing on our ability to to survive
will be
represented but everything else out
there which does not have a bearing on
our ability to survive would not be
represented because our representational
system is efficient not only effective
why would it go through the trouble of
burning energy to represent stuff that
has no bearing on our ability to survive
or or little bearing on our ability to
survive stuff that is INS Salient for
survival it wouldn't and therefore we
wouldn't see it we wouldn't hear we
wouldn't touch it while we may be
completely surrounded by it at all times
um statistically the chance that our
cognitive system would pick out
everything out there relevant or not
relevant Salient or not Salient to
survival is infinit asmal it it it's
Preposterous to think that it would of
course we don't pick out a great lot of
things uh out there why would we if it's
not Salient for survival these may be
all these other worlds that are
unfolding out there at all times that
you quoted James uh speaking of um I I
haven't read James but um based on what
you said I think it's eminently
reasonable to think that there is a lot
more going on then we can discern
through
perception yeah what you said reminds me
very much of Donald hopman's arguments
about the case against reality so he's a
cognitive scientist who he uses very
simil and natural selection arguments
and he says that natural selection will
not let us access reality it will just
let us see the world than in a way that
will let us survive so that seems to be
to dtail exactly with what you're
saying well it's a parallel argument um
there is a subtlety here um what I'm
claiming is that a lot of what's out
there is not represented at all in
whatever form it's not represented at
all there is nothing in perception that
correlates with a lot of what's
happening out
there that is the most likely scenario
by far uh what Donald is saying which I
agree with is that all those things that
are
represented they are not represented as
they actually are they are represented
in whatever other way facilitate our
survival in other words Evolution drives
towards survival Fitness not towards
truth think of it as your computer
desktop I mean I I use the metaphor of
the dashboard of an airplane know the
dash board doesn't look like the sky it
represents the sky but it does so in a
way that is most efficient for the pilot
you you don't see the sky as it is in
itself on the dashboard you it's
represented in a completely diff
different way to reduce entropy and
facilitate uh prompt uh uh uh responses
to threats and opportunities so Donald
uses another metaphor the desktop which
is no a a computer file on your desktop
computer on the screen is represented as
a little colorful rectangle is that what
your computer file actually is no your
computer file is a a set of millions and
millions and millions of microscopic
switches that may be open or closed in a
memory chip um it doesn't look at all
like a colorful little rectangle on your
screen why do we represent files that
way well because that's most efficient
allows you to work with the file most
efficiently because if you were to see
the file as it actually is millions of
microscopic switches open or closed you
wouldn't even know what it is you would
be overloaded with information you can
act on it it it would be very suboptimal
so what Don is saying is that what we
call the physical world colloquially in
other words the contents of perception
the stuff we see in here uh those forms
and shapes are not the forms and shapes
of what is really out there just like
round dials on a dashboard do not
correspond form to the clouds uh in the
sky outside it's a it's a way to
represent things so according to Donald
what we see is the computer desktop
representation of nature so the virtual
reality headset it's not nature as it is
in itself why because that's not we what
we evolved to do we evolved to survive
we need to work with the icons on the
desktop most efficiently not see them or
perceive them the way they really are
because that's would drive us swiftly to
Extinction and you can prove that using
Game Theory so these are two things one
is what we do pick out from the world we
don't represent to ourselves the way
things actually are in the world why
would we and separates to it there's a
lot we don't pick up at all and
therefore don't represent at all I have
to say so I've been reading a lost of
your your books in the last couple of
couple of weeks and I I find them very
mindblowing in in the sort of best
possible best possible sense um you know
I'm a great s k di so and I think that's
what I I was really enjoying about them
that they're really turning a lot of the
the thinking about the world sort of
upside down I was iFly reading your book
meaning and absurdity which is looking
at sort of high strangeness experiences
such as people experien in old old
States and other other situations and it
gives you very and essentially it's
almost like you you can tune in and tune
out occasionally to these other
realities you talking about and it it's
quite an eerie thing to think that there
might be lots going on around us that we
we really have know sometimes I read the
new scientists and the impression you
get is oh well we know virtually
everything you know we' got a few eyes
to Dot and teas the cross but but I
think what I like about your you in your
books you start to lay out the
ramifications and different dimensions
of of this new emerging worldview and I
I think it's a very exciting thing yeah
um Lord Kelvin said in 1900 I believe
that the physics was done and all we
needed to do is to refine measurement
Precision uh and then came Einstein five
years later and then came bore and
Heisenberg and quantum mechanics and we
realized that all the physics Lord
Kelvin knew was actually wrong it worked
in practice in in certain regiment but
it was strictly speaking wrong neoni
mechanics is wrong that's not how the
world works there is no invisible force
of gravity acting at a distance you know
um and but every generation still thinks
that we figured it out and that that has
to do with our psychological need for
closure we need to attain closure before
we die uh but that speaks of us not of
nature or our no of nature um look if
there if there there is a lot more going
on out there than we have evolved to
Peck out through perception which of
course there is it would be incredibly
unlikely if that were not the case right
to the point of being
unreasonable what would happen if some
of that stuff we didn't evolve to pick
out under particular conditions rare but
particular conditions could sort of
interfere with the signals we do pick up
to have an interference now our sensors
were not made to pick them up because
they don't have a they don't have a
bearing on our ability to survive you
know we we do equally well with or
without them so we don't pick them out
but they create an
interference uh uh some
some some intrusion into the channels
that are supposed to pick up what is
relevant to us how would we experience
that what you would experience that is
something absurd something that doesn't
add up because interference doesn't add
up right I'm I'm a computer engineer I'm
I'm very familiar with the interference
if you're measuring the signals in
certain buz lines and then there is an
oscillation that cannot be attributed to
the transitions of those lines you know
you're picking up interference because
it it's illogical it doesn't belong
there now it's not what you would expect
to see by measuring that line same thing
with these dynamics of the real world
that may interfere uh with our ability
to sense what we want to sense if they
interfere we will see them as absurd
versions of what we expect to
see but it's not what they will be uh
they are where they are and they are
incommensurable with our categories
because our categories have you Ved to
account for the contents of perception
not what interferes by some odd reason
uh uh with our perception so we don't
have categories for these other things
that are out there so when they
interfere say with a part of our
existing categories that is supposed to
discern spaceships or people even if
that thing that is interfering is not at
all a spaceship it's not at all a person
it's it's nothing you could put in a box
because we don't have the boxes for it
but it would interfere with the channels
with which we pick up pick up pick out
people and spaceships it would look to
us as a
distorted ridiculous uh a Preposterous
half spaceship or a Preposterous person
like something ridiculous and illogical
because that's the nature of
interference it doesn't mean that it is
that weirdness it's following its own
logic it's just not our logic it's not
our Aristotelian logic it's not folling
our categories because our categories
evolved to account for what we were what
we evolved to perceive not this
nonsalient stuff that plays tricks and
interferes with other with with our
perception so of course this stuff looks
absurd it doesn't follow our logic
doesn't follow our categories and yet
it's pretty
true so I mean you're I think you're
alluding there to sort of some of the
experiences like like the dwares and
other sort of beings people see in DMT
trips but also
what have been called high strangeness
UAP or UFO experiences I'm to to high
strangeness not DMT because DM DM
perceptual experience it's an endogenous
experience it's something all right okay
fair enough sort of a skeptic or critic
would say well that's all due to
misperceptions or hallucination do do
you think there would be a way to
distinguish genuine interference from
something that's just
subjective there should be theoretically
but I think in practice it me practice
it's very difficult you know the human
mind loves to loves to deceive itself
because the human mind seeks Comfort not
truth you know these Legions of
westerners doing Eastern spirituality
they are not doing it because they want
to find out what is true they they are
doing it because they want to stop
suffering suffering they want to be more
comfortable um the Mind always wants to
be more comfortable so it will deceive
itself every opportunity it gets if it
senses that here is an opportunity to
find comfort so it's very difficult to
distinguish this natural tendency
towards
self-deception from objective
interference with our cognitive channels
that is done by an agency that is not
ours it's an external agency now part of
our cognitive neighborhood and not our
own wish fulfilling self-deception
narratives I I'm not a psychologist I
wouldn't know how to distinguish I think
both things do
exist but I do think
operationally it's extraordinarily
difficult to distinguish between them
perhaps you could try to do that through
you know the way science operates
through statistics and multiple
subjective reports independently uh
collected finally you've got a new book
out haven't you could you tell us a
little bit about that just to finish
okay um so I've been
writing publicly and speaking publicly
about metaphysics now for 15 years I I'm
a proponent of analytic idealism which
is this notion that there is a real
world out there but it's mental and
physicality is just what it looks like
and observed from across a dissociative
boundary and life is what dissociation
looks like so I've been talking and
writing about this for 15 years now and
over those years you you learn a lot
about how to reach people where they are
because in the beginning you're speaking
out of your own perspective because
that's all you have but as you interact
with thousands of people o over the
years you understand that they are
coming at it from a perspective
different from yours their references
are different their context is different
so you learn how to reach them where
they are so I I wrote this book now
called um analytic idealism in a
nutshell but a short no jargon concise
to the point doesn't even have citations
in bibliography put them in the running
text unlike my other books which are
exhaustively documented this one is
meant to be read in one sitting one
Saturday one Sunday and it's a summary
of analytic idealism uh
that embodies what I learned over the
years about how to meet people where
they are how to directly address the
questions they will have before they
even have it before they even have them
you know to to offer replies to the
criticisms I know they will have before
they think it through completely because
I have I have seen it for 15 years so
that's the book it's coming out at the
end of October
2024 oh brilliant so it would actually
be a good place for anyone curious about
your work to take this further oh yeah
absolutely it's the place for everyone
to come in contact with my work it's
that short sweet
book oh brilliant oh well Bernardo it's
been a really fascinating chat so I hope
you've enjoyed it and I'm sure you've
left plenty of food of thought so thank
you very much thank you for the
opportunity to be
here what lies Beyond with Matt cin
conversations on Consciousness science
the Paranormal and the post material
future visit us and subscribe on what
lies beyond. substack doccom
