have started
recording I hope
so
okay hello and welcome to our very first
webinar of the Academic Year featuring
Joseph Eisman who has also contributed
to the growth of our Sig incredibly for
many
years my name is Honda feneri and I'm a
doctoral student at Virginia Tech and
the co Senor graduate student
representative for the complexity
theories in education Sig the purpose of
the Sig is to apply advance and extend
complexity theories to inquiry research
theory and practice in a variety of
educational
contexts and in the meantime hold on
please I will
start
accepting
participants
yep um Joey is a post-doctoral
researcher at the University of
Pennsylvania Graduate School of
Education and an adjunct assistant
professor at the College of Education
and human development at Temple
University his research explores the
relationships between empathy emotion
motivation identity and creativity in
educational context using complex
Dynamic systems theories Joey received
his PhD at Temple University and he
holds an MA from teachers college
Colombia University and Bs from the
University of Michigan Joey will deliver
his presentation with an opportunity for
a question and answer session please
join me in welcoming
Joey it's funny not to be on the other
side where I'm not presenting um thank
you so much for having me um thank you
all for welcoming back in into the s in
this way um it's funny to think about
the the language that's being used from
Explorer to experts and I definitely
want to highlight I still I'm very much
on the Explorer side of that language of
that of that identity um I'm going to
share my screen can you just let me know
if you can uh see my
screen wonderful thank you um so I'm
very excited to be here with all of you
presenting This research and to kind of
kick off
the work that um both the co-chairs
Hyundai ali um and yes me have been have
been working on and and to kind of give
you a glimpse into some of the work that
I've been working on recently especially
in relation to my dissertation work this
actually what I'm presenting is a
portion of the dissertation study and uh
which proposed a novel approach to
conceptualizing but also measuring
empathy um that work I wanted to
acknowledge Obby who's on the call was
my advisor is my adviser and never goes
away I'm always going to be I'm always
going to have the identity um uh so lot
this work has been inspired by and
informed by a lot of his ideas and also
Dr Joanna Garner who's also member of
the Sig and a lot of the a lot of the
ideas that we're going to talk I'm gon
I'm going to try and talk about is
really empathy and
education
generally empathy is really associated
with many positive
outcomes and enhances teacher educ
teacher and student relationships we
know that can proove student academic
outcomes teaching quality and a lot more
but as you're going to come to see or
hopefully I'll do my best to present
this this important construct which is
often touted in things like education
policy and administrators encourage
their teachers to be more empathetic um
we don't really describe it well we
don't really describe or measure the
authentic empathetic experience so this
led me to suggest a
reconceptualization of empathy through a
complex Dynamic systems lens the
um The Talk today I'll briefly introd
introduce empathy constructs and
measures then highlight the value of
complex Dynamics systems as The Guiding
approach then introduce a theorical
framework that had guided the entire
conceptualization of empathy that of
course is the DSM the damic Sy Mal
identity and finally I'm going to
describe a an application of this
approach which constituted a portion of
my my dissertation study so
really we know that that there's many
ways to describe empathy and recognizing
as many definitions and constructs which
you can see here on the screen we have
this um we these are all subsumed under
the umbrella of this thing that we call
empathy and there's many different ways
that we can splice and dice this
term but we also know that often times
there these measures these constructs
align with similar phenomenological
experiences which can cause jingle
fallacies and for example you can see
that there are two major overlapping
phenomenological experiences that often
um are the focus of empathy literature
there's the inferring what another
person thinks or feels we often refer it
to that as the cognitive forms of
empathy and then there's the feeling
what another person feels which is often
referred to as the affective forms of
empathy it's important to acknowledge
that there are other major forms but
these are the two that have really
guided most of the Contemporary research
in fact when we look at the measures of
empathy we often see that they're also
um looking to measure latent constructs
like cognitive empathy and affective
empathy and here's an example of one of
the more common survey U materials that
is used for the past 40 plus years and
you can see that it's looking at
cognitive empathy affective empathy as L
constructs there are subscales there's
uh example items you can see here and
these are from the interpersonal
activity index which really has been
king um in these in the empathy survey
world but these are just one way to look
at empathy another major way also of
survey is pictorially we see a lot of
different surveys looking using imagery
or U metaphor to try and interrogate
someone's empathic experience so here we
have What's called the inclusion of the
other and where it's highlighting a very
specific form of cognitive empathy
that's called self other overlap and um
visually that's really just how much do
you feel interconnected or similar to
another person so you could be closer to
letter A in this example it's about
yourself and a homeless person very far
apart or maybe your G where you share a
lot of overlap and that signifies one of
the ways we might try and capture this
thing that we call empathy but as we
come to see truth is that even though we
know we aim to capture these major
phenomena really we're just
capturing um one of these components and
therefore we can never wholly capture
the authentic empathy experience which
we know is dynamic complex and I think
really important to This research is
situated in a role let me give you some
examples of what I mean by that so here
are three different roles that someone
might have a teacher a parent or a
physician um and for example we can
anticipate that the way that a teacher
empathizes with their students students
is different from the way that another
person let's say a parent empathizes
with their children those two different
forms of empathy look different and are
associated with different actions and
beliefs and goals and self perceptions
different emotional experiences and what
is expected in one is not expected in
another similarly when we look when we
think about something like physician
empathy which has a long um definition
excuse me has a very stable definition
in the physician empathy literature is
often the is where we uh excuse me is
where medical students are encouraged to
take on more of the cognitive forms of
empathy over the affective or to say it
differently Physicians are taught to
really try and understand their patients
but not to really feel what their
patients are feeling which does make
some sense because we know that aective
empathy is often associated with worse
prognosis diagnosis and treatment plans
so Cran some of this distancing can be
helpful so here we can actually identify
that empathy is Shifting with inside of
a role so when we look at capturing
empathy we have to be specific to it's
and acknowledge it is contact sensitive
it is dynamic and it does shift moment
to moment but this is a challenge
because normally when we look at the
major ways in which we capture empathy
we look at it through traditional
component dominant systems let's think
back to the interperson activity index
that was that survey first introduce
with cognitive empathy and affective
empathy and in this example we um we we
understand that there are latent
variables and manifest variables and
that they have these linear uh
directionality behind them and that
we're looking at how do these things
interact but the truth is to really
interrogate them appropriately we can't
use this component dominant system we
have to use an interaction dominant
system which is what you he see here on
the right so let's go through why we're
talking about complexity and why I think
this is useful so we know as many of us
who are familiar with complexity that um
these approaches are flexible adaptable
and that they're um they're more they're
able to capture more of the complex
social phenomenon like empathy and which
which allows us to see things from a
nonlinear perspective going back to that
previous component dominant system this
linear this approach so this also makes
sense because empathy is not linear it
is nonlinear actually um and what that
means is that a change to a system may
result in unproportional outcome so we
know actually that empathy has nonlinear
consequences as an example in a recent
paper by Alder at all they suggested
that and I'll quote them both low and
extremely high levels of teacher empathy
might be problematic potentially
potentially causing a nonlin
relationship with the call Quality of
teacher student interactions and student
outcomes or to say it differently
teacher empathy is not always going up
or down low levels of teacher empathy or
high levels of teacher empathy may
actually be just as as a um negative to
the student teacher
relationship um sorry uh high levels of
teacher empathy may be just as as
impactful negatively to the teacher stud
relationship as would a low level so
this is of course nonlinear in that way
and when we look at this nonlinearity
we're also acknowledging the interaction
between these components these are
metaphorically in this example here
these are like the little dots so
they're Dynamic and that means that they
are um interacting uh over time and that
they're interdependent which
acknowledges that components of the
system are assumed to be interconnected
and therefore they influence each other
so when we're looking at all these
components we're then looking what's the
macro level emergence or to say it
differently we're looking to see what is
the appearance of a complex behavior
that develops from these interacting
Dynamic components in the system and
that when we look at what we look at at
this higher level is not um is is
irreducible which is to say um this
system is n nested and is more than the
some of its parts and this is really
important because what I'm trying to
highlight here is that traditional
empathy literature has focused on this
linear approach which is focused on um
uh simple components is often neglecting
certain constructs over others and we're
missing the whole picture and this is
not useful if we really care about the
entire authentic experience of what we
call empathy acknowledging the
complexity the Dynamics and the role
situatedness of the empathic experience
I'm encouraging us to then shift our
focus and then use a different approach
this is a complex dyamic assistance
approach one that's grounded in the
dynamic system moal identity the DSM and
here's a schematic representation of the
dmri the dmri for those who are not
familiar
is um grounded in complex Dynamic
systems ontologies and is a met
theorical framework that conceptualizes
action as
emergent from a person's social
culturally constructed and context
dependent role identity that's the
idiosyncratic way of taking up a role
and for our example and most of the
people on this call it's really that of
a teacher like what is the teacher's
role or the role Identity or the teacher
role and this framework really stands in
contrast to those traditional approaches
I showed you earlier
and can highlight the way that we can
integrate the many different constructs
of empathy into one single framework
this is really impactful because we can
then start to highlight how the DSM um
uh can capture the entirety of the
authentic experience let me show you how
what I mean by that so we start to focus
on the contents or the four role related
factors that are interdependent and
these four related factors what which
what we call the content are someone's
ontological beliefs or epistemological
beliefs those are referring to knowledge
beliefs and assumptions that they have
about the world their or the level of
certainty about those The credibility
which is the epistemological purposes
and goals are um a purpose person's
purpose or their um for action or their
goals objectives in reference in their
role self-perceptions or
self-definitions or ref or self-
references uh uh in relation to a role
things like self-efficacy perceived
values interest abilities Etc and
finally we have perceived action
possibilities which are internal and
external behavior in relation to a role
so let's put this now in the language of
the dmri with empathy so we know that a
person can have an ontological belief
that is empathetic that um they may have
a belief about emotional experience or a
teacher can have a goal to be more
empathetic
they can consider action possibilities
that are viewed as more empathetic for
example trying to take someone's
perspective that traditional getting
someone shoes and finally a person can
have a
self-perception that they themselves are
empathetic now we also not only are
interested in these different components
of the dmri the contents but also the
structures and these are reference to
the relationships between the contents
often referring to tension or alignment
between and within contents so and the
DSM uniquely can capture the emergence
of these empathic informed actions and
effective experiences at this level as
well so not only are we asking well is
that is that empath empathetic goal um
uh present but maybe does empathy emerge
when there's alignment between a goal
and a belief or does it not emerge when
there's tension between an action
possibility and a self perception for
example and you'll see me by the way use
these these lines or EXC me
double-headed erors again you're going
to see me use them in Green in reference
to alignment or R when it's intention
and finally with the dsmr we also have
the processes which is reference to
changes in the content of the structures
that I just mentioned but all this of
course is being um framed inside of a
person's control parameters so the and
these are also empathetic in in content
or in in perception so for example a
person's context might determine the
type of empathy that they may show The
Domain might also in inform them for
example in the teacher empathy world we
might suggest that uh the type of
empathy that a math teacher has versus a
socialized teacher might change the
culturally mediated means and what is
normally empathetic might also be uh nor
uh might shift and finally the person's
own personal dispositions and what is
their own disposition positional levels
of empathy as well so this is my call to
suggest that the DSM can function well
for capturing the entire authentic
empathy experience by integrating all
these different components
simultaneously to show this I'm going to
show you an example this is just a taste
of some of the work that came out of my
dissertation and I'm going to show you
an example um that was really
highlighting how you can use the dmri to
unpack but more importantly to show the
entirety of of empathy emerging from
someone's goals beliefs perceived action
possibilities and self
perceptions so in this example I'm going
to show you data the data for here is
only going to be two pieces of data it
is a life story and narrative inquiry
interview which is where I ask the
teacher to reflect upon emotional
experiences while while teaching or tell
me about how they became a teacher and
then also a video stimulated recall
interview where the teacher in my in the
study explicated their actions and
decisions during a recorded video
segment of their class the two teachers
in this uh in this uh uh study were uh
purposfully sampled and both taught the
same school I'm going to introduce you
to Kevin and Kelly who taught at Windsor
Tech um Windsor Tech is a vocational
school in the Mid-Atlantic United States
that primarily serves um students from
marginalized identities and Kevin
identifies as white and male and is a
veteran English language arts teacher
who's been teaching in that school for a
long time um by contrast we have Kelly
Kelly is a multi-racial female who is
both a science teacher at the school and
also fulfills the role as the athletic
director and we're going to focus on
their experiences and to really
highlight their story I'm going to
introduce you to a very specific form of
empathy that comes out of the work of Dr
hunter gach from gilc and mu in
2023 where they were looking at Social
perspective taking um which I would
argue is a form of empathy where you are
trying to understand someone's
experiences and there's two different
ways that uh that a person can engage in
Social perspective taking according to
their paper one is that of a judge and
the judge makes assumptions you are
judging someone about existing knowledge
which does have an available heuristic
if you want to make quick assumptions
about people in value um of keeping
resources time Etc and then we have a
detective the detective seeks out
information and is a more costly uh job
but is perceived by many as being maybe
a little more adaptive because you are
then learning what is actually true and
operationalizing these two with inside
the DSM we have the detective is part of
the action possibilities so seeking on
information I'm going to generally refer
to as an action possibility and the
judge is generally as an ontological
belief because there's assumptions being
made and their belief systems are are um
excuse me and they are then believing
things about their students so let me
first start with Kevin Kevin is our
judge and his empathetic judging
ontological beliefs we saw alignment AC
cross his identity system so as an
example and you're going to see me use
color here so the color and the quote
will match the color that you're going
to see in the DSM schematic so for
example that whole quote is blue which
is the ontological belief and once again
the green double arrows are alignments
just to kind of keep everyone on the
same track so he said the students at
Windsor Tech his school come from all
over the city but many from The Windsor
Tech neighborhood many from difficult
circumstances many of the students face
tremendous hardships and most have
experienced a wide range of traumas this
is an ontological belief that Kevin has
told us and from our from the interview
he has made clear this is something that
he believes but doesn't always have the
uh knowledge to back that up he doesn't
actually seek out information with his
students he's making many assumptions
about them but we see here that his
judging his empathetic judging carries
through and is shows alignment with
inside of his identity system on the
whole so as another example here he
talks about where he lowers his
standards to help us feel his students
feel better and this is a direct um
response to his beliefs about his
students having hardships in their life
so for example as an action possibility
he talks he says if providing a smack of
success by giving good grades moves the
needle just a tiny bit with their own
self-image with their own who they are
with their own way they feel about
themselves he then says as a
self-perception and as a goal I'm 1
million per down so we can see here that
Kevin is highlighting how his beliefs by
the students has led to new action
possibilities and new what is perceived
as empathetic actions beliefs goals and
self perceptions that are in favor of
making students feel better so he's
using this knowledge to inform
everything else this is not what's going
with Kelly Kelly's quite the opposite
while Kevin is comfortable making these
assumptions Kelly does not have that
same comfort and while I don't have it
here I can tell you that this comes from
her own experiences where she um made
assumption about students in the past
and as a processed changed her uh her
actions and started to become a
detective that is once again where she
seeks out information so we can see here
as an action possibility and a goal she
says explicitly in reference to seek
information she says in terms of that
for parents I was like hey is there
anything I should know that will help me
become a better teacher for your child
and then we can see here that in
response to that she has this
antropological belief about her what her
parents tell her or excuse me what the
parents tell her they say and sometimes
they do open up a lot of times it's like
I've had things like oh please know that
my son or my child really likes to move
around so once again she using her
detective uh action possibilities which
is an empathetic exper is an empathetic
action possibility align with the goal
and align with this new um uh uh belief
excuse me and then we also see her
explicitly talk about how this is part
of both a goal and then also perceived
action POS s um we also see this once
again is now an action possibility and a
self-perception so she says I try to let
them know I.E her students if I do not
know your circumstance I cannot afford
you the extra Grace let's compare now
for a moment Kevin said I'm G to make
assumptions and then give my students
Grace Kelly has is now telling us I will
give my students that Grace when I learn
something about them to afford them that
Grace and that is a different form of
empathy where she's still learning about
information she still creating mental
models learning about them and and
showing empathy but only where when it
becomes appropriate based on what she
can what she now knows so when we look
at their data together we can see that
Kevin is our judge and Kelly is our
detective now with the time I have
remaining um I'm going to try and show
you the way that we then
conceptualize this work um using State
space Landscapes and I once again want
to thank AI for your help in helping me
get through this so the first part was
we found a set of themes across our data
the major themes were self-perceived
familiarity responsive action
possibility flexibility goal and action
possibility so specifically
self-perceived familiarity refers to
familiarity with students lived
experiences cultural knowledge ethn
racial views and personal lives how
familiar am I with my students
responsiveness as an action possibility
is indicates the warmth or adaptability
with this to students
needs um and then finally flexibility
refers to how accommodating am I to my
students um am I so low flexibility
would be I really hold my students
accountable to do things or high
flexibility would be I really give my
students
Grace So to demonstrate these three um
uh emergent themes we then looked at
them and re uh interpret them as
Dimensions across state space Landscapes
so I'm going to walk through these three
excuse me how we how to interpret or how
we read these together I'm going to show
the flexibility one which once again
refers to um how flexible were you were
you more accommodating or um or were you
more holding students accountable so
stat spased landscapes for those who are
not familiar are a visualization that um
we can we can use to to conceptualize
our qualitative data and they're
conceptual models that are often used in
complex damic assistance approaches that
describe all possible States patterns of
of a system so in it we look for things
like conceptually we look for things
like Hills so Hills represent unstable
repeller States so un instability while
a valley refers to um uh sorry a valley
is uh requires energy to move out of and
is often it refers to an a tractor State
um so if we see if we see a lot of if we
see a valley it's harder to move out of
a valley so think kind of like
conceptually I'll show you here with the
ball imagine the ball is representative
a person you have flexibility are they
low medium or high which you can see in
the bottom there and then you have
energy so if a person has is in a is in
a state where they are on a high hill
this we refer to once again as a
repeller State and it takes very little
energy think back to physics to to move
from there so you and so we're thinking
ing kinetic potential energy so this is
unstable State and the ball wants to
move somewhere and if it moves down this
way it moves into a uh into a valley or
an attractor State and it's much harder
to move out of an attractor State once
you're in an attractor state so it takes
more energy to move
out um to now demonstrate how we then
looked at this once again as a reminder
we're looking at
flexibility responsiveness and then
familiarity familiarity does not exist
in XY AIS familiarity you're going to
see actually as a color scheme so pink
is more is low familiarity with student
Liv experiences and high familiar is
blue and of course the X sorry the y-
AIS is energy so how easy is it to move
conceptually out of the space so Kevin
Kevin once again was our judge he felt
comfortable making assumptions about
students and when we look at his
identity landscape it's clear that he
that with this alignment in his identity
landscape he had a very comfortable uh
stable identity system um we can see
here that he had high responsiveness to
his students really high flexibility
because he was he was willing to give
them Grace no matter what and but even
though he had low familiarity he did not
know their circumstances he was making
assumptions about them and and we from
his uh stable identity system and
Alignment to AC cross identic system he
was going to be
stable now that's not the true it's not
true for Kelly Kelly conceptually when
she does not know something about
student she seeks it out once again
she's our detective so as an example
here we have Kelly when she conceptually
is in uh misalignment here or having
tension across her Ro identity system we
can see that she is now in a repeller
State that's the that's that Hill there
and she has low familiarity with her
student lived experiences but when she
seeks them out we can see that she has
identity alignment across her identity
system and she now with inside the high
familiarity is in a more stable identity
space and if you look carefully you can
see on the flexibility at the bottom she
moving from like a medium low medium to
to high medium which is to say e unlike
Kevin who's willing to give the Grace
Kelly is not as willing to give the
grace unless she now knows something
about her students and has sought out
information that she then uses um to
give to be more empathetic in the way
that made sense to
her that's all to say I believe the DSM
as as a complex acceptance approach and
framework is an appropriate and proper
way to capture the the entire authentic
empathy empathetic experience it embeds
all the different constructs I mentioned
earlier which often times traditional
approaches will neglect or prioritize
one over many instead here we can
integrate all of the many into into a
single framework look at them as set of
goals
actions uh self perceptions and beliefs
and by doing so we can more
appropriately and effectively capture
the entire whole empathetic
experience um and as I end I just want
to say that um as someone who's been
looking at complexity for a while and
has only since really feels like I've
been found my space in it I just want to
highlight that the people who brought me
to systems theories first first um we
have a fourth book forthcoming book
coming out on the topic of relationships
of power and systems theories in
creativity research with a focus on
Gregory baton both as a case study on
his life and also his work and for many
of us who are familiar with cybernetics
research and Gregory Bim um there's a
strong tie to our work um and his and
with that I want to say thank you I'm
happy to answer any questions you may
have
thank you for this Rich presentation
Joey thank you um so uh first I would
like to start asking by uh your
struggles you've experienced during your
studies before you started before you
explored complexity complex Dynamic
systems framework to study
empathy did you do any quantitative
analysis yeah what were what were the
other approaches you
have so i' I've have used the
interpersonal reactivity index um that
survey I talked about at the beginning
it is still prominent is has been
readapted in many different spaces and
it's still used today in fact there is a
there is an adapted version for Teacher
specifically it's been Rewritten and um
my feeling is that it it doesn't really
give us everything and of course as We
Know surveyed material is neglects
context uses aggregate uh experiences so
instead of looking at one specific
situated moment and one role it's often
look having a person reflect on the
entirety of their experiences which also
only gives us a glimpse into what's
going on because they're pulling from
potentially only a handful of
experiences that are most Salient to
them um the approaches that I'm
encouraging of course are more situated
in the moment with people um and their
experiences and the other things I've
seen with regard to empathy research is
when you look at other survey material
we do see a lot more um visual pieces
there's a lot of different ways in which
people have used affective and cognitive
empathy um survey material to try and
capture PE different people and groups
perceptions and then also there is some
people who have looked at are trying to
look at observation data which I think
is also a bit complicated because
empathy is such an internal experience
even though there is a relational
component um
it it can be quite difficult so that's
why I have shifted in my understanding
of empathy to suggest that complexity
really is the only way that makes sense
to me at least when trying to understand
how to really capture the social
phenomenon when I really do care about
it meaningfully and instead of trying to
say well this one very specific
component in neglecting everything else
that's the thing that matters the most
and I just I just don't believe that's
true anymore or ever
really thank you thank
you yes may I ask something um well
thank you very much that is a very
comprehensive and wellth thought out
presentation and you made it very clear
thank you so much for that and I can
certainly see where complex Dynamic
systems applies um and enriches our
understanding of empathy I wish you
would use empathic instead of empathetic
but I'm losing that I'm losing that
battle just a linguistic anomaly um the
my question has to do with Kelly you
said and it was a wonderful question
that she would speak to the parents I
believe you said of the children that
she was teaching to ask what they would
um suggest she know about their child
what a wonderful question question um
but you also said that uh not everybody
had an answer for that I believe that
you said that not all parents answered
the question did I miss that you're
looking puzzled she I don't recall
saying that she she did not mention that
what what she does at the beginning of
the year she speaks with parents gathers
information in multiple modes so for
example she sends out a survey when she
meets with parents at the beginning of
the year for example back to school
nights um she talks to all the parents
um to kind of give some backstory to
Kelly Kelly when she was a young
teacher made an assumption about a
student and his lived experiences that
were so foreign to her own that she was
appalled with with herself and that very
emotional experience led to a processing
and changing of her identity in the form
of what was appropriate and what can I
do so she had student who was sleeping
her
class and she kept saying why do you
sleep like this isn't so inappro
and then one day the student and her and
the guy's counselor were talking and it
was saying um you know my father's out
of the picture I work three jobs at
night I come to school immediately after
a night shift and I'm tired and that was
not something she ever experienced she
not experienc that type of um challenge
or hardship in her life so that type of
um assuming about people prevented her
from in the future making assumption
about students she often came to them
with a bit of um empathy in the way of
hoping that they will respond to her but
she's not going to change her actions
unlike her foil of Kevin who is just
making many
assumptions also by the way I would love
to talk to you after the fact about the
empathic empathetic I will as obious
Smiles that was a question that we also
had and I don't have a good answer for
it so happily entertain I'd be happy to
talk with you about it but can I come
back to my question um so I'm uh G to be
giving a talk myself next month at a at
a state conference and um it has to do
with
identity and so uh I was going along
saying you know we need to know about
the identity of our students especially
with the marginalized population and I
listed all of these marginalized
populations that we need to be aware of
and be sensitive to and I believe that
um but it also has been pointed out to
me that not everybody identifies just
because I call them nor divergent or uh
whatever doesn't mean necessarily that
they are comfortable with that
appalation right with that that label um
and that's sort of thrown this whole
thing in my mind so what you just said
now was really important the idea of
being a detective rather than a judge um
seems really important when I'm talking
to
teachers
um I mean the the point of of being a
judge I suppose is to help ease the
burden of marginalized populations
that's what one's doing but um but may
misfire may not connect with the actual
feelings of the intended
audience there was just something on on
PBS the other night the NewsHour and I
don't know how many people watch it or
heard this part but they were talking
about a segment of the latinx
population uh called No Sabo did anybody
hear that no Sabo business and no Sabo
is um a label that's used for latinx
people in this country who don't speak
Spanish and they resent the fact that
they are and they and they feel
ashamed um of the fact that they don't
speak Spanish and yet there's a large
segment of them there're a second or
third
generation immigrants to this country
right but because of their culture
because of their appearance because of
their names it's assumed that they speak
Spanish and there's a great example I
think where you can say you know let's
not make assumptions um about it let not
and and not necessarily make
accommodations if if they're not
warranted um I mean I don't know how you
go about Discerning that I mean you can
ask them which is what you did the
parents I guess I guess there's a way to
ask older Learners um do you have a
suggestion on that so I have a few
actually and it's very appr propo to
Kelly once again so Kelly does have an
experience where she is struggling to
communicate with some of her students
Kelly is not a spash speaker um but
Kelly has my spash speaking students and
um has found ways to almost as an
inverse have her students empathize with
her where she she really starts to
introduce her vulnerability with her
students and she encourages them or
encourages them to realize like I'm
trying we should try together and it's a
very warm space so she has cultivated
that I don't think that's a simple I can
just do it and it happens um she has
cultivated over some time but she does
try and be playful with them in that way
and acknowledge I know you're struggling
I'm struggling too there are also many
people who will talk about how do
teachers try and learn about their
students so there is the detective but
what are the mechanisms or the actions a
detective should take the most common of
course is perspective taking which is
just a general term for trying to learn
about someone else and there's many
different forms of perspective taking
the common one that is most encouraged
especially by Dr chz Warren out of
Vanderbuilt is learning about your
students but not trying to step into
their shoes
so there this we refer to as imagine
self versus imagine other perspective
taking imagine self is where I put
myself in someone's shoes imagine other
is where I have to imagine them from
kind of AAR it's a it's an outside
perspective and the reason why he
encourages people to not engage in that
of Imagine self is because we can never
truly know our students experiences and
it is incumbent upon us to keep
awareness and try and be we appropriate
um
Equitable culturally conscious and be
thoughtful of how we were doing these
things but by not making assumptions
about the students at one of his papers
he actually talks about how one teacher
tries to use her marginalized identity
um she's a white teacher who um um I
think identifies as a lesbian and she
tries to use that identity to make
meaning of her black students
marginalized identity and while there
might be some continuity between
alization as a general term the
experiences in America are very
different so there's a there's a
question of like don't try and make
assumptions about me ask me questions
learn about me let's be do this together
um and there is also an I will say
there's a form of empathy um that's
called strategic empathy where teachers
are encouraged to um bring in
perspectives that may run counter to
their own that may that may run against
their own and which is often very
difficult but you're encouraged also
remain skeptical but in that way you're
inviting lived experiences culture and
knowledge emotions and other experiences
that often are absent from the classroom
into the
classroom I'm not sure that answered all
your question but I'm I'm you just say a
little more about that last one please
yes I'm happy to also give you the link
to a paper about it okay uh but the the
big thing here is that it's a strategic
empathy is a very specific form of
empathy of where you're encouraged to
um invite perspectives that might feel
um you're not supposed to condone a
perspective but you shouldn't condemn it
either is kind of like the big idea
that's not always true of course there
are times when it's appropriate um but
that's that's like the big idea let me
try and find the paper for you really
quickly I don't want to dominate the
discussion I
can pagi of strategic empathy there we
go everyone if you want to read it
wonderful peace thank you thank
you I have a question
please uh and this is for joy and AI in
your in your work you you went really
deep were there any things that
suggested any uh
future work toward uh
any modifications of
dmri I'm gonna say no I'm G to turn to
Avia though and see if you have any
perspective on
that um this specific work has not um
challenged um anything in the dmri um it
it's been informative I mean it has
contributed to the development of the
dsmr because the role of emotions more
generally in the dsmr is something that
we're still exploring the emot itself as
a dynamic system is and how it manifests
emotion is with all its multifaceted
components how does it look in the dmri
so in that sense yes um it hasn't
challenged but we all realize that the
dmri is a model in progress I mean once
it sto progressing we can probably throw
it away but it's it's um as as um we
continue to progress it so Joe is
dissertation research has brought
emotion most explicitly so far into the
dmri but the other things that we're
learning and this is where the dsmr is
continuing to to develop is um how it is
manifesting the social cultural Dynamics
um is a control parameter or a set of
control parameters within which it is
emerging and contributing in turn to the
change in the environment as well I want
to add one more thing where I think I
found um a novel use of the DSM I never
thought of before and this work really
inspired it which is taking a literature
and embedding it into the dmri has been
very useful the DSM in that way is
becoming the framework but I can use
other constructs so you you see as you
saw from this work really you'll only
saw a snapshot um but I was able to take
existing empathy constructs and embed
them inside the DSM in a way that felt
meaningful to the authentic experience
and the teachers's identity their
motivations emotions goals Etc um but I
also have been um developing obious we
should have a conversation about emotion
regulation because I also know that
their emotion regulation has goals has
action has beliefs and self perceptions
emotional awareness emotion regulation
by definite is a or goal States for
example is something called honic versus
uh um in instrumental goals we have uh
beliefs about emotion regulation and
then there are emotion regulation
techniques that are the action
possibilities so what I found really
fascinating is many of the literatures
that we use fit inside the dmri
especially if you're interested in the
role components and the person's um
motivation action decisions
Etc and I I'll just add on what Joey
said so so the dmri is a meta
theoretical framework um and in that it
provides the frame for theories to both
be incorporated but also to inform local
theories of phenomenon within that frame
um so I think in that sense it's um
flexible in that in the way that Joey
was describing um but another comment
just to to uh Dian your your uh um um
imminent presentation about identity and
how in students identities and how the
teachers relate to students identity
perhaps the dsmr can be helpful there as
well because what the DSM emphasizes
that identity is not the nominal
categorization and even not the
intersectional uh um interaction of
various nominal categorizations but it's
how the student constructs their own
meaning of who they are in the
contextual role they occupy
um and more generally the identity
systems is comprised is comprising uh
the multiple um roles they have in life
so developing in in in empathy and being
empathic towards a
student um is not about like what you
know it's not like being the judge and
making assumptions about them because of
their intersectional social um group
memberships but rather is trying to
understand how do they construct who
they are as a student and then the smmr
could provide um helpful language to
think how did these students construct
an understanding of their reality what
are their purpose and goals what are
their self-perceptual self-definitions
rather than uh um the the external
imposition of those and what do they
perceive as available actions for them
in that context in light of how they
Define themselves the goals they pursue
and the construction of reality and
particularly to me at least um being
empathic towards such a person needs to
understand what their dilemmas where are
the tensions in their role identities
where do they feel negative emotions and
then maybe they don't fit or they don't
know exactly what to do so um I I
thought that that might be helpful yeah
thank you I just put I just put the DM
paper in the chat for you so if in case
you want to look at it and go a little
more detailed there yeah I think you
should be giving the paper next month
though not
I kind of building off of um what Joey
has said and what Dr Kaplan has has said
I'm really interested in um kind of
understanding empathy and like Joey was
talking about emotional regulation in
collaborative group settings what do you
think is the potential for these models
especially how you depicted them to show
reciprocal relationships of empathy
between students teachers peers all in
the same model um I think this has a
really great applicability to like I
said not just empathy but regulation and
um socially regulated emotions or
socially regulated empathy um or like
you were talking about at the beginning
like emotional contagion what do you
think about depicting all of those
things using these brilliant models that
you have um shown us today um can I just
have a simple answer of
yes um that works thank you so well so I
can tell you that there are ways in
which people have depicted I'm um Abi
has
depicted the interaction of different
groups so you can look at the you can
look at a group Ro identity it's not
it's not only just the
individuals um or at the group level how
does that change of course because we're
using complexity approaches what you do
at the group level we'll look different
what you do at the individual level my
research is often just I'm fascinated by
teachers um I think that helping te my
my goals personal goals are in relation
to helping teachers teach better and
this is the way that I think I can help
them is in this form um I think there
are people who are more interested in as
your to your point the relational aspect
of it and there are um I've been working
on some of the conceptualizations be
behind what does it mean when I start to
develop and and um another person's
identity through that empathic
experience or empathetic experience
whatever word you want to use um
and um I do believe that you can then
capture where do something like
emotional Contagion for those who aren't
familiar emotional contagion is the
description of when something like uh
one emotion kind of is infectious around
a group so for example I smile and you
all smile be an example of that or I
start crying and you all start crying um
and I do believe that that's also quite
easy because it would then highlight the
contextual and relational nature of the
EMP empathic experience that um is at
the heart of what is the work it's just
that I as a researcher have drawn my
boundaries around the teacher
specifically and in fact a critique of
my work has and is appropriately so this
does not include the perception of the
students in the classroom right I'm only
looking at the teachers perceptions of
their empathy I haven't included the
students and I will say those who are
interested um there's a new this's new
war coming out by um Jeff vman at
Tennessee and his adviser Dr Miller at
um George Mason where they have been
looking at um how do we examine teacher
empathy but by the students perceptions
of their of their teachers empathy I
will say though in my own critiques
though it is a survey so it still f it
has the same Foles that a survey has so
I think honestly maybe Molly to your
point Jeff and I should talk you should
join us and then maybe we could find a
cool way of taking Jeff's ideas but then
putting them inside the dsai making them
fit although I will say AI I would like
to hear if you have any thoughts on that
as well because I feel like that might
be where I've seen some of the work
especially museums also
moving if you you have uh sharing uh um
privileges if you want to actually show
there's a diagram in the um article you
shared yeah where we take I mean because
it's a you know we we work from the
complex dynamic system it's a
hierarchical uh system and as Joey said
you know his U research forms an an
artificial boundary around the Ro
identity of a teacher and their
emergence of their Ro identity and EMP
and empathic uh
um elements for that Ro identity but you
can then zoom out and have the focus be
on an interaction between teachers
students um or a team members working
together and trying and then each Ro
identity is
emerges u in relation and through
feedback loops with the others um you
with with who they're interacting and we
try to capture this with this image um
in the um in the article let me let me
pull it up right now sorry my computer
was acting up a little
bit okay
um I'm not sure why I'm trying to show
there we go so the example that I was
talking about is you can see the
individual a individual B individual c
with inside and that's once again framed
by their context their domain their
culture and their dispositions and also
a key feature is you can see that there
are multiple dsmr inside the dsmr
highlighting the nested nature and also
the permeability between identities your
teacher identity can have can bleed over
have influence with your parent identity
and so that's kind of what you're seeing
here and I think M to your point this is
one of the unique features um once again
I just drew my boundry at a very
specific
point yeah that nestedness is really
interesting thanks thanks for sharing
I'll have to explore it further and talk
to you and Jeff some more oh we'll we'll
have to hit up at AR and we'll we'll
make it work
um yeah we are coming to the end of our
presentation um Joey thank you so much
uh for this Rich uh presentation and
wonderful discussion
um hold on I'm sorry this is my first
experience um hosting these
presentations so we are looking forward
to seeing you in our our uh upcoming
webinar next month uh we will soon send
out the details and registration link
please stay tuned uh for the updates on
our communication channels I hope I am
able to I hope I can share the
communication Channels with you right
now thank you so much again and I hope
you all have a good night thank you all
so much for joining thank you Hyundai
for the invitation thank you it's great
to be home yes thank you thank you so
much Joey and everyone thank you thank
you thank you Ali also for your both a
lot of this and also for the comments
very good Joey thank you very much
