I'm Nicole Shanahan Bobby Kennedy's
running
mate welcome to back to the people
podcast which highlights the growth of a
movement uniting America where our
government is free from corporate
capture and where we give voice back to
the American public you cannot afford to
have scientists not participate in the
wealth of the nation that they made
wealthy so you know what's really
fascinating is that everything you just
said was what what gave birth to the
world economic Forum
initially the modern academicians are
screaming at the people who founded
their their subjects it's kind of a
scientific exploratory retainer this is
mind control at scale we live in a world
with these forces we have to be in the
middle and and that's where sanity and
Humanity has to be in order to move
forward I'd like to go on CNN MSNBC NPR
PBS
and I want you to tell me why I can't
thanks Eric thanks so much for joining
me today great to be here Nicole okay
it's 200 years from
now we've somehow convinced Humanity in
2024 that this exercise is worthwhile
and worth protecting sure but somehow we
find ourselves in
2024 in a
situation that's somewhat anti-human
that are the establishment the things
that are necessary for human evolution
are under attack that's
true feels to me like that scene in the
original Matrix where Trinity is talking
to herself after surviving a gun battle
and being chased by the bad guys and she
says Get Up Trinity like at some level
the question is we've got anti-natalism
we've got neoism we've got incredible
partisan bickering we clearly have more
oress Global Peace with a couple of
hotpots that point out to us how fragile
uh this moment is we're highly
demoralized we can't see past the coming
AI because we don't even know what what
it what form it's going to take so the
way I'm reading it is this is like a
really bad moment for profound decision
making but it's a moment acquiring
profound decision- making that's that's
the rub is that we have to make these
decisions now and you know it's
like you know drunk and tired is no time
to operate heavy machinery but there's
no ability to wait either and that's
that's the Paradox of this moment and
boy did we just get handed a couple of
curveballs yeah before we get to those
curveballs you said something we were
chatting earlier today you said
something that really could only get get
through to me from someone who is a
theoretical physicist such as yourself
you said to me that in order for
Humanity to survive 200 years from now
we need a back
propagation of a belief in the
indefinite future of humans absolutely
and you said that and it had a real Prof
I mean i' I've spent some time in the
rabbit hole of quantum physics where
this idea of time is different than how
we think about time sure it's not
necessarily
linear right so so this idea that
there's this backward reverberation yeah
to 2024 from 200 years from now there's
this backward reverberation this back
propagation so now you're talking about
retrocausality okay but but but but
where this
indefinite human
future we don't have the groundwork for
it right now no in fact we we losing uh
our belief in in an indefinite human
future I think year by year uh I think
it was very clear to people uh around
the time of uh the fision devices in
1945 followed by the hydrogen bomb in in
52 um that we were in in danger of
permanently losing this is when the
bullet in of the atomic scientist set up
the Doomsday Clock uh it's very clear to
people that these things were very
powerful then we stopped stopped doing
Atomic tests with the testband treaty in
the early 60s and that sense that there
might be an indefinite human future if
we hadn't killed ourselves by the early
60s um maybe dayon and and the end of
the Cold War could could usher in the
end of History we'd all live peaceably I
think that's clearly not true and
essentially we we we took a big nap for
a long time and we are now waking up to
what the XPR date of the postor War II
order is likely to
mean this postor War 2 order has been a
really defined by America holding this
moral Authority overseas and at home and
the American public assumed it as a
almost
Birthright that we would have this moral
Authority
overseas and for the first time since
World War II we are seeing a block of
powers coming together that are actually
showing us more restraint than we are
showing
them and you know I I I think about
bricks constantly I think about what's
going on in the Middle East constantly
um just this last week China made an
unprecedented statement China usually
doesn't make statements this big but it
said that peace in the Middle East
requires us to
acknowledge um the formation of
Palestine as a sovereign I was blown
away by this
statement and you know whether or not
that's maybe we don't want to unpack
that but I think the significance of
China saying that is a really big deal
you mean because they are assuming that
mantle of speaking on behalf of the
world Community yeah and and and
typically they haven't made these Grand
statements and gestures for the
prerequisites of Global Peace before
right and so the United States could
could right now at this moment look at
where it is and be realistic about it
and be you know just readily accept that
we have worn out this postor War II
identity and and it and we I think many
of us feel it many of us feel that these
dynasties from the Democratic party and
these dynasties from a Republican party
are going into retirement like a final
retirement Joe Biden stepping out of the
race
yesterday um signals that you know you
and I unpacked a little bit about
understanding what the future of the RNC
might look like in four
years and and it it does strike me that
um this era is coming to an end which
means that we have great opportunity
before us because
perhaps you know the winding down of
this era gives opportunity for these two
possibilities to
happen one of those possibilities is
that 200 years from now humans are
nearly
unrecognizable and the other one is that
we have gotten through this we've
weathered it we've made some of the big
decisions and we're going to talk about
what those big decisions are we've made
those big decisions for our
culture and society that are going to
lead us to a human future that is
recognizable because it's the thing of
our dreams I'm super excited about that
and the key question is how does the US
need to morph so one of the things that
I thought was really interesting about
what you said is that the post World War
II order gave America some moral
Authority but it was net it wasn't
simply because the US were the good guys
we were the guys in Chile with Operation
Condor we were the guys in Iran with
Operation Ajax we did a lot of things uh
particularly under the dullas brothers
uh that were very muscular not
necessarily known to the US and in part
they were tolerated because the sense
was that America was net positive not
positive in everything that it did right
and not necessarily honest in everything
that it did but that ultimately it was
about spreading Freedom spreading free
trade spreading Prosperity rebuilding
Europe um and a cultural example for the
world and being good to the defeated you
know trying to be good to Japan trying
to be good uh to Germany and trying to
show some sort of uh leadership was a
was a mixed activity I think that in
part what's gone on is that we've
slipped in terms of we're not
contributing enough
positively to disguise the ways in which
America has worked in the Pro postor War
II era in a very muscular very often
non-open cryptic fashion so in order to
get to an indefinite human future we
have to get back to being a net positive
moral Authority in the world and I I
think you know that's it's a beautiful
point that you're making how do we get
back to the optimism I'm concerned that
fundamentally it has to do with being
excited about things that have never
happened before H so for example we all
know how to be terrified of
AI but we also have an idea that the
future may be terrifying but it's also
going to be unbelievably cool my and my
initial uh relationship with AI was not
Terror it was really based upon solving
Humanity's partnership and Innovation
challenges and so for me to hear the
hysteria about AI I understand it but
I've already endeavored into a positive
relationship with it and seeing what can
happen you know using Ronald Coast
economics and transaction cost theory
and and using AI to achieve you know
these optimal transactions um which
allow for the unlocking of
innovation um and all these other you
know very humanistic goals it's
interesting that you mentioned Coast
because one of the ways of saving
capitalism from the destruction that AI
might wreck on let's say labor markets
uh might be to Grant the population
property rights that have to be
purchased by the
technology uh innovators uh you know
because obviously it's using a lot of
our general data it's going to be um
effectively moving things that were
labor tasks into the capital Pile in a
K&amp;L model so in part I think what you're
really talking about is coasts is the
bridge from the economics we know to the
economics we don't yeah and isn't it
amazing that we're not talking about
post capitalist postcommunist economics
I don't think that hyek and and uh and
Marx uh and Adam Smith have the
solutions for a world with AI and so why
is it that we're not forming institutes
and conferences that say capitalism is
not going to survive AI and that could
be a great thing I think people are
really terrified about talking about
life beyond capitalism because that then
sounds Marxist so
why I I you know that's a really good
question I think because nobody knows
anything other than the two so that's
what my my claim is is that at what
point did we lose the ability to break
out new space and say I want to fill
this with something that hasn't existed
without being back referenced to fail
ideas mhm so you know if you think about
like we had wheeled luggage before 1989
but it it all sucked it was like these
tiny casters and long leashes that fell
over because of high centers of gravity
that didn't work right now if you said
hey I have I have an idea as Robert
Plath did um for wheel luggage somebody
might have just said yeah yeah yeah it
always falls over right and the ball
bearings were like too sticky exactly so
my claim is is that what's really
fascinating is that we can't even get an
Institute or a conference that says we
obviously need a new economics it's an
emergency what economics is this going
to be because we have this idea is that
if we give up capitalism communism will
fill the vacuum so you know what's
really fascinating is that everything
you just said was what what gave birth
to the world economic Forum
initially right because that was the
initial motivation was that we are going
to think think about the future and
we're going to think about it you know
in a world with Limitless Innovation but
something got co-opted in that mission
in a very dark
way and and the agenda that came out of
that is not necessary I think that
agenda takes us to the left when I said
we're either going to the left or the
right we're going to go either left to
200 years from now where humans are like
virtually unrecognizable or we're going
to go to the right into this like dream
world of utopian Humanity where humans
are still organic maybe when we unpack
that because I think if we unpack that
we can begins to um you know set up the
the foundations for it so we gets us to
the left humans are
unrecognizable there's this you know
transhumanist relationship between
machines organic nature is fully
controlled by man and computer right the
right
let's talk about going right humans are
incredibly connected to Nature to a
degree that we could only dream of we've
figured out all of our energy challenges
energy is virtually
free um we understand metabolic Health
in a way that we could have never
understood we understand how to harness
sun and travel wait this is the right is
it I don't know this this is how I would
Define it I mean we have healthy humans
we have organic natural child birth we
have an ability
to um manage
disease in a very elegant way without
putting our biology in a blender and
adding aays but we have like a whole new
paradigm for
medicine
um I mean you're looking at me
suspiciously no no can I riff with you
yeah riff jump in all right so I think
what you're saying and I haven't really
heard or thought about this before is is
that the first one is an organizational
viewpoint on the world that the wise
women and men of the world economic
Forum need to guide us to do things that
are unnatural that have never happened
before but we will be so happy once we
finally do them and realize uh that the
organizational benefit of coming
together uh through these enlightened
Elders uh that this just brings
wonderful benefits to humanity the thing
on the right that I think what I'm hear
hearing from you is an idea of let's
accept our nature and the nature around
us and live with it as being very very
difficult to take over from and as a
result there's a you know there's all
these cautionary states that if we just
start changing our genders and eating
bugs and not owning anything that we're
somehow fundamentally repudiating what
it means to be human so if I hear
because you see I come from the left and
basically we spend all of our time in
the sieras growing up hiking and trying
trying to be one with nature so I don't
relate to this concept of the left sorry
by left and right I don't mean political
Spectrum oh um but but it turns out that
actually there are some interesting
similarities and I could see I was just
talking about a mere fork in the road
but now that you're actually talking
about it within the perspective of of a
political Spectrum that's kind of where
the globalists have landed they they
have kind of co-opted the movement of of
left leaning politics but it is
interesting I think that you know the
the great third way to to an extent that
I see is if you think about the Bitcoin
Community they're very tough to
understand initially because one of
their ideas is Bitcoin is stupid and
it's smarter than you are and the idea
being is Bitcoin is not trying to be
smart contracts it's not trying to be
everything to all people in a crypto
world it's saying ultimately the world
is stitched together through money and
if all we did was create new money that
humans couldn't interfere with we would
have done a great thing and that is the
ethos that in in essence a good World
emerges it's sort of closer to the Adam
Smith invisible hand that as long as we
don't start dumping our politics into
Bitcoin um what the world needs is the
money supply of which cannot be a
adulterated by Central Bankers cannot be
mismeasured um by
statisticians uh and that what we really
need to do is to get humans out of money
to the extent
possible that kind of view um is
repugnant to people who believe that
fundamentally human wisdom is what's
needed to guide the
world um and it has to do with sort of
top down wisdom versus bottom up wisdom
the wisdom of the market versus the wi
wisdom of Highly Educated people who've
been put in positions of power
unfortunately I do think you kind of
need both and this both
thinking is increasingly hard to find
Because the Internet tends to convince
people of one set of prejudices or
another it's
true it's true and I you know I'm
reading some Rudolph Steiner right now
that talks about that as well it's um as
he wrote um a number of essays talking
about
the balance between Lucifer and aramon
and that to you know live in a world
with both of these forces because it's
inevitable we live in a world with these
forces we have to be in the middle and
and that's where sanity and Humanity has
to be in order to move forward and so
it's it's really fascinating because you
know I see us in this time as well and
and it's funny that we confuse this left
and right fork with like left and and
right political spectrums um because
it's there all the like layered on each
other in almost this microcosmic way
right and you just talked about Bitcoin
which I think is a really important way
for us to think Beyond Sovereign Nations
and if we're rethinking money and we're
rethinking Sovereign currency Bitcoin
has already proven to us what that looks
like um
decentralization um so
now what does that look like in fields
like science because we have have talked
about this a number of times where
science and Academia have been corrupted
and decentralizing
science is going to be necessary in
order for us to get to this better
Humanity um that you know we can't be
producing
um middle of the road
consensus without that Liberty of voice
we've got to get very suspicious about
consensus right and I make this point
there's no arithmetic consensus because
everyone uses arithmetic or they're out
right so you don't need a consensus
because we all agree that 2+ 3 equals 5
or we go to jail when we file our tax
returns okay MH consensus is what you
get when you you have some political
thing that you're trying to get done and
you've got not enough evidence to really
say well this is Rock Solid and so then
you start having to like intimidate
dissidents and you have to put
statements in front of people will you
sign with implied threats so anytime I
hear about a scientific consensus I'm
very worried I never hear about an
einsteinian consensus or a neonian
consensus or a DNA consensus because
those things don't need a consensus um
we need to start getting very nervous
when we start hearing about a scientific
consensus particularly one that can't be
discussed openly without the word
crackpot crank Nutter uh being thrown
around and that's really the death of
science when everyone who has a
different idea uh has to start the
conversation backf footed a as if they
uh they learned science from the back of
a crackerjack box uh that's nonsense we
what is the Bitcoin model of science we
don't have it yet unfortunately the
previous model of science was an elite
one and it was a a model in which you
pretty quickly figured out who the
smartest people were and you gave them
an ungodly amount of power and influence
over the field and you put a lot of
pressure on people to behave well and so
it was an elite
uh largely gentlemanly there were there
were not enough women in it
um but collegial it was it was largely
European to an extent I think that we
feel very uncomfortable with uh I would
say only Japan really has First Rate
universities outside of North America
and Europe for the most part um this was
a world with problems but it was a world
run by people of high integrity who
could say that they were wrong who would
listen to their colleagues who would
hear people out and effectively when we
lost that civility MH it wasn't just a
question of office niceties that
civility was life itself it was the
lifeblood of science does admitting one
is
wrong a requirement for that
civility I don't think you should have
people in science who can't admit that
they're wrong it's too expensive to even
if they're really smart and they're
frequently right we can't afford them I
often times talk about this in the
context of Co that many of these experts
just are absolutely refusing to admit
that they got some things
wrong and um if we continue on in this
environment we're going to end up losing
a lot of the core
values of Western Civilization
amen
so how do we bring back that
example um I'd really like to figure out
what the the
Bitcoin model for science looks like you
often talk about the the issues with
peer review the history of peer review
um maybe we can recap some of that real
quickly to think about how we might
evolve beyond the system of of peer
review which hasn't really worked for us
for a while so peer review is an
incredibly contentious subject in part
because the world's most authoritative
voices the
professors basically don't know what the
history of peer review is even though
it's the lifeblood of their own lives
and this has to do with the way in which
we divide science we have some
scientists who go to Washington DC and
spend time around the National Mall in
the 202 area code and we have others
that basically sit in their labs and do
work and the people who do the work of
science have no concept about how the
science and government uh interface
actually works so more or less if you do
a search on the word peer review as a
phrase you'll notice that it crops up
right in the middle of the
1960s this has to do with the fact that
galain
Maxwell's uh Father Robert Maxwell um
revolutionized the academic and
scholarly publishing industry he created
a huge number of journals and in science
was very profitable for him but he sort
of destroyed science in the process by
diluting the power of great editors and
journals that could be trusted also in
the mid1 1960s we started
um nationalizing to an extent the
payment for healthc care and in the US
that meant Medicare and Medicaid in
1965 and immediately the American
taxpayers said why are we paying for all
of these procedures if we can't ask the
doctors why they are necessary
mhm so what happened was in 1972 a guy
named Wallace Bennett who was the
senator from Utah said we have a small
um program that should be the model for
the country in our family medicine
practice and he pushed out peer review
which was the idea of please don't let
the population review what they're not
capable of reviewing which is what
requires a medical degree to understand
let doctors be the reviewers of other
doctors so it was a defensive measure to
keep the American taxpayer from using
their elected representatives to
question all of these procedures that
were being um paid for by the by theed
by the government exactly then in
1975 um you had two programs U called
makos and Isis that were an early
version of the culture War and the
National Science Foundation was funding
things like uh I don't know
anthropologists and weaker
Sciences um which had a political nature
to it talking about sexuality to fourth
graders in the case of Isis and talking
about cannibalism I think uh in other
cultures in the case of makos and what
happened was is that small government
conservatives uh I think represented by
Conan uh
evangelicals and then William proxmire
and Wisconsin who took over from uh
McCarthy's seat I think uh these people
uh started saying we need to review all
of science because we don't like what's
going on and the National Science
Foundation came up with peer review as a
defensive mechanism saying you don't
need to worry we will have scientists
review everything so it wasn't a
question of outside reviewing which had
been used in The Sciences before it was
a compromise that we would subject all
of these proposals to review and it
would no longer be the case that editors
or program managers would have such
individual power the average
scientist knows nothing about the
history of peer review they attributed I
think to the 16 1700s because of sort of
faulty work of
Merton um and as a result we don't
realize that this peer review thing is
basically an attempt to keep the
populace out of elite scientific
conversations you know one of the ways
that I've been chatting with a few
people about restructuring science and
scientific information so it's more
accessible is allowing people to discuss
their n of one experiences in the
context of available research papers
which just doesn't happen today um we
have a peerreview system that's pretty
limited and then it becomes pretty much
the word of God it becomes
Dogma um and if you were rejected from
that peer review process or your papers
redacted from one of these Publications
it becomes um blacklisted often
times and you know in a world in which
we have now social media people are
getting medical information from online
um medical
influencers it strikes me that there's
this whole variety of ways that we could
think about restructuring
um review or qualification of science
capture data we we haven't tried to
capture much of this n of1 data um from
people's
testimonials um even when you think
about drug trials and even the best most
well-funded drug trials are still so
limited in scope on on what information
you can get back from the
participants um there's been talk of
wearable collect you know there's this
you know let's just put wearables on all
of our our trial participants and then
we have all this objective information
um and then we'll have even more data
and that data is going to give us real
information about what is going on um so
you know I see I see people really
trying and grasping right but
fundamentally like the
more and you know I talked about Rudolph
Steiner and aramon and it you know
aramon is represented by this grasping
right of more data more information more
confidence in
truth and and the concern that Rudolph
Steiner and and and he made this at at
the beginning of the 1900s this
assessment and he well predicted this he
was like he said effectively humanity is
going to
misunderstand itself because it's going
to have these false
Idols of of
Science and and it it's going to take
the humanity out of Science and when you
take the humanity out of
science that's when you lose all
connection to what's behind Humanity
which is a spiritual
experience um and I think about that
constantly when I think about well you
know we figured out currency with
Bitcoin
but science is much harder because it
really is how we think about and
Define what is right and wrong for the
direction of humans and and Human
Experience and human biology and the
direction of human evolution it's a big
deal to get this right and it's also
equally a big deal to get it wrong well
it's so powerful you see I mean I think
one of the things let's take 23 and me
do you know some of these stories where
somebody sends off their 23 and me and
they find out that they've been lied to
their entire life about who they are yes
okay so my claim is is that this is
pretty weird that a company that takes
your spit in a tube and sends you back
some pieces of paper completely changes
your life because you find out all sorts
of things that your parents to told you
just have nothing to do with reality um
that is how dangerous and powerful and
beautiful science is tell people that
science is is good for you like granola
you should you should uh you should eat
your science and and uh well 23 and me
also is trying to make predictions about
what kind of of diseases you'll contract
in life and and that is life Chang do
you want to know whether you have a
bracket Gene that predisposes you
towards cancer right and and quite
frankly that narrative you a Brack the
gene that predisposes un cancer could
mean a whole number of things that we
don't even have science for yet that's
right because we we don't we don't need
to understand it we don't sorry we need
to understand we don't have the ability
we don't have the ability to understand
it if I think back to the weird things
that are under the same tent as science
at the moment so if I just take let's
just stay in biology if I take Marshall
nirenberg's
1963 description of the genetic code
where 64 words spell out 20 amino acids
and a couple of directions unbelievable
that we did that how cool are we how
inspiring and at the same time I'm
supposed to take a a tweet yelling at
people for uh asking about Ivor
mechon as horse
paste come on you're not a horse I
mean these things are not of they're not
of a piece they're not the same they're
not what we're doing is we're extending
science um the name science to all sorts
of things that are fundamentally
unscientific and
this has now become institutional and
all the scientists are precarious and I
I want to stress this you cannot afford
to have scientists not participate in
the wealth of the nation that they made
wealthy it is an
Abomination that we ask questions about
why should a scientist have a second
home it's like shut up seriously it's
time to be quiet you've got a world in
which you've taken scientists out of the
ability to um patent
and protect their discoveries because
you can't uh protect nature discoveries
about nature you can protect
Technologies but not not nature itself
and you've taken their compact that was
called the end endless Frontier which
came out of World War II penned by Van
of our Bush and you've made them
precarious and now you're angry that
they're not standing up to the fouches
to the colins of the world they're not
telling you the truth because they're
acting as what they're acting the
experts are acting as expert witness and
an expert witness is somebody that you
pay to make the best technical argument
for whatever it is that you're paying
them
for I think what I hear you
say is that
we've we've
made almost like a scientific peasant
class that doesn't have the wherewithall
to stand up to lies they want to protect
the population they can't I when I
visited a bunch of universi cities on
the east coast in the last couple of
years people would pull me into their
offices so they wouldn't be seen with me
they'd close the door and then they
would tell me how much they hate their
lives in stem departments as professors
at American universities I've seen this
look I've been a funer of science uh for
a number of years and finding scientists
who have the truth who are protected to
say the truth protected enough
their institutions won't protect them
they don't have money to afford their
own legal bills to protect
themselves and they risk their entire
career and some of them are clinicians
and that means that they risk being able
to not be able to serve the populations
that they have worked so hard to serve
and to be in service to and in some
cases to heal um and so I hear it I see
it from the donor angle um you know you
and I were talking a little bit earlier
about an experience I had when I was
setting up a regant program through the
buck Institute which is this institute
in Nado California dedicated to research
in longevity medicine and I wanted to
set up a reproductive longevity Center
and it was very clear early on that
doing so at a university was a terrible
idea that I was not going to get good
science that the scientists were going
to um get capped at how much they could
take that the overhead from the
University and the burdens that the
university were going to put on the
researchers was too high and so I
decided to do a regant program through a
nonprofit which is what Buck is and even
so it's it's it's gridlock in this
country Lawyers Guns and Money is what
we have to get our remaining scientists
ASAP Lawyers Guns Guns and Money Money
yeah you need to be able to defend your
lab your ability to share your ideas MH
if if you're in the elite why are we
policing you with Gatekeepers yeah and
is it guns because if the F like what
would the guns be for well what is or
are there like metaphorical guns it's a
reference actually to vber um that a
government is a monopoly on violence we
have got to get the government on the
side of science rather than telling
scientists here's what you'll need to
find if you you know it's a lovely
little career you have there be shame if
anything H had to happen to it by the
way sign this petition yeah or make sure
that you include these attestations in
your Grant application and if a
scientist can't say and I don't know
whether you speak French uh but if if a
scientist can't say you to somebody
I do know that one to somebody who's
asking for yeah um a Dei affirmation a
claim about their work um um with
respect to what it will actually produce
uh in terms of translation I mean you're
you're pushing people to
lie
constantly it's unbefitting of our
government it's unbefitting of our
institutions and the idea that the
institutions can then say well anybody
who doesn't agree with this is a
crackpot or a crank I had to coin the
word knark which is crank spelled
backwards and a canar is an official
crank so in other words if if the head
of Ni Aid uh or the head of the
NIH um have a an email exchange in which
they decide that they need quick and
devastating takedowns of their
colleagues perspectives who have to be
considered Fringe despite being highly
trained credentialed and employed at the
top Institute I mean these are
karks our number one problem is not
cranks and crackpots it's not charlatans
it's not any of these claims the the
problem is is that we have academicians
who've acquiesced we left them too long
we need to get the government we left
them too long we made them too desperate
we made them precarious and the concept
of the precariat is that you've got a
bunch of people who are more or less
paycheck to paycheck uh I know academics
who think they're lucky stars that
they're raising two kids in adjacent
States because they were able to get
jobs you know in large states that share
a border but that's not too far that's
ridiculous this is a rich country these
are the people who created your security
and your prosperity and what you've done
is you've said you know bring me another
peeled grape and at some point the
scientists should say uh this ends you
will pay us you will allow us to live
and to prosper this is a this is a rich
and prosperous country and by the way
the dissident scientists are the most
important because they feel a strong
pull
to the to taking care of the population
that can't necessarily understand every
study yeah and and they're some of the
best people we have and it and if we're
making their lives hell which you know
we have been our this nation has made a
dissident scientist a
complete um yeah an an Untouchable I
it's just it's been so alarming for me
to see the extent of it
and um and and I'm somebody that you you
know I come from the field of
intellectual property law I looked at
the patent Corpus as as this
individually animated Oracle yeah and I
would look at all of these Trends and I
developed an AI to help me see where the
future of innovation was going and you
could see where there were holes and and
you see and Theos was actually a really
interesting example of a portfolio that
didn't follow the new the normal human
trend of of evolution of innovation okay
so you could see parts of their
portfolio that trended so there's
clusters and they cluster around all of
these scientists that have been working
together in these similar Fields finding
similar pieces of of breakthrough and
information something worthy of a patent
something truly novel and they cluster
together and then there was Theos which
had this big hole between the clust
cluster of Science and the cluster of of
their um finger prick um
Diagnostics and and there was this big
hole where there was really nobody
clustering around this part of the Theos
portfolio and that's when you know
there's
frauds right and so you know when I
looked at what was happening with the
MRNA vaccine and there were clusters of
of scientists all around it mRNA and
then around crisper as well and Gene
editing and and and there were clusters
but nothing looked like it was ready for
human
deployment um and so you know what I see
happens to science when you silence the
dissidence and financially reward the
frauds is you
break um the organic nature of human
evolution yes you break it down yes and
when you break it and these holes exist
that's where the greatest threats to
humanity emerge because that's when you
begin to sell lies so let me see if I
understand this because it's a beautiful
if I understand you correctly what
you're saying is is that science is a
system of selective pressures and if you
tell me who advances and who does not
based on whether or not somebody is
principled and their dissent or whether
they muffle themselves what you're going
to do through that system of selective
pressures is you're going to produce
relatively docile people willing to go
along with things that they shouldn't
who are not highly
Innovative and and the way science works
is it works in
clusters and it doesn't have to be
perfect consensus or overlay but they
have to be close enough together and
they all have to move together because
when they don't move together that means
something is
wrong that means that um it I mean I
mean you understand physics like it it's
there there's there's this physics of
innovation um and the physics of
innovation
requires um a multitude of people to
find a
independently find similar things that
work off of The Works of previous
generations of scientists okay that's
always how Innovation and evolution have
have worked together um so when you see
like Anthony fouchy creating a
consensus yes and then pointing out
dissidents and saying go away dissidents
but those dissidents are part of the
clusters of the natural evolution of
science you then break apart the
fabric of science this is like Seno ISM
in the Soviet Union where we we had a
situation in which the government
decided that lysenko knew what was going
on and everybody else didn't and the
only way that that got undone if I
recall the story correctly yeah is that
Stalin had to keep around his
theoretical physicist because his power
derived from nuclear weapons and so at
the time and the nuclear weapons working
and the nuclear weapons working so
somebody asked why didn't Stalin get rid
of his dissident uh physicists and the
answer was well Stalin was always crazy
but he was never stupid MH um which is a
great line uh the issue is that it then
fell to the physicist
to go save biology from the Soviet
biologists who had been trained in
lysenkoism so in in part we have to
purge ourselves of our American
lysenkoism and this is coming in large
part from public health from large
pharmaceutical corporations that have
the ability to uh pay for things when
other people can't yeah and that roughly
speaking we're in a terrible spot where
we're being incentivized in science to
destroy our own credibility and I think
it's it's absolutely well to destroy the
credibility also of your
peers sure to to to well any dissenting
peers have their but then the aggregate
effect is people trust the remaining
peers less than they ever have
interesting right and so in a certain
sense what's going on is is that the
universities and and the professors
still have the ability within the field
to create create Paras but science is
becoming increasingly less trusted as a
result yeah and so in part the emergency
that we have is why is there no
institution anywhere for all of the
people who are highly credentialed Elite
level humans to go and Descent Why is it
that we effectively have a a
hegemony um we have a lot of different
universities but there all basically the
same they're I mean they're all very
similar in how they're structured and
how they manage IP portfolios and how
they think about fundraising I want to
say one thing on IP yeah go ahead we've
gotten very focused on technology where
we when we say science we often now
really just mean biology and we really
just mean the part of biology that's
close to technology that's close to
deployment in terms translation yeah if
we
don't drop the f focus on translation to
product um we're not going to understand
that the reason that there's been so
much to do on that front is is that I
represent a community of people who are
completely invisible I just watched
Donald Trump say that we have smart
people like Elon we have to make sure
that the smart people are happy and my
feeling is uh okay I want to talk about
the lab scientists I want to talk about
the bench scientists I want to talk
about the coders I want to talk about
the people who are actually at a
Blackboard solving partial differential
equations these these people have become
invisible because the power players only
think in terms of money technology and
Q3 and we've got to fundamentally
remember that all of this stems from a
different class of people and no we
don't just have to make Elon happy we
have to make people who are employed by
Elon happy we have to make sure that the
people who come up with the innovations
that Elon will use in his company happy
and happy generally speaking I I I want
to say this in the most offensive way
possible I think you should be able to
put three kids through a home in a
second home in private school all the
way through college with a retirement as
a scientist and not feel poor and if you
think that that's an outrageous and
disgusting ask I don't want anything
further to do with you these are the
some of the most important people and
we've gotten used to the idea that there
are there somehow um valet for us and we
should get me three phds no that's not
how it works what we really need is we
need an highly muscular science with
fineman's with with oppenheimer's with
tellers with all sorts of crazy
characters who are free enough to
express themselves well let's talk about
um feineman and Oppenheimer and and that
generation of scientists because they
were venerated they weren't they weren't
weren't Rich by any measure but they had
nice homes um families they were
certainly you know not hurting
economically or financially or or
spiritually or in in dignity they were
seen and and so I
wonder how we get back there without
increasing the current incentive model
which actually is hurting science right
um you know we could
it it make it easier to get academic
positions or reward those academic
positions we could rethink um an
alternative model of translation of
these
discoveries we could create a blockchain
that you know financially incentivizes
Publications um I'm wondering if you've
if you've talked to anybody who has come
up with a a a new Financial incentive
model here's an Olden Financial
incentive model we need to get the
military back into science we need a
military we can be proud of and I don't
like the idea that as Americans we're
embarrassed about military uh funding I
myself went to graduate school with an
onr Fellowship Office of Naval Research
um the military is not something that
science should be in bed with to the
extent that it's simply uh rubber
stamping everything that the military
wants nor should we be shying away from
it I believe that our universities we we
taught them to see themselves as
International and Beyond nationhood and
I don't think that that's right I think
that our universities are our
universities um I think that the
Mansfield amendment that happened in the
late 60s early 70s basically cut off the
supply of funding from the military to
do blue sky research and that was the
golden age that we're talking about the
fineman's and and the uh others of that
era benefited hugely from the fact that
scientists put the you know put an end
to World War II right and and these were
the physicists that we talking about I
you know I will say computer
scientists are still actually getting
quite a few military contracts oh we can
still get military contracts we're not
allowed to get contracts unless there's
an Express military purpose and what the
military used to do was to fund Blue Sky
research saying we understand you're
SEAL Team Six of the human mind you guys
uh are the Green Beret your Delta Force
we get it we want you happy so that when
we occasionally have to call on
you you understand that we have a
relationship and not acknowledging that
relationship is frankly dangerous it's
like a retainer it's almost like a
retainer so it's it's kind of a
scientific exploratory retainer yes but
it's also Al the case that um while
you're paying away that
retainer you're getting this huge
benefit which is that's the seed corn
that ends up as translation and so while
you're paying the retainer for people to
investigate nature uh as we understand
it which is absolutely what I want to do
I would much rather spend my time um you
know researching uh fundamental physics
than hanging out at at San Trope I've
done sandrope it's fun it's it's gets
boring real fast you know more or less
what we need to do is we need to
recognize that there was a huge benefit
from keeping science also as a check on
the military yeah in some ways AC
academic uh positions worked as that
retainer because you would teach you
would give back to the academic
institution and then you would also have
your research lab a huge increase in the
funding and so what happened was is that
you took a relatively Boutique field
that was
capable uh of of you know weaponizing uh
the neutron effectively and then you
spread that it wasn't just physics
during the 50s and 60s biology grew up
um it was fabulously Dynamic one of the
things people don't realize look at the
RNA Thai club uh that was going after
the um the genetic code the names in
that are George gof Edward Teller
Richard Fineman it's physicist working
with biologists yeah creating the field
of biophysics well and molecular biology
was largely created by by physicist so
in part getting back to what we know how
to do that works has to do with funding
Blue Sky research which is all about not
controlling your scientists right and
and without the end goal of of
translation into a product or a therapy
um or or something immediately
commercialized that changed with the B
Dole amendment in
1980 because that said that instead of
universities being the only thing that
can pursue that which cannot be funded
by the market it said and if you do do
research that can be um rewarded by the
market you can put in to for the
University to reap that reward so
suddenly the universities abandoned
their blue sky and started doing things
that were translation oriented the other
thing I wanted to point out with the
dissidence imagine that I told you that
some crazy guy went into the his
backyard and started taking puss out of
his farm animals and injecting his
employees and his family with pus to
guard against deadly uh diseases you'd
think well that guy sounds like a
wackadoodle but I've just described
Benjamin JY in the beginning of vaccines
where he went to his cows for cow puss
to protect his family against small poox
wow um because he noticed that his
milkmaids weren't getting small poox so
in part we have this crazy
system where the the modern academicians
are screaming at the people who founded
their their subjects the the idea of not
experimenting during a pandemic and
asking questions the way Benjamin JY did
with with
smallpox is the death of science I I
think it still happens in certain
fields and um but again the motivation
always gets to how do we cross the chasm
into a clinical trial or how do we cross
the chasm into um you know getting the
kind of
Hospital uh partnership that's going to
allow us to get this into patients as
quickly as possible well let me try
flipping something on you because you're
in this political game and one of the
things that we're dealing with and
science is mind well I don't know how to
say exact brainwashing at scale yep
where you cause people to see something
they know it's not true but they know
that somehow to say well that's not true
and I wonder what is true is to cross a
Chasm into opening all sorts of
questions that they're not prepared yeah
to deal with now right now you and I are
living with through the
crumbling of a crazy narrative that got
pushed
out Joe Biden is absolutely fine he's
completely in command of the situation
yeah and it makes no sense he's now
abandoning his reelection campaign to
focus on the presidency which he does
not appear to be able to carry out yeah
I want to turn this and ask you how are
we living through something this
mind-blowingly stupid this is basically
a
confession that everybody who was told
that you're crazy you're you're a
Trumper you don't understand reality the
president is absolutely fine yeah all of
us who've been told we we were nuts have
suddenly been told you're not nuts yeah
but the machine is going to continue to
go on and lie to us and
furthermore there was no primary the
majority of Americans see it they feel
it and when I say the majority I think
it's
70% very very clearly see this and feel
it and they're not okay with it and then
you have 20% that will vote blue no
matter who because they are so deeply
programmed to and you know we don't have
to get into the power of modernday
programming and mind control but that
exists but it exists in me so for
example yeah I can't get over the idea
that I'm still a crazy person because
for 4 years I've been saying that Biden
is not fit cognitively to be in the oval
off office but that's the risk of this
technique is that you
disenfranchise the
individual's capacity to trust
themselves all of us yeah and so so what
I'm what I'm looking that's that's
what's at play right now but how is it
that I'm still Under This Spell I mean
I've clearly broken from this thing I've
been talking about this for 4 years
years there is no Vindication there is
no Absolution there's no apology the
system is simply going to try to go and
anoint kamla Harris as if there was a
democratic process in place which I I
want to get into this this is mind
control at scale it's mind control well
it's making mistakes showing your hand
at making the mistake and then offering
no redemp to the people zero that have
have known the truth all along and and
that's you know we had talked about this
concept of redemption that if we were
going to really restore the heart of
this country and if we were really going
to set up the conditions for a prolific
indefinite human future yeah Redemption
is a key piece of that Redemption but
also exoneration because a lot of people
I don't require redemption in this case
mhm I require I think you do though but
but go on well because I don't think I
did anything wrong in other words but
you were made every that's what I'm
trying to say a person every effort was
to make you feel wrong a person wrongly
accused needs to be exonerated
yes but who is going to offer you that
exoneration so this is my question which
is what do I make of Institutions think
about the level of
collaboration needed for no
psychiatrists no uh geriatric Medicine
Specialists Parkinson Specialists no
neurologists nobody in the Inner Circle
I mean more or less it's like murder on
the Orient Express where all of the
experts were
colluding to pretend that the bad people
were the people speaking the truth who
worried about not having a functioning
president while we're in a half proxy
war
with with Russia with a n thermonuclear
cap I mean I can't yeah how is this guy
staying in office till November I I I I
hear you and um you know this idea okay
let's let's go to ex exoneration I
exonerate you and part of what I'm doing
with this with this podcast is
highlighting that we should have never
gotten in the situation to begin with
and and this is why people are so by I
exonerate you as as being a spoiler
thank you very much and for whatever
other number of things other imagined
crimes yeah other imagined crimes I've
been held accountable for but um so
the the thing is is this should not this
should not be the environment that we're
in
with qualified voices and I keep going
back to qualified voices and they've
become known as dissident voices um and
and from there they've become absolutely
cancelled and you know who has the power
to exonerate all of us I think it it's
not Donald Trump although he really
that's he's winning over a lot of hearts
and Minds by offering that because he's
holding himself up as the Martyr that
has always self-
exonerated um but I don't actually think
he's the answer for a number of reasons
one in that his version of exoneration
includes a bit of Revenge
we're not this is not the population
that I think we're talking about is is
just really wanting fairness and people
to do their jobs well it's really
simple and and it it's wanting
progress um and and it's it's this real
desire to move on from this moment that
we're in right now and and I think that
the gift the things that the lessons
that we can learn from Donald Trump are
how to self- exonerate
um but we we have to do it in
Partnership and you know one of the
other thingses themes we're talking
about that I want to discuss now is this
idea that the people in this group may
agree 80% of the time or even less and
there might be 20% of the things that we
absolutely disagree on um you know one
of the things is I I've never actually
thought about military as being the
ultimate partnership for science but I
can see how historically that was the
case you'd hear me out yeah I would hear
you out on that and and and and I think
that there's this
neuroplasticity that if if we save 20%
of our intellectual capacity for um we
would be definitely better off and if we
didn't seek revenge for the parts of us
that have been so shamed and cancelled
and excluded from the conversation and
replace that with thinking through you
know a blockchain for science you know
putting it to real productive use I see
us doing that as a community but I also
see us deeply hurt say more about that
so I think the PE the thing is is that
there's this
hopelessness um that this
culture has left many of us with this
hopelessness that the
institutions that we all once trusted
that we gave ourselves to Sure in big
ways have um sold us out yeah it's one
of the worst feelings I don't think we
you and I have had this discussion I'm
dying to hear more about
it it it really it the worst part of
being a dissident is is is is
feeling very let alone and ostracized
and and your reality stripped from you
in every single way it's it's a form of
psychosis right it's it's intentional to
like actually inflict this psychosis on
somebody that um is a dissident and that
you're trying to silence is is you you
make them out to be somebody who is
untrustworthy and if you are that
individual you begin to question your
own sanity and I think that we got to
dig ourselves out of this I didn't know
that you actually experienced this and I
don't know that I had the presence of
mind to talk about it in these terms are
you familiar with a psychologist in
Oregon by the name of Jennifer frud no
she has a theory called institutional
betrayal that deserves to be much better
known and what it says is that the
trauma that we experience when an
institution that was uh specifically
entrusted with our care when we are
betrayed by such an institution like a
hospital or or a
university or a daycare or whatever that
the trauma is of a
particularly special nature that it
leads to a long-term inability to trust
because that thing is in some sense in
local parenes it's some form of Parental
Authority and it's like your parent
telling you you're a Charlotte wow right
or you're untrustworthy you're a bad
child yeah and you're not worthy of
life-saving care or whatever these
things are and so what you're not worthy
of the dignity everybody else is worthy
that's right yeah and so I have this
question for example um with Harvard now
Harvard through one particular Professor
um told me that I had to not live in the
state of Massachusetts free year to
continue in my program there is no
law in the US code that entitles a
university to tell somebody what State
they can and cannot live in it was an
absolute betrayal of the
relationship yet Harvard has gone on for
hundreds of years and so I have this
question well why would Harvard get into
a problem with you and I can say well
did you see the claing gay thing it
doesn't matter there's something about
the
institutions that no matter how many
scandals how many failures how many
exposures they still retain this sort of
place in our lives and it can speak to
us and if your institution turns its
back on you and says you are
particularly horrible mhm we experience
a kind of Shame of trauma of othering
which we can't effectively you're being
disowned by a parent wow and well no I'm
sort of getting it from you that's I no
that's exactly what it feels like and it
feels like it it is it is a pattern I
mean and then it feels like some kind of
personality flaw um that somehow
having a different opinion from
everybody else um makes you
intrinsically
unlikable I know this I this goes back
to just you're right being a child and
being
disowned um it it it affects people at a
psychological and spiritual level that
is really deep and significant really
deep and significant and and I think
quite honestly that a lot of us uh are
experiencing some version of this with
the Democratic party we didn't grow up
in a world in which you couldn't descent
or even a relationship with our country
well this is this is the thing I went
with my son to uh C gerswin Rap City in
blue turns 100 this year we went to the
Hollywood Bowl and I can't think of
anything more American than like a
summer evening with Gershwin at the
Hollywood Bowl and they played the
national anthem and there were all these
people who were sitting and you know
some of them I understand you're in a
wheelchair or whatever but this was many
more people than that was true for and I
think what we need to teach people is
that you've got to have reverence for
your country even though you know it's
done many things that you don't approve
of but ultimately you rever the offices
you rever the flag you rever culture of
your country because and this is
something I've never been able to
explain maybe the first time I'm talking
about it publicly one of the greatest
things about this country is that there
is an a shared imagined United States of
America that even though we find out the
truth it isn't the country we thought it
was what's amazing about this place is
that we all have a pretty common concept
of lots of people of different looks and
Hues and beliefs coming together for the
purpose of Liberty strength standing up
for people who don't have anywhere else
to turn and think of that as like a
movie set or a pkin village MH it's not
real because it doesn't have the depth
that we would associate with it but the
crazy thing is what if we realized that
it was a movie set and we said you know
what let's build out the city behind
this very two-dimensional front that it
suggests and I think that that's part of
what the American Plan has been one of
the reasons I was so a gast at the New
York Times and its 1619 project which is
we're in the process of building that
country where all men are created equal
whether or not they are men or women or
whether they're black or white or or or
int or doesn't matter to interfere with
that process to go back and just you
know air these grievances that can never
be addressed or really worked with or
anything like that is madness because
we've gotten pretty far along the path
of building out that country that we had
imagined and to give up on it right now
seems insane so I in part think that it
is the imagined United States of America
that causes you to come to your feet
when the national anthem is played and
if you don't have the imagination for
that better place then that explains why
you're sitting the existential threat of
of of corrupted science okay we saw that
play out during the pandemic we're still
seeing it play out right um if if we
really protected the First Amendment
throughout the pandemic from beginning
to end it would not be the situation
that we're in
today um we probably wouldn't have had
lockdowns the children would have been
able to go to school with you know
certain criteria in Play We may have
even evolved a new model for um
transmission
management and and then you know other
existential threats related to um
military like if if you think about the
power of AI when combined with military
and then um the fact that individuals
don't have the right to bear equivalent
arms okay that's existential the second
amendment anticipates that so if you
track all of these big existential
threats that the this this technological
innovation boom are going to present if
you lead first with the core values of
of the Constitution we overcome each of
these existential threats time and time
and time again you could create a list
of a thousand of these incidences so
it's an interesting puzzle which is I
think the way I'm hearing you and I
correct me if I'm wrong is is that the
the Bill of Rights is in some
sense thematic it speaks to you should
have the freedom to share your ideas you
should have the freedom to defend
yourself in your country you should have
the freedom against unwarranted search
and seizure uh you shouldn't have to
bear witness against yourself all of
these sorts of things yeah the problem
becomes how do you instantiate them as
opposed to what were they spiritually
trying to say so for example if I have a
server that has my email and it's inside
of my physical house um you might say
that it's protected against unwarranted
search and seizure on the other hand if
it's outside uh my house but I have a
password do I extend the perimeter of my
house to include that server because
it's it's really part of password serve
as that's what that's what I'm trying to
say so you know in part what we have is
we have a group of technical people
trying to divorce us from our rights as
that they are spiritually
understood and you know this goes back
to and even as they're doctrinally
understood okay but I think that there
is a question of how do I put this
exactly we lost two ideas that I think
you can't afford to lose both of them
one of is is that nature is almost
impossible to take over from because
things are very very complicated in
nature and somehow nature finds
equilibrium you can do it but it's no
it's no walk in the park and it often
fails the other
idea is some version of religion and
when you talk about the naturalistic
fallacy very often that has become the
idea that just because something is
natural it doesn't make it better and
the idea of getting rid of religion says
well who is to say and I think about the
um I talk about the Declaration of
Independence quite a bit that the most
important words are endowed by their
creator and self-evident yes because if
you did not stop the infinite regress
into quibbling and caving and Petty
fogging and all this kind of
nonsense you would never get a country
you have to basically assert we believe
these are self-evident
and we believe that these come from
something greater than ourselves so
we're not going to mess with it and if
you don't agree there are plenty of
countries all over the country go find
yourself one because you don't belong
here yep I I you just said it better
than I could have and I'm going to
contextualize that into where we are in
in transhumanism and this idea of
self-evident is being tested everywhere
I mean that is where most science has
gone actually is is redefining what is
and isn't
self-evident um even you know and I hate
getting into cultural Wars but this idea
that um a a trans man is a woman right
and again I don't want to bring this up
because it's just one of these things
that the left is so fixated on right now
but is it self-evident that a trans man
is a woman and like is with a capital I
right it's um it that's the piece that I
believe is up for interpretation right
now um and and I'm not
saying
that it is that we're redefining what a
woman is I'm saying that there's a group
that is trying to redefine what a woman
is but but I'm saying that science has
kind of lost its motivation
around
self-evident and we have been as we test
that piece of the foundation of this
nation we begin to test all pieces of
the foundation of this nation and and it
is um and and and and it's what is
causing the sense of deep deep
instability into the fabric of who we
are as a country well but but look let's
take the two points I tried to make just
before you uh played the trans card
right so the point I was trying to make
was some version of that's unnatural
versus uh that's immoral or wrong those
were the two things that we had before
so if you take a normally functioning
XY uh individual and you say well that
individual is now for all intents and
purposes XX yes that is an unnatural
Thing by most standards and we should be
able to say that that is true if we want
to say that moralistically speaking uh
we believe that our creator believed
that there was something sacred about
the the propagating family that's
another place now the problem is is that
neither of those work entirely
comfortably in a modern context for
example what if if somebody's born with
ovotestes what if somebody is born in in
an interex uh category that defies easy
descript Des cription yeah do we want to
be jerks about that that's part of the
problem with the rights answer to this
which is a man is a man as a woman is a
woman don't tell me otherwise because
yeah and that's the thing liberals have
a hard time with well no right but the
Liberals then say so we should um
potentially put uh an unprecedented
number of uh our our children that we've
raised uh into a situation in which
they're considering permanent
reproductive mutilation which is insane
I know okay so my claim is is that what
we need is a bunch of
adults to model the idea is that we want
to keep things more or less boys and
girls and compassion for the tiny number
of people who fall into the edge
category and we don't want to grow that
edge category by normalizing it in cases
where it had no basis to begin with
somehow the complexity of that thought
is too much and I can count on 10,000
people yelling at me on social media
like you're the worst person ever
because you didn't either say a man is a
man a woman is a woman or uh a trans man
is a woman yeah right and my my claim is
you should all go to bed without supper
and we can meet tomorrow morning and try
to grow out of this yeah you know it's
really refreshing to be able to talk
about this within that context because
you know we both come
from this world of of compassion and and
of Science and I think that and and of
intellectual dis
discourse um and
Civility and I think that there's still
a world for us to do this work well to
to be these kinds of people there's got
to be beer at the
end okay right in celebration right I
mean you know it's been it's been this
cold war um of
of of like almost going underground if
you are somebody who is not picking a
side between wokeism and Maga and
everybody is stuck between this um we we
need to reclaim our institutions
Nicole and if we can reclaim our in do
we reclaim them or do we create new ones
well we should do both but like I'm
going to try something just to see where
it goes okay I would like to go on CNN
NPR or M
snbc and I'd like to talk about what
just happened with Joe Biden I'm a
lifelong Democrat I've never voted
Republican and if I can't go on any of
those shows because I can show you that
I can generate ratings for you that'll
be no problem I want to know why you
will no longer talk to me we used to
talk all the time between oh I don't
know 1980s and I would say around 2012
2013 something discreetly different
happened I can no longer be interviewed
by the uh newsour I can't be a source
for NPR I was shocked when the New York
Times um had me in an obituary of a
friend of mine and I thought what a
strange thing and then I realized that
they always write their obituaries years
before the person dies and so it had
been in the
files uh even though the New York Times
will no longer talk to me on most
stories I want to understand from your
perspective why it's impossible to have
people who represent the independent
podcasting World on mainstream corporate
media because it seems like a total
disconnect it's very clear that you're
avoiding almost all of us almost all of
the time why is that why are we in two
separate ecosystems it doesn't really
make any sense I want to know for
example why let's say Robert F Kennedy
or Nicole or tulsey or any one of these
people who've been traditionally
associated with the Democratic party are
somehow no longer welcome who in the
Democratic
Leadership is doing this what are their
names is this Debbie waserman
Schultz and her uh Legacy who created
the structure that says that we don't
have primaries and we anoint people that
you know if Obama and Schumer and Pelosi
decide who the next person is that's the
candidate for president of the United
States what are we doing with this crazy
structure that says who can appear uh in
a debate I think if I recall correctly
Tulsi told me that multiple primary
candidates couldn't appear on a podcast
because of the rules can we get all of
these secret Rules by which the
leadership puts its dirty little thumb
on the scales of democracy and can we
have them put in front of us so we have
an idea of what are the ingredients in
this process just imagine that you're
eating piece of food like a a Hostess
snowball um I want to know what's in it
what are the preservatives what are the
colorings will you please just tell me
all of the rules that you've put in
place so that you can't have Joe Rogan
interviewing candidates you can't have
uh Independent Media in this it it feels
like a rigged game and I want to know
and I I just want to begin with I'd like
to go on CNN MSNBC NPR PBS
and I want you to tell me why I can't
thanks well I I I'm sure we can clip
that and send that around well but but
my point being we're in a situation in
which we don't know why this door is
locked I look at the number of people
you you can have a you can be a
convicted felon and be in the Democratic
party you can be uh you know some of the
most
self-interested uh billionaires uh and
be in the Democratic party mhm you can't
be independent and be in the Democratic
party where did that
begin you know speaking as a as a
millennial and I think on behalf of
Millennials you're a millennial I
am I I believe it it
happened uh
probably around the time that Bernie
Sanders kind of sold out his base and
went back to the party cuz you kind of
you saw him coming out of the party
doing his thing doing it very well
attracting all of these young people
behind him that made him that built him
up that wasn't his vision he didn't have
that media skill and talent he didn't
know how to fundraise through setting up
the Gorilla Marketing campaigns that his
his Millennial supporters set up for him
um Bernie Sanders selling out his base
and going back and sidekicking for
Biden is one of the things that I think
has betrayed my generation in ways that
we will never even seek to go back to
the institutions as a result of say more
about that it's why the Democratic party
has devolved into a single issue um
hating Donald Trump platform okay
because that's all they have left to
offer Millennials Progressive
Millennials and and Jen zers is you know
if you don't want Donald Trump we're
your only other option I heard there was
another ticket running actually there
there is another ticket running we have
um a very very strong independent
candidacy and I think this is where the
nation needs to be right now in order to
heal um and and this is not not
something that is hyperbole or not it's
not branding it it it is actually
mechanically necessary yeah um if if we
refuse to accept that everything you
just mentioned is okay yeah go
independent officially declare it by by
re-registering as an unaffiliated okay
um we send a
signal um to what is the DNC today that
we want our institution
back and that's what that is it's it's
not this is not permanent this is not
Anarchist um this is a message because
we haven't been heard in any other Forum
so are you open to people just parking
themselves with you temporarily for this
election cycle or yes and again let's go
back to the 8020 rule if we agree on 80%
of our ambitions for the United
States we have space for us to have open
debate about the remaining
20% um and it's we're not offering this
as you know don't vote for Trump if you
want to vote for Trump vote for Trump
but if but if you can't bring yourself
to voting for Trump go
independent give give this ticket a shot
this ticket is a completely different
Paradigm it's a completely different
structure of
thinking um we are the angry
moms we are the dissident
scientists um we are the white men that
feel confused and
betrayed we are the people of color who
don't and the black men and women who
support them and will not stand for any
more of this anti- whiteness racist
nonsense because the black community has
suffered more from racism and better is
better able to identify racism yes yeah
right okay precisely um we are the Asian
immigrants and children of immigrants
who don't understand the
vitriol who have just silently worked
away to earn our way in this country
with the American dream and American
Spirit in mind because of the desire to
learn freely um without without the fear
of of having to to actually join a party
right without the pressure without the
being disowned by your country if you
don't subscribe to um a political
ideology so that's what this is right
now these are American values of freedom
and and and you know it it is and it's
okay it's it's very powerful it's more
than okay come on I mean one of the
things that really I'll tell you
something my most priz possession and
this is
ridiculous is an electric guitar from
Michigan MH and it looks like a Les
Paul um but it's not a Gibson it's
produced by a company called Heritage
the most important thing about Heritage
is is that Heritage is the factory at
225 Parson Street in kalamazo Michigan
where the Gibson magic began yeah and so
in a certain sense Gibson's Legacy split
between the company that moved to
Tennessee and the people who stayed
behind in kalamazo Michigan and to me in
part what you're talking about is the
Democratic party split in two the legacy
of the democratic
party uh that comes from let's say the
kennedies and the Roosevelts is riding
with your ticket and the new
relocated uh Democratic party is this
thing that we associate with Nancy
Pelosi and they're not the same party no
and so in part the when I hold up my
electric guitar am I holding up the
heritage of the Les
Paul Legacy at 225 Parson Street you bet
I am and the point is is that the
headstock doesn't happen to say Gibson
it it it says Heritage and that's
because there was a split and I think in
part what you're talking about is which
part of the split are you the Pelosi
side of the split yeah or are you the
Kennedy Roosevelt part of the split or
Reagan even or Reagan even because I
have to say like Reagan Republicans
don't have a home right now
either sure and well I wasn't a huge
Ronald Reagan fan but there great things
about Donald Trump and they're great
things about Ronald Reagan that we're
not allowed to acknowledge I can say
that as a Democrat we were definitely
too much in the self-hating idiom of the
70s that sense of lays that the US
couldn't do anything right there was
something about a telegenic
individual stepping up and saying
Daddy's home that was extremely exciting
and that's why also the angry mom energy
wait a minute I'm trying to figure out
whether to inject my child with a
vaccine and I'm looking at the somebody
explained this to me this doesn't make
sense and so the idea of righteous moms
now I think I've said to you before
growing up in the hiking in the sieras I
was never cautioned about male Bears it
was always never get between a female
bear and her Cubs yeah and yeah yeah
we've we've we've gutted um that
maternal might because it is so powerful
like it is such a threat to to
institutions um it is probably one of
the most powerful substances we have as
as a human species is that maternal
connection between mother and child it
is it is an endless commitment that is
endlessly um
resourced
by chemistry and spirit it it's so
powerful do you know my favorite version
of the story what the Rosen stasa
protest from the mid1 1940s a bunch of
German women with I think half Jewish
husbands and the fathers of their
children decided that they were going to
stare down Adolf Hitler in the height of
Nazi Germany and they went to Rosen
stasa and they started protesting and
they would not be shut up and they got
their husbands got uh taken back from
the
camps uh and reinstated at home because
ultimately standing up to mothers is
always a losing battle this is what
Mothers Against Drunk Driving uh figured
out which is uh any Mothers took on
Tobacco and
one mothers are the most powerful force
in the universe because all love comes
from maternal love and I think that in
part one of the things that we have to
recognize is that um if moms are not
going to stand up
against anti-scientific
nonsense paraded as science yeah then
we're lost yeah yeah or the perversion
of science or pretending that public
health is science when in fact it is a
hybrid of things that are true and
things that must be said in the eyes of
some yeah that are untrue and the
culture and the cult of the noble lie uh
is very important that science disavow
Public Health uh if public health does
not want to play by the rules of
science well Amen to that I I think that
um you know I think there's space for
civility to come back into politics it's
not going to happen you know within the
Democratic party the cycle we can let
that one go and you know I I I'm sad to
say I don't think Trump is changing who
he is so I don't think that we that you
know this
um I don't want to call it the cult of
trump but I I think that this it's a
cult yeah okay it's a cult you know I
don't I it is this belief that cult is
that that uh Trump is a savior of some
sort and he may be a savior of some sort
I don't know he could be he could be our
undoing there's a lot of energy and
power behind him he is neither as evil
as his uh detractors claim nor as good
as his strien supporters claim he's a
wild card he remains a wild card um I
think that the problem is why are we
dependent on a wild card yeah at a time
when we need something much more
dependable yeah and you know the the
thing that really soured me on Trump was
the moment at which he started inducing
people at one of his rallies during the
earlier cycle uh saying I'll pay your
legal bills if you want to R rough up
the protesters he just oh jeez well
because he flirts with that violence he
flirts with that violence and and he
flirted with it on January 6th and
January 6 is not what the Democrats
portray it as being nor is it what Mega
claims it is and the issue of being
forced into this Paradigm in which we've
constantly got to
overlook some huge set of negatives in
one one candidate or the other because
we're always fighting the the worst of
two evils this doesn't work I do want to
push back on one thing you said about
the Millennials never going back to the
institutions that it is the only thing
that makes sense for us us right now but
go
on people often say why are you so
focused on
CNN because CNN isn't pulling in great
ratings the answer is that it's the
institutions that
watch uh PBS and NPR and CBS like uh and
CNN like a hawk you've got a group of
institutional media voices MH that are
listening to each other and what you
have
in the system is
a a failure to understand that the
importance of what gets said on CNN
isn't a question of whether it draws
huge ratings or whether people believe
it it's a fig Leaf very often for the
story um that's being pushed out and
that even if you don't watch any of that
stuff I watch as it creeps into social
media because so many different Outlets
say more or less the same thing people
will repeat anything that comes from
that if you don't either build new
institutions or reform uh the
institutions and reinsert the dissidents
inside of them uh you've got a terrible
situation so it may be that you've never
seen a good version of the institutions
because during the time that you were
growing up they were already so far gone
but as somebody who's a little bit older
and not quite a millennial um I'm the
oldest of the xers uh I would say you're
going to have to accept institutions one
way or the other
and it's a lot
cheaper to kick out the people who crept
in in the last 10 years than burn
everything to the ground but if we have
to and we have to start a fresh that
that's up that's up to them I do think
that quite honestly if you'll just wait
five more years these people will be
dead or they will be retired they will
not be able to keep self-reinforcing
this is really the last
tah I can buy that and I I I would say
you know even though in the moment it
seems like Millennials have lost all
trust in institutions one thing I have
noticed about my generation is a
willingness to come back to the table as
well well so if you have to walk away
you have to walk away for the time being
well thank you Eric thank that was
awesome
