oh well good afternoon as it is here in
the UK uh to the Mind Body Solutions and
to you the audience and uh to you tev
for kindly inviting me to talk about the
self and indeed about rescuing the self
from the philosophers because the self's
had a bit of a rough time at the hands
of philosophers so I want to do a bit of
affirmative action for the self and the
aim of my talk is to make more visible
and then to explore
key aspects of us of the mysterious
creatures we are given to ourselves to
be and actually the more I think about
the the stranger I seem and I do seem
very strange to myself at times and it's
actually also rather strange to be
talking as I am you have an instance of
one self talking to other s reassuring
or trying I hope to reassure them that
they exist what a strange thing to do
but what I want is to see what remains
of the self after you set aside or deny
yourself the use of terms such as Spirit
Soul or ghost restore what I call the
humiliated self apologies for the pun
the explanation will come shortly
restore the humiliated self to the point
where it can be a person can be the
bearer of biography and most importantly
a moral agent I want to another pun
coming up to exume the
self here's a man of my f witness have
I've called him Mr MC bundle he's a
Scott hence the Muk but he also supports
the so-called bundle Theory the self and
he really is um possibly my most
important Target in this
talk why well this is what he had to say
about the self I won't try a Scottish
accent but this is what he said I may
venture to affirm that selves that is
are nothing but a bundle or collection
of different perceptions which succeed
each other with inconceivable rapidity
and are in Perpetual flux and movement
hence the bundle theory of the self how
does he arrive at this conclusion well
by The Honorable uh process of empirical
observation he says there are some
philosophers who imagine we are every
moment intimately conscious of what we
call our self but for my part when I
enter most intimately into what I call
myself I always stumble on some
particular perception or other of heat
or cold light or shade love or hatred
pain or pleasure I can never catch
myself at any time without a perception
and can never observe but the perception
can observe only the
perception so the self seems to
evaporate uh before his very gaze that
he was writing in the 1730s uh his
treaties on human nature uh but atide or
being an atide has uh remained one
particular strand of philosophy and it's
particularly uh popular at the moment
and I just mentioned three uh leading
figures who've talked about the self in
the um 21st century gayan straon he who
offers us the pearl necklace self Daniel
dennet who offers the narrative Center
of gravity of self and Thomas metzinger
who beats the other two and talks about
the no one
self so let's talk about Galen strawson
this man who doesn't think he has much
in the way of a
self he says we don't have a self we
just have loads of selves many selves
exist not simultaneously but one after
the other like pearls on a
string yes there is a mental self but
only at a given moment of Consciousness
and in humans it exists for a short
period of time just a few seconds so
that's the pearl necklace self then
there's Daniel
Dennett who thinks of the self as an
imaginary construct imaginary construct
like the notion of the center of
gravity and you may recall that a center
of gravity as dennet explains isn't
anything isn't a thing it's not an atom
or a subatomic particle or any other
physical item in the world it has no
Mass it has no color it has no physical
properties at all except for spacial
temporal location it is a purely
abstract object it is he says if you
like a theorist Fiction it's not one of
the real things in the universe in
addition to the atoms likewise the self
isn't anything additional to the stories
we tell about ourselves
and then finally there's Thomas
metzinger no one he said ever was or had
a self so he's clearly the man who is no
one all that ever existed were conscious
self models that could not be recognize
as models they're just models but we
don't recognize their models they're
things effectively we construct the
phenomenal self is not a thing but a
process so he's a bit like Hume he's a
bit like gayen strawson seeing that the
self is just a succession of um mental
contents if you like and that's uh from
being no one the self-model theory of
subjectivity a book of several hundred
Pages which in my opinion probably took
herself to write but that's something we
need to argue about so let's get back to
Mr bundle Mr MC
bundle just remember that passage we had
just
before and realize it's riddled with
self-contradictions he is an eye who is
denying the eye so what does he say in
that pack passage I enter most
intimately into what I call myself and
when I do I always stumble on some
particular perception I can never catch
myself at any time without a perception
and I can never observe but the
perception 1 2 3 4 five times
well actually it's four times I is
explicitly mobilized and once implicitly
mobilized so we have an eye who denies
his a self who denies anything
corresponding much into the eye an
example of what philosophers call
pragmatic
self-contradiction we have to ask
ourself could a bundle of
Sensations gather itself in the way that
Hume gathered himself
into an object of a report on itself in
the way that he reports on
himself indeed could a bundle of
Sensations conclude that it is a bundle
of Sensations and the answer to question
a is no and the answer to question B is
no again because it takes an awful lot
of self to deny that you have a self and
to be able to give and indeed to share
reasons for doing so using by the way
words that have rather complex
meanings so it's obvious there's more
much more to Mr hume's self than what is
revealed to him by introspection than
the bundle of Sensations that he uh
picks out when he thinks about
himself it seems as if
basically it's a slam dunk you know uh
clearly all of those characters straon
dennet Mets singer Hume are all
contradicting themselves by denying they
have sells so why do we bother with Hume
and indeed the post Humane
aides well actually they're quite useful
wrong ideas in philosophy are often very
useful because by contrast they enable
you perhaps to see the right ideas
certainly these characters seem to
create a standpoint from which it's
possible by default to see what the self
actually is most importantly it helps to
make visible the rich mystery of the
self as something that is impossible to
dissolve in the natural material
world and what we if we're going to
rescue the self we need to think a
little bit hard about it we need to look
a little bit harder at it not in the way
that hum did but in different ways the
road to rescuing the self is observing
its deeply connected multiplicity which
goes Way Beyond the multiplicity the con
connected multiplicity of pearls on a
string so what sort of sources of
coherence does the self have well there
is internal coherence Unity at a time
I'll say something about that there's
Unity over time which is another
dimension of internal
coherence there is the coherence of
those standing states of ourselves and
I'll give an example of a few and then
there's the external coherence the
social scaffolding of the
self and then there's the body and the
body is obvious source of both external
and internal coherence of the self but
I've got to be a little careful here
because some people would like to reduce
the self and the continuity of the self
to the body and the continuity of the
body and that would be very
disappointing indeed and then there's of
course our sense of ourselves as
agents so let's talk about the internal
Unity of the self at a given
time the multiplicity and unity of the
conscious
moment think how Sensations and
perceptions from one modality add up to
a field I can look out the window at the
moment I look past the daffodils I look
to the trees I see the sky see a bird
flying across all of those belong to a
Unity I don't just see them in
succession they are
co-present that co-present goes beyond a
single modality of sensation there is
what we might call the cross modal Unity
of Sensations and perceptions where we
feel there belongs to a single moment of
Consciousness not only things we see but
also things we hear I'm looking out the
window seeing the landscape I've
described I can hear my voice speaking I
can feel my hands waving through the air
I can feel my bum on the seat all of
those things are all gathered together
in a single moment of
Consciousness and there is a of what we
might call transitive and intransitive
experiences a transitive experience is
an experience of something that is over
there from my experience of the tree I
can see through the window intransit
experiences are experiences that are not
about something other than themselves
like itches or indeed the pressure that
I feel uh as I'm sitting on a chair so
there's that unified as well and of
course there is the unity of my body in
its bodily self-presence I don't feel
I'm a little Patchwork of patches I feel
as if I'm a single unified body so the
pressure on of the carpet on my feet and
the um feeling of the saliva in my mouth
all belong to a Unity so we have this
multiplicity yes but a unified
multiplicity of the conscious
moment and of course there's more going
on than the sort of things I've talked
about and I could go on at length but
I'll just simply list them
emotions thoughts memories they all have
a common ownership or at least an
implicit point of
attachment so that's Unity at a time and
of course there's Unity over time and
that's something that many philosophers
have focused on the explicit Unity of
the self over time there is working
experiential
memory there's declarative and
procedural memory declarative memory say
memory for facts and procedural memory
for memory of um how to do things the
semantic memory again of uh memory for
facts there's episodic memory when I can
remember something that happened
autobiographical memory when I remember
that something happened to me and the
most exciting form of memory is what
philos the psychologists would call
autonoetic memory this is a memory that
I recall
and I recall that is of something that
happened to me I attach it to
myself let me say a little bit more
about autonoetic memory because it puts
my selfhood in italics in the way
perhaps the other forms of memory don't
when I have such a memory I locate the
memory in a self that is
myself and was myself and in a world
that is and was my world I locate the
remembered event in my life I was there
so if I just think about something quite
bow like having lunch 2 hours ago I can
recall myself sitting there and the
person who's sitting there at that table
having those experiences is the same
person as the person who's now hearing
himself talking to
you and in fact autonoetic memory has
triple intentionality now intentionality
is the property of aboutness of
experiences but when I have an
autonoetic memory I have the original
experience of the events the experiences
I had when I'm sitting down to eat then
there's my memory of that experience
such as I'm having now and then my
locating uh that memory in a past self
or a past world that's an awful lot of
tethering together of myself over time
now John Lock was very impressed by the
role of memory in as it were the nature
the essence the coherence of the
self the trouble is as as he admitted
this Contin continuity of memory seem to
vulnerable basis
oneself one forgets things in fact he
even felt that the self is limited by
forgetfulness if for example I performed
a crime 25 years ago and now I've
completely forgotten it he could say we
could no longer be held responsible for
it rather convenient you might think but
the truth is I can forget what I did and
yet it's still I who did it and Thomas
Reed gives a very interesting counter
example he thinks about a young lad who
steals some apples from an orchard and
gets beaten as they would do in those
days for this act of theft now that
young lad can be remembered by a young
officer who is extremely Brave
um in a u particular battle that he took
place in uh he took part in I beg you
pardon 20 years later so you can see
there's a link between those two phases
of that person's life and then there is
the old man who's reminiscing in his
chair remembering the battle he
participated in when he was a young man
but he can't remember his getting beaten
for stealing the apples from from from
the orchard
but there's nonetheless a kind of
continuity because a is linked with B
and B is linked with C so there's a
transitivity between let's say the
original experience and the later
experience the original experience of
the young boy and the later experience
of the old
man and um philosopher writing largely
towards the end of the 20th century
Grace uh felt this was very much a clue
to our nature as being self
he believed in
overlap and he put it rather technically
He said Each total temporary state of a
self me at this moment contains an
element a remembered experience shared
by the preceding total temporary State
same me and now
before but this one won't be true of the
total temporary state of different
selves so I remember I will remember my
memories but you won't remember my
memories so that differentiates
oh there we go and he felt that
basically it was that continuity through
overlapping threads that secured our um
continuity Unity as a self in other
words he picked up on what Thomas Reed
said and said yes of course the old man
is the same as the young boy because the
old man remembers the brave soldier who
in turn remembers the young boy he once
was so we get a continuity through over
o overlapping
threads I don't find that totally
reassuring because am I as an old man
really a load of old or aging rope it
sounds a bit too bundle for me and
what's more that which overlaps in me
reaches past the point of
overlap there are backwards and forwards
connectedness there is co-presence of
now and then in implicit and explicit
sense and what's more there are
countless dimensions and scales of
familiarity the self at any given time
that to say is fattened by its connected
world so it's more than just overlapping
threads adding up to a rope I'm not an
old you know a load of old or aging
rope and one of the things we need to
appreciate is that there is kind of
implicit temporal depth at any
moment
and it's con ESS which makes sense of
experiences in the light of other
experiences if they I didn't have other
experiences that were Illuminating what
I'm doing now I'd have no idea what I'm
up to or indeed why I'm up to
it so our continuity is not a question
of connecting successive States slights
or contents slices or contents it's not
merely just overlap between them it goes
beyond discreet and explicit memories
Raymond Talis at time T 100 is informed
and his life is facilitated by Raymond
Talis at time T1 to T 100 the sense that
I and my world make to myself at any
given time draws on the past and also on
a future that draws on that past as
well behind every moment of making sense
of myself is what you might call the
sense light of Prior moments and the
individual indeed communal
circumstances which those prior moments
lived suffered and indeed embraced there
is internal transillumination which goes
beyond mere overlap of a threads of
threads of
memory so making sense of I being up on
a kind of stage to you now draws on a
vast ocean of my past that's not past
not entirely past but present though
much of it is
implicit ditto you're being here nailed
to your seats as you listen to this
talk so explicit Unity over time goes
beyond mere memory there is a kind of
ownership of one's past there's also an
ethical issue there's the owning up to
one's past going back to lock basically
uh he seemed to think if you forgot a
crime you committed then somehow it
wasn't part of you but if it could be
demonstrated that you'd actually perform
that crime then I think we ought one
ought to own up to it and that applies
equally to mistakes as a Medics we often
preoccupy by our mistakes and they're
just as real now as they were when they
were made and also on the other side
achievements so there we have it's
getting rather complicated is it there's
an internal connectedness Unity at a
time internal connectedness in the form
of unity over time but we haven't
finished with internal connectedness yet
they what you might call standing States
these are habits
capabilities standing goals standing
objectives the over period over years
where you decide you're going to be a
medic and follow a medical career etc
etc there are dispositions that are
standing States and Trays which others
will recognize as well as
oneself we also have
we take from moment to moment from Epoch
to Epoch a body of factual knowledge
things that I learned when I was 16
they're still part of my body body of
knowledge uh now even though I feel that
the learning curve I'm on at the moment
is pointing downwards rather upwards but
that's another story there are beliefs
that are not merely as it were received
passively they're embraced affirmed
enacted there are long-standing
projects dreams values commitments and
very importantly relationships with
others so these are standing States
versus urrent States and they add to our
Unity over
time there is for example the deliberate
acquisition of skills expressed as
muscle memory performance ability teach
other I'm connected if I become world
famous pianist I'm connected with the
four-year old who first encountered a
piano and then spent many many hours
perfecting the the ability uh to play
music on the
piano there's the exercise of those
acquired skills which enables us to be
the beneficiaries of past
labors personality which we may
cultivate which we may affect which we
certainly act
out so there we are a pile of standing
States also stitching us together over
time so they're the internal sources of
our coherence makes us much more than
pearls on a string or just a trickle of
perceptions what about external support
the so-called social scaffolding of the
self my central thesis is it takes a
village indeed a global village to raise
and sustain herself but this doesn't
mean however we dissolve into a
community of minds and I'll come back to
that in due
course but our social scaffolding lies
in our roles our rights our duties
profess beliefs that we explicitly share
with others profess convictions
commitments relationship to institutions
the hospital I worked in for 20 30 odd
years and indeed work is Central to our
continuing
identity nature described man as the
promising animal he didn't mean that we
were full of promise what it meant was
we made promises and that is where we
commit our future so I'm going to I say
to tev yes I'm very happy to give a talk
in three or four weeks time that is
another way in which through the
external scattering of involving
involvement with others I am stitched
together myself that fortnite or a
year's time or whatever uh is part of my
uh sustained explicit extended
continuity we are creatures who are
answerable for our own future
and indeed behind promises is the
strongest sense of the reality and
continuity of the self promises not
merely for events but also the kind of
promises we make when we say we get
married or we qualify as a doctor or
whatever appointments are very
interesting the more I think about them
the more interesting they
become we basically commit ourselves to
an event which we will bring about in
months shall we say at a particular day
at a particular time we have this map in
our mind of time Quai set out in space
like it is in our
diary we commit ourselves to going to a
location to get involved in something
that has a topic a purpose and we
prepare for it and we journey towards it
all of these things are part of our
interaction with others as a kind of
scaffolding of
ourselves and behind even the making and
honoring of small scale appointments is
what I've called in my book on time post
tense time of the human
subject there's basically tenseless time
that's a succession of moments in the
physical world there's tensed time past
present and future and then this post
tense time in which human time is as it
were
articulated in in clock time calendrical
time the time of ourari is historical
time so that all lies behind the
promising animal and it's a temporal
scaving for
ourselves the role of others in
maintaining
ourselves is very Central of course it
is it's very important to be taken for
granted it's very important to be
recognized it's very important to have a
sense of what others expect of me in
terms of behavior attitudes and duties
and of of course it's very important
that we engage with shared
commitments acknowledgement is
absolutely fundamental to our sense of
oursel we acknowledge those who
acknowledge up us and there's a kind of
loop of reinforcement which begins with
the return of the
gays there's also a mutual
acknowledgement of our temporal depth
Terry my wife and I often reminisce
we'll say gosh do you remember that Cafe
in Greece gosh it was a blazing hot day
and she will say describing more events
that happened and then I'll make it
bigger and bigger and suddenly we have
this popup shop we've created between us
acknowledging a shared moment in past
time what I've described rather clumsily
as the recreational co-curating of s in
memory and this makes our pasts more
real because they are shared and in fact
there's nothing more disturbing for
somebody who has a relationship with
someone who is starting to DeMent that
they lose the shared past it's very it's
it's it's the beginning of a very sad
bereavement but I always think curating
your is an absolute Miracle now you'll
be familiar with this creature it's a
swallow and what swallows do is they'll
migrate one year and then the following
year they'll return to the same country
the same town the same house the same
Eaves where they'll return to the same
nest and you think wow how do they pull
that off well what about as it were
curating the self when we say do you
remember such and such do you remember
that Cafe in Greece and I'm talking
about something 10 years ago and I'm
looking through intervening hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of experiences and
we both land on the same spot that's a
fantastic affirmation an existential
support for one's sense of
self and enjoy during relationships of
course depend on a shared present shared
projects shared concerns and commitments
but also a shared past episodic memories
and presupposed memories shared
Futures and hanging together as a result
courtage of those with whom we hang out
they hold us together just as we hold
them
together so it's important to be taken
for granted to be recognized so that for
example when I go home and open the
front door Terry my wife doesn't call
the police because it's totally I'm
taken for granted of course I come to
the house and also that is built into
the sense of what is expected of me in
terms of behavior attitudes and above
all duties when I was a doctor if I
entered the ward I wasn't thrown off the
ward because people say who are you
basically it was expected that I would
do a wardr and of course uh that
reinforced my sense of a continuing
self and of course Central to enduring
relationships is mattering to another
who matters to oneself gives a sense a
substance that's not elusory even if
sometimes the content is
mistaken sometimes you could be nailed
to your past self by shame and guilt by
mistakes or also just as simple as
thinking oh God I'm late I'm late I'm
late the feeling that you're impatiently
awaited when you have made um a
commitment to an appointment
and then there's the literal scaffolding
of possessions I'm rather aware of this
we moved house not so long ago and I was
very much haunted by what nature said is
that we are possessed by our possessions
well yes or no Freddy we are also
affirmed by our possessions you know
don't touch that don't touch me our
habitat is like many layered clothes of
ourself it is the Inner Parish or the
inner Circuit of a very familiar
world and then there's other things that
reinforce our sense of self of being an
entity that has that thisness of
identity such as having our papers in
order there are a million mirrors in
which we're reflected in which we are
affirmed as that person who is this
person on being documented is very
important there is a Scaffolding in
having papers being in order something
that preoccupied for example Kafka uh in
some of his novels the sense you w
simply recognized nobody knew who you
were you know
Etc so going back to it takes a village
to raise a child it takes a world to
curate aelf and it takes communities of
s to curate a
world um so far surprisingly
particularly for a medic I haven't
mention the
body the body is a rather strange Strat
I can't work out whether it's me or it
whether it's my friend or my enemy there
is a relationship to my body that is
what you might call
ambivalent in enough already on the puns
but it is it does seem to have
qualifications for the job of being the
substrate of the self as some
philosophers believe it is after all the
literal scaffolding of the self it is a
solid localized spatio Temple
reality if someone says where's Raymond
well Raymond's where his bodies
it changes but there is usually
continuity across change and it is most
importantly the first mediator of our
agency and indeed it's the elemental
Setter of the agent agenda of our agency
it's our bodily needs that are the
ground floor of the agenda of our agency
of course we go a little bit beyond that
but that's the ground
floor it's more faithful than anything
else in my life possessions come and go
my body's stays with me it's the one
body that's continuously present all
other people's bodies come and go human
and
non-human and it underwrites a
continuous distinct
Viewpoint actually I always think of it
not so much as a Viewpoint as a view
blob but that's another
story and I've emphasized the extent to
which it takes a village to create cator
self it takes a world to cator self but
we don't entirely dissolve in the sea of
we the body prevents our eye from
dissolving in the sea of we and we has
got one e in that
context the body is what you might call
an antisolvent stops us becoming simply
a part of a Nexus a um location in a
community we have a necessarily distinct
Viewpoint I'm at the moment I am obliged
to have a Viewpoint which reveals to me
the city of Chester that's because
that's where my body is
it underpins a unique personal history
and that insulates our individual
narratives from those of others there is
what you might call the non fungibility
of experiences your toothache couldn't
become my toothache or vice
versa and I am where my body is has the
speaker turned up oh well his body has
my presence to you ultimately depends on
the direct or in this case courtesy of
computers the mediated proximity of our
bodies it is the ultimate underpinning
of the community of
Minds
um some people are so persuaded
impressed by the body they say actually
we are our bodies this is a view on the
self called
animalism but of course animalism cannot
accommodate disembodied experiences the
sort of memories I've been talking about
the thoughts I'm having forward-looking
emotions that are Central to selfhood
you can't look locate those in the body
some people might locate them in the
brain but I'm not too sure um you can
locate them in the body in the way that
for example my spleen is located in my
body there is a dissociation of the self
from the body much of the time where're
wool Gathering and our agenda at any
given moment isn't comprehensible in
bodily
terms what's more the self I've talked
about is tensed it draws on the past and
points to the future but my body is
tenseless my kidney is totally innocent
at time T10 of time T8 and time
T12 and of course the body cannot fully
account for the Comm aspects of the self
that part of the self that for example
can only be understood in terms of
relationships or
institutions duties and so
on there's also the fact that that my
body is incompletely colonized by
experience or by knowledge what my body
gets up to without my knowledge is
endless there's a distance between its V
Vita and my C curriculum there's a
fundamental Divergence between the it
being of my body and the am being of
myself so much of my body is an
impersonal it around the personal
eye and you know people sort of say you
know I could I knew something like the
back of my hand but I bet if you put my
hand the back of my hand in a row of
hands in an identity parade I wouldn't
be able to recognize it and I certainly
wouldn't be able to recognize my brain
or my
spleen so the problem with animalism is
really it doesn't address the challenge
of incarnational humanism our ambodiment
is incomplete I am and I'm not my body
but that said the body helps to
underwrite the unity continuity and the
reality of the self it's Absol necessary
for my being recognized so when I arrive
at my house my wife opens the door she
recognizes who I am and doesn't call for
the police thinking I'm a burglar or
whatever but there's also the problem of
scale I mean what is my body well it's
continuous blob of Flesh it's a one it's
a sort of smogus board of G
it's a Nexus of guided juices oh by the
way it's a trillion cells oh and it's
trillion trillion trillion trillion
atoms and we need a privileged scale to
define the mode of
identification of the it of the body
with the eye of the self and we don't
have that privileg scale so mapping the
one onto the other isn't something that
we can
complete because there are no scales in
nature never mind privileged ones the
natural world is neither full of things
the size of mountains or full of things
the size of atoms depends on the scale
of
observation so we cannot rely on the
body operating at a self scale of
attention in order to unpin underpin I
big you pardon a
self so there we are unity of at a time
Unity over time standing States within
uh are Consciousness the social
scaffolding of the self courtesy with
others this external internal source of
cence the body and then of course we
have agency being a self is not a bundle
of perceptions because being a self is
not just a spectator
sport action is
self-affirmation self-bracing action is
amming especially where the action is
effortful pushing and shoving which puts
the self in
italics action is rooted in long-term
projects depending for example on skills
acquired in the past it's temporary deep
self-affirmation our days are shaped by
the agency of previous days our present
realizes our
past and agency is nested it draws on
many aspects of the self at many levels
think of running for a bus to cat a
train to catch a plane in order to
travel to a destination a destination
that's defined by what you intend to do
on arrival and what you do on arrival
makes sense that draws on many connected
aspects of what one is and there is the
conversion with the agency of others at
one's destination eventually I arrive
and I meet someone in order that we can
um have the discussion we've been
planning to have or whatever
you can't separate selfhood from
agencies I say being a self is not a
spectator sport being Raymond Talis is
in part doing Raymond Talis I am and
am's a funny verb it's not passive and
it's not active it's what the Greeks
would call middle voice but somehow you
feel aming is something rather positive
it puts Raymond Talis in italics and of
course all the effort of agency
reinforces the self the is rather
unpleasantly pleasant as you're puffing
and panting up a hill but I don't want
to go too far I don't want to embrace
the views of the German philosopher fcta
and say that the ego is entirely a ago
that the ey is entirely I do no but
doing is Central to the being of a
self so there we are these are the
sources of coherence this is the self
when it's been rescued uh from those who
would want to reject reduce it to a
bundle of um Sensations or whatever
sorted but I'm sorry to say but take
heartlands in sight not so fast there
are disunities in the everpresent
temporally extended bodily underpinned
Unity we are multiple there are
fundamental changes between the
beginning and the
end we are inconstant and we are
discontinuous what about the changes
between the beginning and the
end what about
inconstancy what about
discontinuity well this is how I looked
in June 1946 and by the way that's not a
selfie and this is how I will look in
who knows when so I'm 78 now so it's not
going to be very long but this is not a
selfie either but you can see there's a
rather dramatic change between the
beginning and the
end what's more beyond that things that
mattered once no no longer
matter having said that the transition
from mattering to not mattering has a
story we relate to ourselves and the
story can be retrieved by the self so
that inconstancy doesn't undermine the
notion of substantive
selfhood what about
discontinuity well we have a daily
discontinuity we fall asleep every night
doesn't that suggest you're sliced into
separate
selves wait a minute moment Wednesday
morning is able to resume where Tuesday
night left off we can regain our future
selves after an
interruption and indeed we can set the
alarm this is the self planning to
Ambush itself into the resumption of
itself so there you go this is self
curating
itself when we wake up in the morning we
redon the body we doed when we went to
sleep the surroundings acquaintances
duties ongoing commitments when we had
fell asleep and either lost
Consciousness or had all those stupid
boring dreams that we waste our life on
and we have a unique capacity to do
this so conclusion the self is more than
a a bundle of perceptions b a series of
time slices c a narrative construct or D
nothing but it's in the thing
nor is it a stuff or a portion of stuff
but it's not nothing it is distinctive
he has
identity and in order to be not nothing
the self doesn't have to be as something
additional to that with which it
engages the work of piecing together the
self of course you will view in view of
what I've said just towards the end of
my talk is a work in progress and I hope
to some extent the talk has highlighted
the work is to be done but I remain
grateful for what I said at the
beginning to the aides to those who
would bump off the self for making Mir
visible the complex Miracle of the self
for helping us untake the taken for
granted which is the essence of
philosophy for seeing the
mystery as I as a humanist of sea of
human
Incarnation we haven't still teased out
the conceptual geography of the
relationship between rival candidates
for the role of protagonist in this talk
I've talked about the self but what
about the ey and the transcendental ego
and the work a day ego the subject and
the person how do they relate to the
self well that you'll be glad to know is
the topic for another talk but here's a
final reflection the more I think about
myself the stranger I
become or feel I should become to
myself you've just been subjected to 50
minutes of being told what you are
something you knew
already you've been given philosophy
which as is so in so often the case with
philosophy just consists of correcting
what philosophers have said or perhaps
more cheerfully assembling reminders for
a purpose and what is the
purpose
celebration so I thank you for your
attention
or at least for the courtesy of
simulating it thank you very much indeed
thank you
