40% 45% of the American people believe
literally in Adam and Eve believe
literally that the world is only 6,000
years old I mean that's a shocking
figure and you can't duck out of it
imagine being able to decipher the
history of every creature ever to have
lived on earth based on its Evolution
why are men's sect drives so powerful
why does this peculiar desert lizard
have such intricate patterns on its back
and what does it tell you about its long
dead relatives today we have the
extraordinary privilege of exploring
these topics and more with one of our
greatest Living Treasures Richard
Dawkins one of the world's most
influential and thought-provoking
scientists genes are predicting the
future because they will not survive
unless they get the prediction right
Richard is a renowned evolutionary
biologist zoologist and author a
prominent figure in the new atheism
along the other so-called Horsemen of
the Apocalypse past guest Sam Harris and
the late great Daniel Dennett he's
well-known criticism of creationism and
intelligent design you can't opt out of
science because it goes against a
traditional faith in our widely ranging
conversation we explored the evolution
of sex drive and the aesthetic
appreciation of genetics as well as the
way genetics intersect in theoretical
and experimental science we talk about
the potential evolutionary outcomes of
artificial intelligence as it augments
Humanity we talk about what it's like to
be a scientist and a scholar with a
career ranging over 50 years and we
encounter along our journey some of the
greatest figures in all of science I
know you're going to love this episode
so let's go Richard I've always wanted
to ask you why is the sex drive in men
so strong I mean surely we could have
gone through the replication of the
species if it were 10% less powerful
maybe even 25% less powerful I mean what
accounts for the behavior in men such
that they will copulate with female
angler fishes in ways that allow them to
be digested or ingested into their
female Target or say a male human being
who buys a social media app when he
already has a quarter trillion dollars
and 11 or 12 children what is make what
is the reason the biological necessity
that the male sex drive is as strong as
it is I think perhaps you're misled when
you say something like replicate the
species it's not about replicating the
species it's about replicating genes and
genes that are in males have a different
way of getting themselves into the Next
Generation than genes that are in
females and because sperms are so
numerous and eggs are rather few in
number eggs are economically valuable
well endowed with food sperms are not
and therefore they can afford to be much
more numerous what this means is that in
general throughout the animal kingdom
males can pass on their genes by meeting
with lots of females whereas with a
female meeting with lots of males
doesn't benefit her because once she's
in a mammal pregnant let's say talk
about mammals there's no benefit in
mating with another male whereas where
in the male's case once he's M with a
female there is some benefit in mating
with another one because you got lots of
sperms to go around and therefore the
male sex drive is when there's any
difference between them the M male sex
drive does tend to be stronger males
tend to be more promiscuous tend to be
more open to meeting with lots of
different females males tend to be less
fussy about who they mate with Etc so
that's I think the answer it's about
gene replication not species replication
and if it were diminished by a few
percent would that affect the relative
fund of replication of genes or is is
that level that we have it at as males
does that seem to be a necessity or
could it be diminished a bit it varies
from species to species I mean not not
not all species are promiscuous in in
the males there are there are many
species in which the Sexes contribute
equally to reproducing and to to to
nurturing the young and that's different
I mean different species differ
according to their ecological
circumstances so you're talking about
diminishing yes it does happen it
happens in in some species monogamous
species it is diminished yes we in in
physics and and especially our friend
sir Roger have have looked at the
possibility of the destruction of
information What's called the the
information Paradox of black holes where
there's actually pretty vehement
disagreement between scientists on
whether or not information is truly
conserved or can it be destroyed and um
and and Hawking radiation plays a a
significant role in that can genetic
information be destroyed Richard is is
there a sense in the same way that are
are you know at some level you cannot
destroy genes any more than you can
destroy information even when you throw
it into a black hole I think it's less
philosophically interesting than in the
case of the the physics you're talking
about the information in DNA is
preserved in living organisms over
millions of years but if you want to
actually look at the DNA itself ancient
DNA uh people who for example uh dig up
um neander people and um look at their
their DNA that decays so there's no
there's no almost certainly no hope of
Jurassic Park of actually getting
dinosaur DNA um it it decays you you
you're talking about 10 10,000 years
maybe 100 thousand years but not
millions of years so yes it it does
Decay some have suggested that you know
DNA is is sort of the U the the the
nucleator the or the originator of life
in some sense and I do want to me talk
to you about that I'm here at UC San
Diego Rich where Jeffrey and Margaret
Burbage uh the late great Burbage uh Duo
used to work and they would bring quite
frequently Fred Hoy who as you know is a
proponent of panspermia which I always
remind my listeners if you're young it
sounds dirty but it's not a dirty word
um the notion of origin of life is is is
obviously a question I always point out
it's not exactly related to to to life
itself right I mean I can study
cosmology the evolution of the universe
without knowing exactly how it came
about in fact we don't know how it came
about exactly um can you say something
about origin of life is that is that is
that possible to Divine or to read the
genetica book of the dead and learn
about the origin of life itself or is it
merely not merely it's a huge topic
obviously but is the genetic book of
that are the encryptions and encoding
and the carving of natural selection
does that not have the ability to
penetrate the firewall of the origin of
life itself there has to have been
originally a self-replicating entity
like DNA that has to have been the start
once you've got a self-replicating
entity then you have the capacity for
darwinian evolution to get going but it
cannot have been DNA uh DNA is uh what's
been called a Hightech
replicator um it needs a sophisticated
infrastructure of cellular Machinery to
to to copy itself and so that wouldn't
have been available so there has to have
been a
forerunner a kind of John the Baptist
molecule um a a forerunner which um was
capable of replicating without
sophisticated copying Machinery it's may
not ever be possible to definitively
prove one or the other the currently
most favored Theory probably is it was
RNA which as you know is related to DNA
but is a bit different the reason why
DNA can't be the origin is that it
requires enzymes catalysts in order to
replicate the uh Catalyst the the
enzymes that it requires are proteins
and proteins require DNA so we got a
catch 22
RNA is a moderately good replicator and
a moderately good enzyme DNA is a superb
replicator and and is not an enzyme at
All Pro protein is a superb enzyme is
not a replicator at all so protein and
and DNA um are are great Partners but
neither of them can do the job that the
other one can do RNA can do
both so RNA in a rudimentary kind of way
can act as a catalyst and it can even
catalyze its own
replication so the RNA So-Cal RNA world
theory is is a good candidate for
something like what must have gone on
the origin of life life I think all I
would be prepared to say is that the
origin of Life must have been the origin
of a self-replicating molecule a
self-replicating
without the need for sophisticated
machinery and therefore without the
catch22 I suppose we know roughly when
it was I mean it it since the Earth
itself is is what 4 and a half billion
years old and the first uh fossils are 3
3.8 or so billion years old so somewhere
between those two dates uh must have
been when when it happened you mentioned
Fred Holland panspermia I I I wouldn't
rule out panspermia but I I would rule
out Fred
H's reason for wanting it I mean Fred H
thought it was too improbable to have
Arisen on Earth and therefore you needed
to have panspermia Francis criek and
Leslie orle also in San Diego played
around with the idea of directed
panspermia um the the idea that actually
it was life on Earth was seeded by um an
intelligent life form elsewhere in the
universe I think they were tongue and
cheek I don't think they really believed
it but it was an
interesting idea to sort of toy with
yeah I had Thomas check um winner of the
Nobel Prize uh for the catalytic
properties of RNA on and he and I
definitely came to the agreement that
RNA is much more interesting and and
useful uh he was almost a trash talking
DNA
but uh Nobel Prize winners are are want
to do that I I guess the the argument
I've always made I'd love to run this by
you if you'll indulge me uh for a moment
but when we look at Mars Mars is is
fairly similar to Earth in size it's not
too it's smaller but it's not it's not
microscopic in comparison it's in the
so-called goldilock zone of the earth it
has exchanged materials with the Earth
for literally billions of years I
actually have a fragment of Mars here
which I would give you if we
yeah and I give out other I give out
meteorites to my listeners who who are
listening and enjoying the show but um
but I point out that you know I have a
Mars meteorite which means that Mars has
a lot of Earth meteorites on it and
probably a lot more and some of those
could have carried genetic material but
the fact that we don't see Life on Mars
and yes we haven't explored every Square
you know millimeter of it uh to know
that but it seems pretty probable that
at least the surface of Mars is uh is
not inhabited
by macroscopic life forms can that be
seen as sort of a uh an estimate or be
used to estimate in a in a basian sense
how hard it is for a life we always hear
about how easy life is to start as you
just said once it got kicked off but can
we use just the other data point we have
so few data points and and we have no
obvious data that suggests life is
abundant in the universe other than the
probability that it could be so but
that's not an argument so what would you
make of these of an argument that we
haven't discovered life with all these
technology it's actually maybe there
it's a lot harder to get started than we
naively might have thought if we found
life on mars or Enceladus or anywhere in
the in the solar system then you do your
basian statistics and immediately say
right that means life is the universe is
crawling with life I mean it's it's it's
immediately it's a huge data point um to
change the the estimate of the
likelihood of life being elsewhere
provided um it's it's a separate life
form I mean you'd have to look at its
genetic system if it uses DNA especially
if it uses the same genetic code then uh
it would then it's it's been transferred
by a
meteorite going either from Earth to
Mars or from Mars to Earth a key
question would be to to look at its
genetic code and say first is it DNA
second does it have the same genetic
code if it has the same genetic code
it's far too improbable that that would
arise spontaneously uh twice over that
what that that must mean contamination
if it has a different genetic code and I
stick my neck out and say there must be
a genetic code of some sort and I think
I'd stick it so far as to say it must be
digital um but it doesn't necessarily
have to be quaternary it doesn't have to
be binary it could be could be octal I
mean there there are various other
possibilities um but if it's different
then immediately we know that um life is
common rather than rare
now what's the chance I mean could it be
that we are literally unique could it be
that we are the only life form in the
universe well I think yes I mean it we
don't we can't disprove that if you want
to believe that we're the only life form
in the universe then that immediately
commits you to the belief that the
origin of Life on this planet was a
quite stupendously improbable event
because the share number of available
planets in which life could have started
is so huge
that means that when we think about
theories for the origin of life we are
not looking for a plausible Theory we're
looking for a highly implausible Theory
because if there's a plausible Theory
then the universe has got to have a lot
of a lot of life forms we don't know but
but if you if you're the kind of person
who's who thinks that we are unique in
the universe then be aware that you are
committed therefore to the belief that
the origin of Life on this planet is so
implausible is so improbable that any
theory that a chemist comes up with has
got to be vanishingly
implausible and that's an interesting
kind of
paradoxical result scientific advances
are often frightening as well as
exciting an example of this is Elon
musk's new neuralink a brain computer
interface designed to assist paralyzed
patients in controlling technology with
their thoughts while this technology
holds immense promise for restoring
movement and communic ation ethical
concerns linger around safety privacy
and the potential long-term effects
despite the controversy neuralink is
planning upcoming trials in more and
more patients aiming for high single
digits by the end of the year if
successful this could Mark a significant
step towards revolutionizing human
computer interaction I love staying
upto-date on news especially related to
science technology and artificial
intelligence and with the rapid speed of
today's news cycle it's crucial to stay
informed and Trust where you're getting
your information I'm excited I found
this story about neuralink on ground
news ground news is a website and app
that I use every day it gathers articles
from around 50,000 news sources all over
the world in an unbiased way that can
help you read between the lines of the
standard mainstream media bias it helps
you break through of algorithms in Echo
Chambers and filter bubbles you can
check them out at ground.
news/ drbryan let me show you why I love
ground news right away in the nuring
story you can see that 47 news outlets
have reported on the story of these 47
Outlets 35% of them lean to the left
politically 35% come from the center and
only 31% lean right you can see the
reliability of the outlets covering the
story this is unique it also shows who
owns the outlets reporting on the story
The majority 32% are from independent
news outlets ground news also makes
makes it easy to compare headlines to
see how bias might influence the framing
and shape our understanding of the
issues I found it hugely fasing that the
left tends to focus on the detailed
technical issues and improvements
highlighting the long-term goals while
the center emphasizes musk's intentions
to give people superpowers surprisingly
the right leaning media coverage
underscores assurances made that the
implant doesn't harm the brain and
focuses more on the Technology's
potential benefits you can't get this
type of new news analysis anywhere else
the news isn't going to report on itself
but ground news does with ground news
you get a deeper understanding of the
complexity and Nuance of different
issues by seeing it from all different
sides and identifying media narratives
to get this go to ground.
newsdr Briant Dr Brant to stay fully
informed on breaking news and see
through media bias you'll become a
smarter news consumer And subscribe to
my link for 40% off unlimited access
with their Vantage plan the same plan I
use by subscribing they're directly
supporting an independent platform for
news and supporting the show as well
last week I spoke uh with a neighbor of
yours George Fatu who's at Cambridge
University I guess you guys aren't
neighbors but uh well he was at eminent
that's right yes he is an eminent cosm
yeah we've poached uh We've poached him
for one of our as an adviser for our
observatory in Chile but he quoted
something that startled me and and it
was a quote from Francis Crick who you
mentioned earlier this is George
summarizing what Francis Crick said and
then I want your reaction so this is
very many metal layers Richard I hope
you'll indulge me Francis said yeah
Francis said that if your theory agrees
with all the data it's bound to be
wrong how do you react to that are there
are there theories that are too good
that seems to be T typically sort of
provocative um I mean you you could say
it's it's it's it's a it's it's a
useless Theory or something like that
but it's it's not bound to be wrong I
mean that that that that can't be right
I think he was just being provocative
yeah that would not surprise me although
not as provocative as Jim Watson right I
want to talk about um uh artificial
intelligence and and and so forth but
before I do I'd like you to if you're
willing to indulge me in another one of
my ABA questions where I ask you to to
not say sing dancing queen but it's
impossible for me Richard to not ask you
about to define a meme would you would
you please uh for the benefit of of my
audience uh who may not know can you
explain Meme and my question is if there
are genan pools are there also meme
pools so first could you start with a
meme what is a meme and are there meme
pools yes a a a meme is a unit of
cultural inheritance I was interested in
the last chapter of the selfish Gene the
first edition of The Selfish Gene um the
whole book has been about the gene as
the unit of selection and and and
darwinian selection is the differential
survival of genes in gene pools and I
wanted to make the point that there's
nothing magic about DNA anything
self-replicating can potentially be a
unit of natural selection and um a
computer virus for example would would
have been a good example if I'd known
about computer viruses then um but uh
what I did know about was human culture
not much about it but but it was clear
to me that certain aspects of human
culture could behave as replicators
because they get imitated so something
like clothes Fashions or
Tunes yes and habits of speech uh things
like that anything that gets copied
around the meme pool with the the me
poool being the set of humans which
imitate in a position to imitate each
each each other so something like the
one example I use is the is the reverse
baseball cap um which which spread as an
epidemic um of memes because people
think it looks cool and they so they
turn their cap backwards and and that so
that the act of imitation is analogous
to DNA replication but it's mimetic
replication not not DNA
replication
um the what I mean it's quite clear that
memes exist in that sense what's not
clear is whether they really are subject
to darwinian selection I think they have
to be in some sense there are certain
things well I said the backwards
baseball cap is cool cool means in this
case it has good survival value it it's
equivalent to to a gene which is good at
surviving in the gene pool so something
like that or a catchy tune that when you
hear somebody whistling it or singing it
it infects your mind and you find
yourself whistling or singing it
yourself and that infects somebody else
so that is a catchy uh meme something
like a a craze at school you know when
when we were at school there would be a
craze for particular toy or particular
game a particular way of doing things um
a particular
word a private word that that people in
the school use and and is not used
outside the school I think many schools
have such such words the all memes which
um which if they spread successfully
have high by definition they therefore
have have high survival value that is a
kind of darwinian selection what's more
problematic is whether that can give
rise to interesting
Evolution um and there I think we come
to the idea of the meme complex
something like a a a collection of memes
which go well together which cooperate
well together rather like I was talking
earlier about the genes cooperating with
each other because they have the same
exit route um well a Cooperative of
memes might be something like the Roman
Catholic Church where a whole lot of
different uh replicating ideas survive
in each other's
presence and therefore uh could be
regarded as a meme complex or
mlex and um you perhaps can think of
other examples of possible mexes I've
talked a lot uh this past Year to
friends of yours Sam Harris and I
actually was honored to give the do the
last final interview with Daniel dennet
before he passed away oh right earlier
this year and I've also spoken you with
Donald Hoffman uh it's been a year of of
talking to a lot of eminent uh uh
thinkers on on natural selection
Evolution but also Consciousness Free
Will Etc what what are your
Recollections of Dan dennet um now that
uh he's departed this Mortal coil we
miss him so much um you have any
favorite stories of of interactions with
Daniel oh well a Great Bear of a man um
genial jovial very
kind but
also strong and didn't suffer fools
gladly but um if anybody was sincerely
interested in learning he was he was up
for it I miss him enormously I mean not
just as a friend but as a as an in
intellectual um go-to person person
really I mean I would I would um he's so
intelligent and so um good at talking
about anything uh you know there are
some people who when you talk to them
sort of feel they raise your
game and I would say that he do he did
that uh he he Not
only was a highly intelligent converser
himself but he he he he raised what what
what intelligence one has oneself um to
a higher plane by just being there um I
I I I admired him enormously and and uh
miss him hugely yeah one of one of the
things that spoke to me so loudly yeah
we he was such a mench you could ask him
anything but yes he would he would
harumph away you know the uh the the
foolish questions but he was he was
always a gentleman and uh he he just had
such a good cheer and and I regret that
I only had a chance to talk to him or
just before passed away uh because you
could literally fill an entire podcast
with him um I wonder if you've
encountered in your work Richard or just
in your C natural intellectual
parismad Hoffman who's got this
perception-based reality uh concept and
Lee Mullen both past guests on the
podcast who talk about black holes as as
uh nucleating Co what he calls Cosmic
darwinian Evolution what do you make of
these uh sort of Concepts where are they
legitimate you know venues to pursue are
they mainly you know kind of trying to
Hitch their wagon to the star that is
natural selection the brilliant idea
that is perhaps you know the most
foundational idea in all of science as a
darwinian I very much like uh I mean I I
warm to the kind of smolen um idea
whether it's plausible I think that's
for a physicist to answer to me what I
like about it is that is that it it does
the same job in cosmology as as um
natural selection Darin natural
selection does in in life um in so far
as um people sometimes point to the fine
tuning of the universe the the idea that
the physical constants are fine-tuned in
such a way that if they were if any one
of them was different life wouldn't be
here uh perhaps galaxies wouldn't be
here Stars wouldn't be here chemistry
wouldn't would wouldn't be here it's a
challenge to think well how did this
fine tuning come about and uh talking
about a Multiverse is obviously one way
to do it and if if if we have a very
large number of universes all with
different physical constants
then by the anthropic principle we
happen we have to be in one of the
minority of universes that happens to
have uh physical constants which give
rise to stars and chemistry and and
life the smolen spin on that refinement
of that helps because instead of just
saying we've got billions of universes
and some of them just happen to be
conducive to producing the world as we
as we see it and live in it because he
postulates a kind of darwinian selection
of
universities uh and the qualities that
make for fecundity that make for
Reproductive success of a universe good
at making baby
universes those very same qualities are
the are the qualities that eventually uh
make for um chemistry and and and lifean
that's got to be an appealing idea to to
any darwinian but when I talk to physic
it's about it some of them say it's
rubbish and some of them say it's a nice
idea sorry for this brief Interruption
and this wonderful conversation with
Richard I just want to let you know that
to get these great guests Like Richard
and many many others their time is so
limited they often look to see how many
subscribers I have to this Channel on
YouTube and the audio feed and I'm sorry
to say it but I understand it they want
to make use of their time they don't
have infinite amount of time none of us
do so you can really help me out and
this will help you out to get even more
of the great guest like of Richard's
caliber to come on the The Impossible
podcast and that's to just subscribe and
maybe if you're charitable leave a
comment leave a thumbs up or a review on
your favorite podcast player it really
helps us grow the podcast get great
guests and break through the noise of
the five million other podcasts that
these folks often get invited to this
will really help me out so just take the
time while it's in your mind just push
that button and you'll be doing me a
tremendous favor thanks so much now back
to the episode you're right it is it is
somewhat controversial as is the
Multiverse I know you were uh very uh
very generous with your encomium for our
mutual friend Lawrence Krauss and his
book um a universe from nothing uh I
think you did call it you know
comparable to the Origin of Species uh
which which a lot of a lot of uh you
know cosmologists were were uh quite
startled to hear because the Multiverse
is really right now it's a consequence
of an un unproven Theory and and
more view it as a paradigm rather than a
true elevated to the true level of I
thought it was a consequence of
inflation yes no that's absolutely
correct but inflation itself in fact my
my my research is to build experimental
apparatuses that can look for the
imperatur of inflation which are
gravitational waves but primordial
gravitational waves not from black holes
that ligo and other instruments have
detected relatively recently but from
the origin of the universe the quantum
field that causes the nucleation of uh
of our universe and then can potentially
spawn other universes but there's no
necessarily physical evidence for that
or uh or else I wouldn't be building the
you know hundred million do Simons
Observatory with my colleagues and
friends so we we don't know it may it is
consistent inflation is consistent but
that's not quite enough to rise to the
level of of you know in my opinion and
I've told this to Lawrence you know
comparison with The Great Charles Darwin
if we did have access to you know truly
artificially intelligent agents that are
human level AGI as uh my past guest your
neighbor there Nick Bostrom asserts more
than that it will lead to a form of
Utopia um I'm less sanguin and I'm I'm
concerned about these agents as you know
I think Jeremy benam said you know not
whether they can you know are they human
but can they experience pain will we
have obligations to agents if they
achieve you know the turn test or the
the the keing test or the Dawkins
whatever we want to formulate once they
pass some critical threshold that people
acknow will they have rights will they
will we ask if they suffer too well
earlier you said um just sort of knock
out a capacitor to make them feel pain
it only if we only if the programming
has built in something equivalent to to
real pain I suppose but yes if that
would that that was the case and I think
they probably would have rights talking
about artificial intelligence it makes
me think of the threats and
opportunities to what you and I do which
I sometimes call the second oldest
profession uh maybe the third oldest
profession depending on who's counting
but being professors it's a core part of
your identity and it is for M me as well
what threats or opportunities are are
you seeing come about thanks to perhaps
artificial intelligence uh that may or
may not threaten what we do uh because
it hasn't changed much in a thousand
years since the University of bolognia
opened and there was a there was a guy
scratching with a piece of rock on
another rock and sitting in front of
wrapped attention the only thing I point
out Richard is that back then as you
know the students could go on strike and
that was barbaric because then the
professors wouldn't get paid and so
thank God we have tenure now but how is
your job and my job how has it changed
is it got is it has it gotten better
more enjoyable less enjoyable and what
do you see as the future threats to what
we do for a living well if you're asking
could could our could our job as
professors be taken over by by an
intelligent AI I think yes I I I don't
see why not whether they'd be better at
it uh certainly better at it than some
of one's
colleagues um but but I suppose since we
are human we empathize with a human
who's lecturing if he's a really good
lecturer then then somehow um the fact
that he or she is human and is gesturing
and seems to be sort of seizing ideas
out of the air and passing them on and
and thinking aloud um it might be harder
to simulate that in an artificial
environment than simply to simulate the
imparting of knowledge the imparting of
knowledge is is
certainly this kind of thing that can be
done is already done actually doesn't
have to be an intelligent Professor it
can just be a be a me Google is a is a
is a or Wikipedia is a teacher if you if
you use it right I think got a long way
to go before before you can simulate a
really great lecturer who who really
does inspire students but I expect that
could happen as well and now pivoting uh
to another one of these ABA questions
you know you're not going to sing
dancing queen I wonder if you could uh
recapitulate the concept of the shifting
moral Zeitgeist and then I want to apply
it to what's come about on campus is I
dat it you know for about 10 years now
something has changed it's palpable on
campus uh speakers you know will be
protested shut down there'll be violent
threats against administrators I just
testified to the US Congress uh two
weeks ago about my experiences with
anti-Semitism I'm a Jew and my
experiences and my students experiences
here at the University of California I
wonder first could you define the
shifting moral Zeitgeist and then could
we explain and perhaps segue how it is
as a subset affecting campus culture
again where you and I do our work yes I
I think if you if you think about um
going back a few centur going back
decades actually you don't need to go
back centuries um you'll find a
completely well gradually shifting
moral positions um if you look at say um
uh just trivial crime fiction Detective
stories Agatha Christie uh Bulldog
Drummond James Bond um uh Agatha
Christie I think 1920s 1930s perhaps um
you'll find rather shocking
anti-Semitism uh racial Prejudice of
various sorts anti- women Prejudice and
which would have been normal and uh
expected if you go back further to say
the middle of the 19th
century and look at say um somebody like
Abraham Lincoln
or Thomas Henry Huxley both of whom were
in the Vanguard of advanced liberal
thought at the of of their own time yet
they were by modern standards flagrant
racists I mean both Lincoln and Huxley
took it for granted that that black
people were inferior to White and were
incapable of having the same reasoning
processes um women didn't get the vote
in various countries until uh the 20th
century in Switzerland until rather late
in the 20th century uh in America I
think in the 1920s in Britain in the
1920s the Assumption was that women were
incapable of exercising proper judgment
and so they couldn't be be trusted with
the vote I mean you it's palpable
manifest that that the moral Zeitgeist
shifts as the decades go by
as to why it shifts I think that's an
interesting and complex question it's
it's uh it's a sort of Quasi
evolutionary process it it changes
gradually and what changes it I'm I'm
not really sure I I think it's a
combination of when it says sort of it's
in the air when it it's it's dinner
table conversation it's it's politician
speeches it's it's legal decisions it's
it's its um journalistic articles its
books all these things conspire together
to to move on uh the um the moral
Zeitgeist um so I I think it's it's an
empirically observable
phenomenon uh and a very important one
you go back to Medieval Times and you
get truly appalling things I mean public
executions for entertainment people
would would with the idea of a good of a
good day out to entertain the children
would be to go go to public hanging
inconceivable now days um but routine
and normal uh in medieval times in Roman
times gladiatorial contests um people
getting entertainment in the Coliseum
from from watching uh prisoners being
molded by lions and bears and
and I mean the shifting moral Z Guist is
is an empirically observable phenomenon
pivot to a different uh question for you
uh let's say you open your email today
and you get an email from a friend it
says Richard I am very poorly today and
very stupid and I hate everybody and
everything one lives only to make
blunders I'm going to write a little
book for Murray on Orchids today I hate
them worse than anything so farewell and
in a sweet frame of mind I am forever
yours what would you say to a colleague
if you opened your email one day and got
such a
message I didn't understand that
um what are you
sorry this is from this is a quote from
Charles Darwin uh that he apparently uh
wrote to um looking up who he wrote this
too he said it's it's a quote where he
was depressed from
1861 uh he wrote I'm very poorly today
and very stupid and I hate everybody and
everything one lives only to make
blunders I'm going to write a little
book for Murray on Orchids and today I
hate them worse than everything um so
fascinating come across that yeah I
never come across that I'll I'll send it
to you yeah uh Murray was his publisher
uh he did write a book about orchids um
and um I I don't think I've been quite
that depressed but but but I'm
interested to that's that's a genuine
letter is it I mean I I I have a picture
of his handwriting I I'll email to you I
I post it on Twitter okay that's very
interesting yeah the comment is if you
had a colleague and and you got such a
me not you but if you had a colleague
like that um someone who's doing work
it's it's very tedious to do to do
science as you know and I wonder if part
of the tedm and boredom and and just the
the committee work and and the stuff
that is not so great about what you and
I do if if you find great satisfaction
from your public facing side your
writing your popular writing um where
does it rank how do you compare your
research life and writing you know uh
papers and and you're extremely highly
cited um to writing books to
communicating with the public is it a
tonic is it something that buoys you to
be with the public to go on tour as you
are going how do you balance the public
life with the uh with the academic life
and synthesize them into one coherent
intellectual hole yes well first of all
before we leave we leave Darwin you your
quot it begins bying very poorly today
and Darwin was of course a chronic inal
invalid and so um he he had an illness a
mysterious illness nobody quite knows
what it was but he was permanently more
or less permanently ill
and so on a bad day I could well imagine
that he would be hating everybody and
hating life and and and things I mean
just just simply something like being
being seasick you you you sort of want
to die I mean if Darwin felt like that I
could understand him being anyway but
going back to your question about um
balancing talking to the writing for the
public and writing for um for scientific
colleagues I try to do both um I think
in so far as it's possible and I think
it probably isn't possible in physics or
as much harder in physics to to to to
write for colleagues and for the general
public at the same time because physics
is so difficult um modern physics is so
difficult both both cosmology and
quantum physics are are so difficult
that it's it's you couldn't really
imagine papers to Nature being written
in a way that could be understood by any
lay person
uh I think my field is because I've
concentrated on Evolution it is possible
to write in a way that
is understandable by the intelligent lay
person and at the same time makes a
contribution to the field my late
colleague John mayard Smith in reviewing
two of my books the selfish and the
extended phenotype said that both books
were unusual in his in his opinion in
that they they attempted to talk to to
both audiences at the same time he said
that um David laak the orthologist David
laak was was another example of somebody
who did that but but but it was rather
unusual that that is what I try to do
not sure how successfully but I I do I
do try to make
contributions at the same time as as
talking to to lay people I sometimes
joke that we have almost a moral
obligation as scientists who get paid by
the public after all um here in the US
and there in the UK to explain things
and if you were to work as a plumber or
you know installing um stoned
countertops and your your employee
employer said to you well what are you
doing today Richard and you I I can't
explain it to you you can't possibly
understand what I'm doing I mean you
probably get fired pretty quickly and
yet we have a whole host of people I've
had this kind of online battle with
Sabina
hossenfelder you know about the fact
that all scientists should receive at
least some training in communication to
the public and yet it's almost looked
down upon I mean you you surely know of
the travails that Carl Sean had in the
US and never being elected to the
National Academy um some say out of
spite for his popularity and and we have
many examples of that oh you you know a
real scientist is in the lab or at the
computer um and and not communicating
with the public how do you react to my
statement that scientists who are paid
by the public have a moral obligation to
give some return on investment to the
public who pays their salary I think
there was a time when the national
Science Foundation when giving a grant
demanded that a certain percentage of
the output of the
grantee uh should be devoted to
explaining to the public um what the
research was all about I'm not sure if
that's still the case but I think that's
a very good idea you mentioned the Carl
Sean effect and uh it's notorious of
course that that um he he obviously
should have been a member of the
National Academy and wasn't I've been
sometime asked whether whether I suffer
from the same thing um I actually have
been elected to the Royal Society
despite the fact that I most of my books
are aimed at general public um so I I
haven't suffered from the Sean effect
I'm happy to say yeah I mean I I think
that that communication to the public
should not just be left to professional
journalists who who who who do a good
job of actually reading up the science
and then translating it into lay terms I
think that scientists themselves ought
to do it themselves and ideally even
make contributions to their science in
language which is
generally understandable
Darwin wrote for the general public and
was at the same time making a stupendous
contribution to to science and and
that's a model which we might well
follow this is an out of this world
conversation isn't it and if you're
interested in getting a fragment of our
early solar system something that's
truly out of this world I know you're
going to want to go to my Monday magic
mailing list and you can subscribe at
banking.com list and if you have a edu
email address you're guaranteed to win
one of these Beauties a real fragment of
our early solar system who knows perhaps
some of the Schmutz was on this very
meteorite that brought life to Earth
some billions of years ago I don't know
about that but I'll teach you all about
meteor rights and how to observe meteor
showers in a follow-up message once you
join my Monday magic mailing list and if
you have a edu email address you're
guaranteed to win one of these Beauties
if you live in the United States go to
bring.com if you're a fellow academic
like me and Richard now back to the
episode absolutely yeah and the the
people that we look to most of all at
least in physics Richard Fineman uh you
know nowadays we we have uh no no real
peer of his but sir Roger Penrose your
colleague as well these These are
exceptional writers as well as
scientists I mean you you really can't
do
climb higher um I have a question from a
listener who asked uh Thomas Payne is
his name is evolution not being taught
in America at the K through 12 level is
that still a problem affecting Society
um and how would you change the
educational system in America or maybe
even in the UK If you could and and what
what is sort of the best educational
system right now I don't know what k
through2 mean means um what what is that
that this person's asking everything
from a 5-year-old up to a 17-year-old
but um let's just restrict it to a 14 to
17 year old say well I think it's a Pity
that uh if you look at textbooks of
biology uh commonly Evolution comes
rather than near the end of the textbook
and that doesn't make any sense because
you're learning all about the facts of
biology without being taught why and and
and um it it really should be the first
chapter because because otherwise
nothing nothing makes sense um so that
would be one change would be to put it
early in the curriculum rather than late
um another thing would be to
um to teach it unashamedly and without
intimidation from religious uh
fundamentalist interests who try to stop
you doing so I mean some of my
colleagues uh feel the need to bize
their teaching so as not to give offense
to religious Fundamentalist and so
instead of talking about Evolution
they'll talk about I don't know
modification by descent or or you use a
euphemism um I think we need to confront
it head on and say this this is this is
science and and U you've got to learn
the science and uh you you can't opt out
of science because it goes against a
traditional Faith would you Advocate you
know dialogue with uh you know trying to
teach say the concept of religion as
part of an extended phenotype is is that
something that you would expect would
Curry favor with proponents of
intelligent design or in your opinion
should they be ignored it would it
wouldn't kry favor um that they I think
they'd hate it one of the things that um
Dan
dennett's book breaking the spell does
to try to
explain um why people believe in
evolution or sorry why people believe in
religion um
and uh I I differ from many of my
colleagues who who go bend over
backwards to say Evolution and religion
are totally compatible you don't have to
give up your your
faith and you can see why they do it
it's politically very sound because
because otherwise you're going to just
turn people away but I I'm too much wed
to the actual truth to to to do that and
so I I would be a very bad teacher in
Evol in in in America probably because I
would I would
have people walking out of my classes
rather than trying to seduce them I've
been accused of of of of sort of just of
setting it out there and not and not not
engaging in a in an exercise of
persuasion or seduction um and I I just
believe in just telling it like it is I
was once talking to one of the one of
the lawyers in the that famous Case
kitsmiller Case in in I think somewhere
in Pennsylvania after talking to me he
said well thank goodness we did didn't
call you as an expert witness you'd have
lost the case for us because I mean what
they did was they was they got religious
scientists to come along and and explain
that that that they're fully compatible
so I want to conclude with uh a set of
questions that I um have basically
stolen from the late great Sir Arthur C
Clark uh and that is because I am here
at UC San Diego we're honored to have
the Arthur C Clark Center for human
imagination and the uh the center was
endowed by his uh by his this charitable
foundation and I'm honored to be the
associate uh co-director of it so I I
have all sorts of of different questions
that mainly relate to different sayings
as you know Sir Arthur was quite
quotable and he said things uh like for
every expert there's an equal and
opposite expert but I want to start with
the first one uh that is probably very
familiar to to you and my audience and
that's his famous quote any sufficiently
advanced technology is indistinguishable
from Magic you've surely heard that
Richard right
yes so I want to ask you what what form
of technology or invention of the human
mind is most magical if you could go
back to uh the time of say Elizabeth the
first um in a Boeing
747 and uh get out your smartphone um um
and uh I mean indistinguishable from
Magic obviously I mean it would be it
would be uh just mind-blowing for them
and I suppose if people from 500 years
ahead were time travel back to us now we
would be so overall uh that we might
fall on our knees and worship them as
Gods because they would be they would
have Godlike Powers I think Clark third
law is very wise and obviously true
another question that is somewhat
related to that and we we touched upon
it comes from 2001 A Space Odyssey where
there are these monoliths that appear on
the African Savannah and then later on
in space and there are hominids that you
know hitting it with uh with bones and
so forth but we don't really know what
they are they could be time capsules
they could be you know other other types
of phenomena I want to ask you if you
had a time capsule and it could last a
billion years uh what would you put on
it or in it it doesn't have to be your
work it could be or it could be you know
a Bach you know kataa or something like
that what what would you put in order to
you know time travel uh throughout all
of eternity perhaps send it out into
space uh as as a as a sort of cosmic
Tombstone um for Humanity because we're
going to be destroyed obviously
eventually um and it would be nice to to
think that something of our culture
would be at least slight possibility of
being discovered by other civilizations
so we wouldn't be totally forgotten well
I would put bar Beethoven Mozart
Schubert um and hope that if they didn't
have ears at least they could appreciate
them in some mathematical form
Shakespeare well the problem is language
I suppose but again I they'll be very
Advanced so maybe they can decode the
language and as for science well uh
Newton uh Galileo uh Einstein
Darwin Watson and Crick there's so much
that that that we would wish
to to preserve to
advertise
ourselves
um I suppose lots of I suppose various
different languages I I like to think of
a cosmic Tombstone but yeah I asked uh
that question to uh this is a finger
puppet of Carl Sean we we have to get a
uh Richard Dawkins uh finger puppet I I
do have a n Chomsky one and he was a
guest on the show so I I think we can
get Dawkins one if there's not already
but Richard I asked this of Carl Sean's
Widow I never got to meet Carl but I
asked his widow andrean the same
question I just asked you about putting
a uh basically a time capsule out in the
cosmos and she said oh I did that and I
said oh really she said yeah when uh
they were launching a Voyager 2 Carl and
I just started dating and he uh he put
my uh put me in a EEG scanner and scann
my brain waves as we were just falling
in love and that was put on the Voyager
Golden Disc so uh she was told by NASA
that that will last at least four
billion years so um she was the first
person that actually did embody that
question okay the second penultimate
question Richard and then I'll let you
go I know it's getting late and I I I
just am so appreciative for your
forbearance and Indulgence of these of
these silly little questions but a
question that uh that Sir Arthur asked
or statement that he made was the
following he said when a distinguished
but elderly scientist says something is
possible they are almost certainly right
but when they say something's impossible
they're probably wrong and Arthur C
Clark called these failures of
imagination in his book profiles of the
future nowadays we call them limiting
beliefs but I want to ask you the
question in in the form of in this way
what have you been wrong about what have
you changed your mind about if anything
well I have but it's sort of too small
in a way to to uh I mean I I I can give
you give you one example But first you
know there's some wonderful ones of um I
think it was Lord Kelvin in the 19th
century who said that um flying machines
are
impossible um maybe it was wasn't Lord
Kelvin maybe he said radio will turn out
to be a hoax uh the various 19th century
eminent physicists who who who got egg
all over their faces by by denying the
possibility of things which are now
absolutely Common Place um but any you
asked about it was Kelvin Kelvin yeah it
was Kelvin who said he heavier than air
flying machines are impossible and that
was in 1895 eight years before the right
Brothers proved him wrong yes that's
right yes there are quite a few of those
which are well well worth quoting as as
a caution R tale I was wrong about the
so-called handicap principle of animal
communication particular sexual
selection the idea of the Israeli
scientist uh amot sahav that the reason
why sexually selected um signals like
peacock's Tales are so extravagant and
beautiful and and wasteful is precisely
because they're extravagantly wasteful
and costly and handicaps that's why they
work that's why they are favored by
natural selection always before and and
I went along with this I thought I I
admitted that they were handicaps but I
thought that they
were they survived despite being
handicaps so Harvey's revolutionary
thought was that they survive because
they're handicaps because they're costly
and only by being costly do they
establish their credentials with whoever
they're trying to impress which might be
a female and uh I was wrong about that
and and and this was proved by my ex
student and now colleague and now
actually Mentor Alan graphen who who
done mathematical modeling to show that
the Harvey's handicap principle really
does work and costly signals really are
favored precisely because they are
costly and if they were not costly they
would not be favored so I was wrong and
and I had to climb down hey there's a
good chance you might be a scientist or
an engineer aspiring to be maybe going
to school graduate school or after
school or maybe you're a professor like
me if you're wanting to learn the
greatest tips and ways to become your
best scientist you might want to get my
book Into The Impossible think like a
Nobel Prize winner with a forward by my
friend Nobel laurat Barry barish in it
we describe an incredible series of tips
on how to collaborate better unlock your
creative genius and get over common
pitfalls like the impostor syndrome I
hope you'll take a deep dive into it and
I know you'll enjoy it you can read a
free chapter at my website Brian
king.com books and you can buy it at
amazon.com in ebook audiobook or in
physical hard copy or paperback form
thanks a lot very good okay Richard the
last question I have uh relates to
Arthur's law that actually is the
namesake of this podcast or what gave
this podcast its name and it goes like
this the only way of discovering the
limits of the possible is to venture
Beyond them a little way into the
impossible so that's why this podcast
has its name I want to ask you if you
could go back and see 20year old
30-year-old Richard and you had 30
seconds uh to speak to him what would
you say to him to give him the
confidence you know to do as you've done
to go into the impossible well something
pretty similar to to what Arthur C Clark
said uh do believe that you can do it
and and go ahead and and and do it have
have have confidence to actually do it
Richard this has been a delight for me
and for my audience like I said we will
uh make it into many versions and and I
hope uh you will continue to write and
be well and if I don't see you in San
Francisco I I hope to visit you at in
Oxford or the UK uh this has been a
great honor and a great Delight I want
to thank you so much thank you very much
it has been a delight for me as well hey
everybody I hope you're enjoying part
one of my special two-part conversation
with Richard Dawkins if you want to get
early access to part two of this in
fabulous conversation you need to join
my membership by just clicking the
button down below membership start at
just 99 cents a month and get early
access to this video and many many more
higher levels you get other perks
including shout outs and videos listing
your name on the videos as producer
credit and then also getting once a
month conversations with me and kind of
ask me anything casual Fireside type
format so if you want Early Access make
sure you click the join button down
below select a membership that's right
for you
