welcome everyone to another voices with
Fi I'm here with somebody you probably
all recognize quite readily Christopher
masip Petro uh beloved friend co-author
uh executive director of the Veri
Foundation uh Chris and I are intimately
working together in many important
projects from the very philosophical to
the very practical and of course beyond
beyond all of that before it Beyond it
beneath it um he is a dear and wonderful
friend um and uh he will bring his uh
his lyrical Touch of clarity and
elucidation no doubt to bear on this
conversation the other person you might
know of um and that's Andrew uh Sweeney
and Andrew um is somebody that I have
been talking to and Chris and I have
been talking to for quite some time on
his channel uh and uh I'm really happy
to be to have him here so that many of
my students can uh more readily become
aware of his work and his Viewpoint uh
the most recently you may have seen uh
Chris and I were on Andrew's Channel and
we were talking about the philosophical
Silk Road that video has been very well
received and uh quite well discussed uh
with constructive criticism
excellent insightful and original
connections uh uh really recommended
Reflections uh so thank you very much
all of you who have done that uh all of
this is helping me and Chris as we try
to slowly craft and cultivate uh the
logistics and the specific schematic
architecture of the philosophical Silk
Road and of course my final thanks would
go to Andrew for facilitating that
wonderful conversation and I'm now going
to turn things uh over to Andrew um
after Chris says a brief hello um and
and then and then Chris will say Hi and
then Andrew uh will uh start uh by
introducing himself hello thanks for uh
thank you for this thanks for having me
on John U and thank you Andrew you kind
of got the ball rolling on all of this
uh this topic is really fun it's
obviously it's a gesture ah head and so
many ways but it's also in progress It's
also present so um yeah I'm just H I
love conversations with the two of you
guys together obviously each of you but
the two of you guys together I like the
conversations that we have the three of
us I I've liked them a lot and we've
been doing them for a while and we have
a really natural Rhythm so there's
there's good chemistry to this group I
really like it so I'm always happy to be
here with you guys thank
you yeah hello are you Andrew so thank
you um thank you uh John and Chris uh
for inviting me to to your channel
and I
you're you're both my my favorite
interlocutors you know on the internet
and I've learned so much from from you
know both of you more explicitly John
but I often feel that you guys are are
sort of a team that you have a you have
a a twin Soul or something so this is
the reason why I like to invite you guys
together of of course it' be just as
pleasurable to talk to you individually
um so um so I am you know an expat
Canadian um living in in France I'm in
tulo at the moment pink City and uh I
guess um I sort of started blogging you
know a few years ago and came across
John's meaning
crisis uh series um and Di Dove quite
deep into it and wrote a lot of you know
blog pieces on that um because I thought
that John had a wide sort of
uh you know
spectrum of interests that that are
similar to mine although my interests
are less in the scientific realm and
more perhaps in the the spiritual and
religious realm I started in my 20s um I
went through a kind of a existential
crisis and began doing a lot of zen zen
sitting sitting
meditation um because it was the only
thing I could I could think of to to
sort of rescue my my my shattered broken
mind in the meaning crisis and um and
then I you know and then I gravitated
toward towards tantric bu Buddhism so I
guess and also I was a musician for many
years so I think those are the three
things that are my passion I'm also a
teacher the three things are my passion
I've always sort of been you know Zen
Tantra and music those are the three
things I love and at the moment I'm
running a media platform called parallex
um with my friend Tom Amar um we're
doing cour is we do a lot of podcasts
and I and I'm just I'm talking to a lot
of people that seems to be a thing these
days I don't know how it happened um so
just what what what I wanted this to be
a continuation of our last conversation
about the Silk Road because I'm very
inspired by that idea um I'm I'm
inspired by that idea on different
levels um on an imaginative level
because I've I've always wanted to you
know I always wanted to find let's say a
home which was not uh you know some sort
of Monolithic place or ideology or but a
home that was was you know kind of a
dynamic spectrum of of of ideas and
practices and and um and um religious
axioms you know and and I I was attra
very attracted to to the east for for a
long time and but I I also know that the
Silk Road goes all the way you know
Westward as well so um so maybe we can
start on that note start talking about
this this whole East
West um you know Road you know this this
magical road because it's because it's
uh it's a silk
road yeah the intent is that
the Silk Road as we mentioned last time
is something of an abstraction from the
historical reality the historical
reality like historical realities is a
tremendously mixed complex thing with
some light and some shadow in it there's
uh there's you know there's Bloodshed
there's Warfare there's Commerce but
there also seem to have been and this
was Thomas plant's uh proposal in the
book um that really wakened me to this
proposal he makes the proposal the first
time in his book uh that it was also a
place in which like a lingua
philosophica uh patterned on the idea of
a lingua frame
a shared language right a lingua
philosophica that allowed the East and
West to enter into not just the exchange
of words as in Commerce or a
transactional discussion but to enter
into what Chris and I have been calling
for quite some time dialogos or we
sometimes say dialogos I originally
emphasized the pronunciation dialogos
because I wanted it to sound different
than dialogue so now I I skip back and
forth between them um but the point is
that this is a mutually transformative
kind of encounter it's a discursive
encounter but it's not just a discursive
encounter it transforms people in
multiple levels and ways of knowing um
and then the idea was that the
philosophical Silk
Road uh is an attempt to bring back uh a
lingua philosophica in order to afford
that kind of mutually transformative
dialogos so that people
could return and recover their religious
homes leave and travel to other
religious homes uh move along the road
uh in various ways um and as a way
of really
orienting uh receptively
and powerfully uh to the Advent of the
Sacred that I believe is taking place
right now and many people
do um uh in response to the meeting
crisis and one thing I wanted to keep
from I'm just giving a sort of a
overarching framing to get us going
again one other thing I really want to
keep on the front was something that
Chris said that I thought was Central
and Brilliant that the philosophical
Silk Road represents uh a distinct
alternative to obviously there's some
continuity but alternative to the
religion that's not a religion it is not
a top- down engineering project it is a
bottomup organic uh you project in which
a form of life in the very deep sense is
uh uh emerging as a way of trying to
properly um afford the Advent of the
acred and and for me that's uh The
crucial thing right now I've just
completed a course on Ultimate Reality
God and Beyond and uh the last book we
did was bracken's book on The Divine
Matrix and he does that he traces it
through um he starts does Western he
starts with Aristotle ends um in the
Kyoto school and um he makes an
argument uh for something like uh a
white hedian Christian ity but I say
that a more consistent reading of the
very text and his argument is he ends up
with something like I think which
nashida does which is a kind of Zen
neoplatonism which we talked about last
time where Zen neoplatonism is not not
not not the Advent of the Sacred it is
that which will hopefully properly
proportion our perspective taking and
our participatory identification so that
we can individually and collectively in
a mutually transformative way recognize
recognize the sacred in the new way in
which it is trying to articulate its own
logos so those are the things that I
really wanted to bring back to the
center of the discussion and I thought
one of the things that we could do this
time because you're the guest Andrew and
because I've been thinking about this
and teaching on it recently is maybe
pivot for a bit away from
Christianity and pivot more towards Zen
Buddhism Tantra and along the way
neoplatonism because of a book I'm
currently reading uh by somebody I've
currently met Gregory Shaw I met him at
the at Harvard for the conference on
platonism as a living tradition and he
has a new book out called helenic Tantra
or
or uh in which he is explicitly arguing
for this kind of deep dialogos between
Tantra and
neoplatonism um and of course many
people have already been doing that
between Zen and neoplatonism and that
that is increasing Este steam so I
thought that's where we could go and we
could play around in that of course we
will inevitably come back uh to
Christianity because it is the formative
mother religion of the West um but I
thought we could pivot that way and that
way uh you could be more properly as
guest Center Stage for a
while sure um even though one of my
concerns recently is is is kind of like
trying to articulate like a a tantric
Christianity or an esoteric Christianity
which is is close to Buddhist Tantra I
mean I'm I I in many ways um I'm sorry
you're pushing me in the I'm it's like
trying to say pink elephant and and you
can't stop thinking about it don't talk
about the G it's kind of like don't talk
about Christianity but
um so so yeah so I'm I'm curious what
you mean about the sac Advent of the
Sacred and that word Advent because I
find that to be a very beautiful word
and then you surprise me by saying
neoplatonism is not about the Advent uh
it sounds to me that that it's it's like
um that what you're proposing is a kind
of a uh you know like um like almost a
sut Bas before one could enter Tantra or
something like that like we need to
discuss um and I'm mixing all kinds of
different traditions and ideas here when
I'm using this language just because
it's the language that I'm most familiar
with but um but but I I associate Tantra
very close very closely with the
imaginal um and and it seems to me that
Zen and
neoplatonism aren't as much in the
imaginal uh as they're they're more in
the philosophical but but I may totally
wrong there maybe you could thank you
for watching this YouTube and podcast
series is by the Veri Foundation which
in addition to supporting my work also
offers courses practices workshops and
other projects dedicated to responding
to the meeting crisis if you would like
to support this work please consider
joining our patreon you can find the
link in the show notes so um I'll say
something and then I'll be quiet because
I'd like to make space for Chris um um I
think there's important ways in which uh
neoplatonism post amus is uh you know
centrally imaginal and this is the
Advent with I amus which Gregory Shaw
does a lot of his scholarship on of
what's called theurgia theurgia is the
imaginal spiritual practices of
neoplatonism and uh theurgia is going
through a academic Revival right now
there and there's growing recognition
for example of how much the comes
through procus into dionis the
areopagite and how it goes into liturgy
and we don't recognize the theurgia
because we've been practicing it in
liturgy and we for oh we oh where did
that actually come from did that just
drop from the sky liturgy isn't given to
us in the Bible well where did it come
from and and so that's an important
question and so there's uh the the
imaginal in Zen it's a different thing
um in Zen there's something analogous to
the imaginal which is the konic which
we've talked before about um and I want
to be very careful I was I was wasn't
saying that neoplatonism isn't the ADV I
was saying Zen neoplatonism i s I think
Zen neoplatonism is the attempt to
deliberately afford something with
proper and anagogic opponent processing
in which neoplatonism tends to emphasize
the tracing out of intelligibility to
what Nishida would call The Bash show
the ultimate sort
of grammar uh uh of
intelligibility um the place in which
sense making occurs and that's what
neoplatonism is doing whereas Zen is
more about the konic right uh like
questioning to the bottoming of
experience till you get to no thingness
and and so um I think the discussion
between the experience experience isn't
even quite the right word the transc of
realization of no thingness and the
trans objective understanding of the
ground of intelligibility are what need
to they have they're different
there're one is cataphatic a lot of
speaking that gets you into apophatic
and then in Zen there's this there's
centering on the apophatic which then
comes into uh the attempt to do Co
cataphatic processes uh to recover
people into the appat so they have this
complimentary relationship but the point
I want to make and then I'll shut up I'm
talking too much is that configuration
is meant to be a self-correcting
self-transcending set of Reflections and
practices and ways of egress into the
west and the East and what is mataku
what is between the East and the West
not because it is the destination but
because it is a way of orienting us so
that what what what has to of its very
nature be born from itself can be
properly apprehended and appreciated by
us um and that's why I use the word
Advent too it's like the Advent of
Christ in the Bible um and John the
Baptist is not the Messiah he is
announcing the Advent and he is
pronouncing the need for repentance for
a metanoia for a reorientation so people
can be properly prepared and receptive
for what is coming and that is how I
think of the philosophical Silk Road
yeah I was thinking you're you're sort
of saying clearing the ground so so yeah
way move yep yep and now I invite I want
to invite Chris explicitly into uh the
conversation well I I think the thing
that maybe the thing that's difficult to
understand is the distinction you're
making between content and form I think
what you're talking about is that
there's something formal about the
project of the Silk Road that what
actually is what you're actually talking
about doing is you're setting up a
series of conditions and the conditions
are diic conditions but you're setting a
stage you're not presuming to know
what's going to take place on the stage
you're not actually presuming to know
what kind of story will evolve on the
stage what kind of drama will take place
but what you're trying to do is you're
trying to set the stage yes to allow for
something to take place on it which is a
pretty critical distinction right it's
that like you know
Chris could I do one could I play on the
word stage meaning not only the stage
but like a stage of development too and
then I think what you're saying is even
more
resonant yeah yeah go go for it no no
that's all I wanted to say I just was
that it
okay yeah I mean I because what I hear
you trying to do and and it's a big
difference between talking about trying
to do something forcibly syncretic I'm
going to take these things and I'm going
to make something out of them I'm going
to put them together in a pasti I'm
going to collage things together and I'm
going to make something new in a Franken
San
fashion that's gonna be I know I know I
know I know I know but but that's I can
hear that being heard right I can hear
it being heard and um but that's not
what you're talking about right what
you're talking about is no I'm G to set
a stage I'm going to put a bunch of
different people I'm GNA give them voice
I'm G to put a bunch of instruments on
the stage I'm going to put a bunch of
set decorations on the stage I'm going
to I'm going to put a whole bunch of
things together that seem to have
something to say to one another that
have complimentary or synchronous
histories and Origins and have are
multivocal but have a certain assonance
in their vocality that suggests to me
that they might be able to hear and
listen and tune into one another like
instruments on a stage in a jazz concert
and I'm going to listen for how they
play with one another because in they're
playing with one another maybe they can
recall a memory of shared origin that
might not be obvious at first blush but
all I'm going to do is I'm going to set
the stage set the stage for them to play
together and their playing together is
not something I'm doing all I'm trying
to do is allow it to happen and that's a
that's a big difference that's a big
difference from trying to take a bunch
of things and stir them together in a
cauldron and um it's not a distinction
that's readily available to the
imagination because we think of these
syncretisms as either completely
historically accidental or the product
of some kind of design and you're not
really talking about either at one of
them are you no and and that and I by
the way let's put a pin in this I want
to keep that phrase going forward I mean
even Beyond this conversation I think
setting the stage and all the all the
work I've been doing on orientation
about standpoint and stance and setting
the stage I think that's just beautiful
the way I think of it that is completely
in alignment with uh your your beautiful
metaphor analogy perhaps is Aliso R's
notion of setting constraints selective
constraints and enabling constraints and
opponent processing of constraints so
that a self-organizing process can take
shape and take form and evolve and that
is exactly what I wish to be trying to
do with the philosophical Silk Road
which is different from the engineer
coming in and assembling some kind of
machine out of pre-existing pieces so
there yeah that that contrast is very
very
different yeah maybe I could yeah just
think sorry go ahead
Chris no Andrew go ahead oh I just I I
was because since John asked me to speak
a bit a bit about Buddhism I was
thinking about the analogy to what
you're saying in the Buddhist path um
and I was thinking about how you know
one of the biggest misunderstandings of
Buddhism is that it's about emptiness
uhhuh uh empty is is the clearing the
ground part that you're talking about
but in in Budd in tantric Buddhism we
talk about emptiness and
Luminosity you and the and the in the
nonduality of those things so the
expressiveness the colorfulness the the
the form you know is not negated uh it's
not so so so again so I'm thinking as
you're speaking about this apophatic
nothingness no thingness that dissolves
and then something arises you know like
and in Zen what they do is they say the
mountain is not a mountain then it's a
mountain again you know and and in
tantric Buddhism what they do as they
say it's it's vrio guini or it's this
this wild you know goddess with with
skulls you know around her neck and and
and a bowl of nectar and and a and a
butcher's knife so so so uh so it's very
interesting um that that that whole
thing so the idea of stage and the
theatrical of and the expressive
of life and the beauty of of everything
in its expressiveness is is very much I
don't think not not negated in um in
tantric Buddhism
um maybe that comes along with what
you're saying about about the stage and
all the world being a stage and and this
this whole whole theatrical thing which
also and then that made me think of nii
who want who was who said that he he
wanted really to sing philosophy he he
wanted to break out of you know his
wrote his first book was which was very
uh propositional and argued and well
reasoned and then the Le the rest of his
career here he wanted to sing the whole
thing into existence so those are some
of the things that I was thinking about
as you were
speaking I I think the point about um
that no thingness is not emptiness as
privation but um a dynamic you know
fully fractal flow of interpenetrating
reality like pure relationality an
abandonment of uh the idea of
substantial things entities as the
grounding of reality but you know the
impermanent uh interconnectedness of all
things is neither uh a complete
privation right you know this you know
this Andrew this is a central thing it's
neither annihilism and or is it
essentialism it's saying no no reality
reality is a flow in in a profound way
um and I think um especially given the
uh the a person whose work I'm trying to
make monumentally important James
filler's work on neoplatonism and heiger
and Pur relationality he argues that
this is exactly what comes out uh of the
neoplatonic tradition and is entered in
a rather unacknowledged way uh but
nevertheless enters into uh hiigaran
thought in a profound way probably
through echart um and it comes deeply
the thing is is you know heiger is
deeply influenced by eart and he's
deeply impressed by DT Suzuki this is
what comes out in the dialogue with the
Japanese stranger um and so again I keep
bumping into this and of course I'm not
an idiot I know it's because of my own
bias and and my projects and my
orientation good Lord I know enough
psychology but nevertheless it seems
like these synchronicities as I keep but
I do keep finding all of these places
where Zen and neoplatonism keep talking
to each other but what's interesting me
right now Andrew is the possibility of
sort of I don't know adding a third
dimension because of I think I can call
him Greg I know him we're he's going to
be on this my channel um his work his
work on theor on the soul on amus and
the new one on uh helenic tantric or
tantric helenismo it goes um about also
that Tantra has right
this this this really important
relationship uh with neoplatonism
he he he does something and this and so
now I want to ask you he he proposes
like that there's this interesting
relationship between Tantra and what you
see going on in feda around people like
sanura and that uh and that that Tantra
is like is like sort of the dialogical
dance partner uh with vidanta that the
West has kind of not heard properly and
we've sort of been you know from Richard
yeah is that okay please pick that up
that up absolutely I was thinking about
that today actually I was thinking about
how vendant and you know um you know
people like narata and this whole this
whole Indian tradition what the West
adopts from that is the more
intellectual aspect of it because it's
easier for the West to be
intellectual whereas whereas they
they've sort of forgotten the tantric
aspect of it they forgot forgotten that
nissar marz was a Nath Yogi um you know
before he started just you know teaching
us in a in a certain kind of just
straight straightforward devastating
kind kind of a way um but there is this
whole uh let's say um tradition and and
it's and it's the the whole Indian
tradition um is is very in this in terms
of the Silk Road I'm told that in in
Bengal you know where the where the the
Mah cities or the original tadric yogis
came from that there wasn't really so
much of an idea of Buddhism and Hinduism
and there was probably some neoplatonic
influences and there was you know all
kinds of going
Ona baa in the indog Greek Kingdom were
there yes yes and and so um so I guess
the tantre aspect is the elaborate
aspect or the colorful aspect or the you
know the the aspect uh be the complex
aspect because our minds are complex and
we can't handle the absolute you know in
a big punch so we need to go through
these even though even though tantric is
not necessarily separate from that from
the you know the Vendetta or the non-u
schools it it it it's playful and and
fluid and and expressive and and I think
this is the other reason why the West
can't really doesn't get it either turns
it into a bunch of sexy techniques or or
or you know whatever they do with it
right they they they want to literalize
everything um uh and uh they want to
understand it in a very lit L literal
way but but it but it's it's it's so
um it's so primordial fundamentally um
and and not easily captured in in
um you know I think I think in in in
philosophical formula like I think n
narana for instance became a tantric
teacher after he had deconstructed
everything so there was just nothing
left for him to do uh than that um at
least that's part of the the mythology
that that I've I've
heard well well this is stw's argument
and it sounds like and I'm glad I didn't
say it uh to you ahead of time because
now it just comes complete convergent uh
this is sort of the IAM and postam
critique of platinus that it's very
intellectual the neoplatonic but it
loses the imaginal it loses the imaginal
dance it loses the imag
uh transformation of Consciousness it
loses the uh imaginal poesis the Poetry
it loses all the Jazz um in an important
way yeah and I amck is is saying no no
we have to have we have to have rituals
that you know imaginal augmentation of
our experience that we get caught up in
because the the intellectual power on
its own is insufficient we need in fact
instead to cultivate a deeper kind of
receptivity so that for the Advent of
the one
uh we can't just sort of um Ascend um
through intellectual and philosophical
Endeavor and so that sounds almost
completely uh parallel to what you were
saying about tantra's relationship with
vidanta because because what my own
teacher told me once the you're you're
you know your the Luminous nature loves
elaboration the elaborations of beauty
you know and we lose that when we try to
make everything very technical and
propositional and Phil philosophical I
often often find it's um and and again
this is where I I this is where there's
not many Buddhist people that have that
much openness to Christianity I'm one of
them because I I think the imaginal is
deep in the Christian uh tradition in
the same sense that it is in in in
Tantra um and that that is that is
almost it's it's the missing aspect the
in the west Eastern practice is missing
Tantra and in in the West Western
practices also you know allergic to that
because because uh you know it's like I
was listening to your conversation with
with with Brendan who is you know a
lovely person with all kinds of Wonder
wonderful ideas and there seems but
there seems to be this need to try to
make everything
comprehensible understandable to the r
to the rational mind which obviously has
a has has a necessity and a good
goodness to it but then there's this
other side which which which you have to
take a leap into the dangerous realm and
and you know lose that am I making sense
here I'm I on I rambling no no you're
making great sense Andrew I'm just
pausing because I want I want Chris to
speak yeah well I I yeah you you're you
are making a lot of sense and I actually
wanted to just sort of stay on this
Trail for a second Andrew I was going to
ask you if you're comfortable um I was
going to ask you maybe to situate some
of what you're describing in a little
bit of biography um because I'm the idea
like the myth and motif of the Westerner
who's drawn to the east the person who
grows up within the Matrix of a
Christian tradition who finds himself
called to Buddhism for example or to
vidanta uh or to the Luminosity of
shunyata that you've described there's
like a there's a love to there's a drawn
there is a being drawn toward beauty
that I hear in what you're describing
there's almost a kind of aesthetic
appreciation I don't mean that in a
pejorative sense
that I'm heing and there's a kind
ofinity of temper and
a correction for something that you
found absent in your native tradition
that beckoned in a foreign tradition
that now you find yourself more at home
in I don't know if I've heard that right
that's
great and if I have I just wondered if
you could talk a little bit more about
what it was even if you can just
approximate it even if you don't have
the words for it what was it in the
earliest instances you can remember that
beckoned to you about the East um okay
yeah well you know there was there was a
couple of things I I was reading a book
about by um Eric from and he was talking
about meditation and he was describing
about how to make your mind blank and
and I tried to do that and and I
couldn't um I realized it was rather
difficult to try to make your mind blank
and this is very I was very young and
naive at this point and then the other
thing was I read a book called Zen
beginner M when I was a a student
University and uh somehow that book just
for weeks and months I I was I was every
word of that book was resonating in my
mind and in my body and I don't know why
and then shortly after I met a a zen
teacher at
McGill um and I started practicing uh
you know zazen um and it was just such
an existential relief um I wouldn't say
I understood it but it was such just
existential relief to sit in silence you
know in in a and uh face a wall and and
and watch my breath uh I it was just so
beautiful to me that that that that all
of practices could be reduced to that I
I couldn't think of anything more
beautiful at the time um but but then I
I did it for a while I went on a bunch
of Retreats and and I found that I was
sitting there doing nothing and my mind
was just running around around and
around and around and around and um you
know I Zen monks go and they live in
monasteries and they they they spend
one-third of their lives in zaz and you
know working on Co and and I guess I
didn't really want to do that um I guess
I had you know desires and um things
like that and and so I met a bunch of
people from from a you know Mor tantric
School Chum trumpus school and and who
were also going to to migil the time and
and started reading jum tra's books
started reading books by L chimpa and
started exploring the whole you know um
uh Tibetan Buddhist world and during
that time in the 90s I I met I I I met
like three or four maybe five or six
people who are very saintly you know
people had just come from Tibet and they
had a saintly quality to them um I I
haven't I don't know if they're around
anymore but for some reason at that time
in in in the 90s there were there were
there there were a few of them and I was
lucky enough to meet them and um um I
remember uh I was sitting in the U Mill
library
reading a book by chug tro called the
Tibetan Book of the Dead Or was
introduction to the Tibetan Book of the
Dead And my mind went blank went black
it was like and I realized that I had
this sense that everything that I knew
before was sort of poultry compared to
what this was
um it was it was and and I I lost my
sort of trust in in in my professors in
the world and in whatever Direction I
was going on I you know I fell out of
all that and I kind of wandered around
for a few years I lived in a monastery
for for in Northern Nova Scotia for a
year few years I I played guitar I was a
you know a hippie vagamon
meditator um for for a long time um and
uh there's something else I I wanted
wanted wanted to say yeah and I began to
read also about Hindu tatra about just
Maharaj became kind of obsessed with
with Vidant for a while while as
well and
um and then I Then I then I met Trum
Capa who was a Westerner who understood
the the the Eastern the eastern and the
Western traditions and that that was the
best thing I I I found because I didn't
want to become a quote unquote Tibetan
Buddhist I didn't want to become
Japanese I I I wanted to I wanted to I
wanted to become Western you know I
wanted I wanted to find I wanted to find
tarri in in Western um spirituality
because I didn't see why it had to be
Eastern
particularly uh so um I guess that's
that's an
overview you know in a lot of mistakes
and and uh um wild experiences in
between could can you say a little bit
more I I mean I just finished uh last
week I was did Alber Kimu the plague and
there's a character in there taru one of
the two main characters is taru and Ryu
and Ryu represents stoicism and taru is
sort of the uh the the secular
approximation of St Augustine and
Christian neoplatonist because Camu is
actually a Christian neoplatonist that
many people don't realize that but um
that's another thing and take the course
but anyways um uh but tus says you know
I want to know how to be a saint without
God that's the whole problem I'm up
against these days and he's on this
quest for saintliness and what it is
what it is to be a saint and he's trying
to he's trying to he's trying to drop
down to a really phenomenological level
he you know he doesn't want to he's not
he's not going to buy into any
supernaturalistic metaphysical
explanations of St he's really on a
quest and and
so and I I strongly identify uh with
Teru and when you said that that part of
me sort of came alive it's like you met
some saintly people I think I've met a a
person that I would regard as a sage
I've met a couple people who have been
designated as
enlightened I don't know I've met
anybody who's saintly I've met some very
good people um could you say more about
that I mean just unpack that Andrew that
it seems like that's a very
that's a very important thing to say and
it obviously was pivotal for
you yeah good question I had that
question too well um you know I I met a
nun who was you know in this little in
it was in Leonard Cohen's old house she
was a Zen nun
and just her demeanor you know not not
her intellect just the purity of her
demeanor in every
moment was uh was something that was
almost
devastating just to be around her that
was probably the first teacher I met who
was like that and then I met this guy
this wild Tibetan Yogi who who was named
uh Kempo suum gatsu and he was always
singing and
dancing you know uh and and and he would
he would he was like he was a living
Socrates for sure even so what he would
do is he would he would give a he would
he would I was at this retreat with him
and he'd wake up in the morning with
this beaming smile and just full of just
something and then he would sort of
trundle down the stairs with his
eyeballs going in every direction and uh
he'd start speaking in tibetan and he
had this very good translator next to
him uh and uh he would be singing all
the time and the translator would be you
know uh translating his discourses and
one time he came up to me and he he said
how are you and he looked at me and I
was drinking a coffee and I I I was a
little bit hung over and I said I'm a
little bit hung over R and he said uh he
said drink your coffee with a mind of
luminous emptiness and then he started
to go off on the discourse about you
know just like narana and it went on and
on and on and and his his translator
would translate next to him and then
people would gather and and they would
be you know dancing and singing and and
how does that happen I mean it was uh it
was um you know a bit like you know the
story of Krishna who who who who sings
and all the gopies come and follow them
and you know that was that was more of
the tantric let's say
transmission um meeting somebody
somebody somebody like that so so what
the first sound very sort of and since
you're familiar with nii the first
sounds very appolloni like her demeanor
is very pure and there's a like there's
this you know Gathering to presence and
then the other is dionan and there's
this opening up and you know uh breaking
of the frame and um and and and and
being drawn towards the
horizon
so and you know and maybe we'll have to
talk about this because this next
question is really hard but what's the
through line between those what's
saintliness well well um there's an
intense Joy it's it's not you know some
morbid margom even the the first person
I I was speaking of I I describe her
demeanor in this way but she she was she
was very capable of telling a jty joke
and had a wonderful Z sense of humor
right um it wasn't it wasn't a stiff
kind of no discipline it was Zen you
know she was you know a Zen nun so so
there was there was a lot of discipline
and practice um um and and the other
teacher was was had a had a completely
different demeanor but yes I think there
is a through line
between those those two people and and I
guess it's just type of of personality
and and I guess the the Silk Road would
be valuable for you know would would
have teachers of all
different types because I don't think
there's a type especially with
saintliness I don't think satlin can be
defined as a as any particular type I
think it could be practically you know
anything from from uh you know you know
my own teacher who you might think was
was a was a you know a angel or
something because he he doesn't come off
as being spiritual at all in any any any
way and you never know it and you might
think it was a a TR supporter but but
you know I think there's every kind of
type and and I think it's it's not
necessarily a visible I think you get
that when you meet the person and they
give you a transmission of who who they
are so so yeah yeah yeah I don't I I
don't believe there's a an Aristotelian
Essence that's not what I'm looking for
that's why I use the word through line
and and so let's make it more
phenomenological like was there like was
it was it that in their presence you
experienced
reverence like what was it uh like right
it wasn't like just affection because I
assume you have lots of affection for
lots of people that you don't regard as
Saints right and it's not just
admiration I I know you admire a lot of
people
um and so I'm not asking you to Define
find their Essence I'm trying to ask
what was common in your response to them
that made you say I'm experiencing a
saint um I'm gonna I'm gonna attack one
question onto that but just consider it
to be part of the same question which is
how much of it had to do with what was
said and how much of it had to do with
what was unsaid right right by that
person how much did there the language
that they used in conversation have
anything to do with this and what was
the relationship there too I'm also
really curious yeah that's cool that's
an interesting question because well I I
give you another uh story of another
teacher teacher I met um uh in Hamburg
who uh I met him and he was drinking you
know hin beer and he had ice cubes in
his beer and and he was smoking um you
know a cigar and and he was um you know
acting kind of weird he had funny hair
and his his clothes were all wrong and
you know um
all these people came because he he was
a he was a recognized tku from a
particular tradition they came to see
this guy because of his place in in
because he's recognized in a hierarchy
and all these people came looking for
this very spiritual experience in the
spiritual person and um and what
happened was he he he acted weird and
told dirty jokes and then the people who
were looking for a spiritual experience
you know they all left and the people
that fell in love with him like like
myself remained and there was just a few
people left and then he started to
actually
teach
um and he told he told me that he drinks
only in public he doesn't drink in his
private life but he he acts like a drunk
in public you know this is this is what
this is what they call in the tradition
Crazy Wisdom so so so I think he also
mention when I'm acting silly and my my
words are like you know make no sense at
all I'm probably teaching more than when
I'm giving you a you know um giving you
a a laying out the the the the the
standard you know Zin whatever teachings
in a more
um yeah in in a more standard kind of
way so so I would say that 99 I'd say
that you know 1% maybe of the
words and or even
less um when when the when when the real
transmission is coming it doesn't mean
that the words are not important or or
that you know they're perhaps they're
important because we need them we need
to work through these things in our
minds so so you're using a phrase here
that's come back multiple times for your
way of articulating the
encounter uh of the saint which is
transmission and I I take it you're
using it in a Zen sense um that there
and so is that is that to your mind mind
um how you go oh this is a saint because
you get a profound sense of transmission
coming from the person that there is a a
disclosure of a a way uh into a a a you
know into deeper understanding deeper
realization yes I me they call it
traditionally mindt mind uh transmission
yeah so so that is the traditional term
and that that is what
what what happens
um so is that the sense of it that
because there's very little words yet
there is so much transmitted that the
source must be a saint is it that kind
of thing because why I'm worried about
this sorry is is that because in the
west sainthood has degenerated into the
moral
Exemplar yeah right the moral the moral
Exemplar and I know many people who I
would consider moral exemplars and I
wouldn't I they don't strike me as the
kind of beings we are talking about
right now and I think there are people
that like the Crazy Wisdom people like
you're saying they don't really seem
like moral exemplars they're doing
something else they're not immoral in in
any you know vicious sense but they're
they're they're they're doing something
else and that's what I'm trying to get
at I'm trying to get at like there's
this sense of the mostly nonverbal
transmission that is transformative in
some deep
way there there also just sounds like
there's something implicitly aporetic
about the deportment of the people that
does
not conform to the expected patterns of
how people show up one of the
characteristics of saints
canonically is that they are in some
sense not of this world yeah in the way
that most are of this world take that
phrase lightly but there's an atopy
there's a a sense in which they run
counter to the current of expectation of
prediction we can't place them we can't
model them the way that we model and
predict and place people there's
something defy that defies our capacity
to gain a purchase on them something
Untamed yeah
well there you go sorry I interrupted
but John was talking about asan same
thing at the same time the aan example
oh you you said that too yes because I
think I was at that what I was listening
you to your talk that's a very good
description of of crazy crazy wisdom and
the buddh is almost often you know the
analogy is is the lion
right yeah so there's a proposal that's
I want to make U and it's meant to not
in any way be a seeking of
closure most of the stuff that's not
categorically intelligible most of the
stuff that's a tipos is just weird or
useless or bizarre like most of the
dreams we have at night and we get up
and they say that doesn't fit this and
therefore that's not real but people
have experiences that are not like this
and yet they go that's really real
doesn't fit into all the normal
categories but it's really real and it
calls all of this into question they do
exactly the reversal and I'm thinking
that that's what the saint is the saint
is the person that's non-categorical but
calls the categorical world into
question rather than being easily
rejected because they don't fit into the
categories is it something like
that absolutely um you know and um that
could be very you know the stories I'm
telling are stories they're anecdotes in
a sense but it could be something very
subtle you know uh uh people are very
attracted to Crazy Wisdom as some you
know wildness that that that is cool or
something but it could could be
something very very subtle that you
would never even notice like it could be
something that is some some very subtle
change that that a person's presence
could have um I was talking to somebody
who was saying that there was a time
when there was a lot of very charismatic
teachers they had tons of Charisma
because that was what was appropriate in
that
particular moment and the time we're at
now maybe the time between worlds the
teachers aren't so charismatic
necessarily because we we don't maybe
need Charisma we need something more
subtle or more um you know I'm wondering
about that and if the charismatic
teachers you know that I've met they're
not going to be in public they're not
going to be easily discovered they're
they're not you know you won't be able
to find them you know in a way they have
to find you um that's often the story as
the teacher finds you
but the
the the other thing I don't know how
this relates back but the other thing
the other
quality to to go along with the
proposition this seems now to be a DI
this now seems to be a dialogos about
sainthood which is very interesting how
did we get here um but the other thing
is that there's a sense of concealed
order but that is nevertheless
indecipherable because someone who
behaves in ways that aren't that can't
be modeled or mapped easily it's it's
not as though the movements of such a
person are random and absurd if they
appear absurd it is because the
absurdity is our a is the aspect of
incomprehensibility that conceals a
hidden Unity that conceals a hidden
order so the person who appears in the
aspect of the saint that has a numinous
crackle at the outer edges of their
Persona is concealing something not I
don't mean deceptive
but that there is actually a rhyme and
reason to their movements it's just that
the rhyme and reason to their movements
is not available to our perceptions and
models the way that most peoples are and
I think that that is another
feature in the mix here which is that
it's not as though the person who is not
of this world is
simply chaotic yeah it's that they might
appear to be chaotic because the frame
in which we are attempting to capture
them cannot accommodate the fullness of
what they are and so there is a there is
a dissonance between our comprehension
and whatever it is that they
manifest um that that that seems to be
somehow present here I just wanted to
name that see what you guys make of it I
like that it's kind of a you know an
intimate INT in
intimation of something that is just
like it's awe something that's just
beyond your scope
but you have a sense that if you were to
open yourself up to the mystery as
opposed to the the the carony right that
there's actually a through line that
there's something that's followable um
to which you can be disciplined but you
don't know what it is yet but yet you
have that sense of depth um uh am I
picking up on it correctly that there
there there's yeah which is why you have
the imitation without comprehension yes
yeah right that comes with that with the
tradition of sainthood which is you you
you follow in the way without actually
understanding what it is that you're
following because you need the imitation
you need to actually if you need to
affect the pattern in order for the
pattern to become comprehensible or
believable because it is yeah
Beyond these great the great Masters are
Saints are not Idiot seant um they're
not
dysfunctional they're not schizophrenic
you know that but they might appear to
be so sometimes that's it's very
interesting but they there I think I
think that they have fallen into a
higher order uh in this and often I've
noticed that that maybe they're even
more functional than than the rest of us
like they're more worldly they're more
capable of being in the world and um
than than we are in some sense are more
capable of just um you
know you know because I think I think we
you know most human beings live about
10% of their their potential and and and
the great Saints and Masters are living
one 100% of their attent potential or
maybe potential is in the right World
maybe their Divinity you know if if I
can use that these these crazy religious
Words which which I like to use and
provoke people with but but I think that
they're falling into you know other
other other Divinity that's a
possibility that is a potential and a
possibility which we intimate but uh and
we fall short of but but when we notice
that that the the saint is the person
that that shows you that potential and
that possibility and that that of of of
of fullness and and completeness and and
utter utter you know um affection and
love and and wisdom you know
happening on on a on a level that you
know is is really is beyond what most
human beings can can imagine
you know I'm being very provocative here
but no no that's good this what what we
want um so I'm getting a
sense like I've been making the proposal
that um you know building off a pler and
EST like cap me and other people that
and which comes out of the neoplatonic
tradition that we we we we find
something real when we find that it's an
inexhaustible source of intelligibility
unlike the dream object you know you you
can't you can sort of of learn
everything there is about it the real
thing is commentator explosive um and
then the sacred object is the sacred the
sacred entity used as neutral as I can
use that word is one in which um that is
that is afforded to us through
reciprocal opening there's something
about it that opens us up and then it
opens up responsively and then what I'm
hearing you both say is like that what
we get in the Saint is somebody who
somehow transmits that to us and we
suddenly get opened up and they open up
as we open up and we get a sense of a
trajectory of a depth of an order that
exceeds our grasp but will never
actually horrify us um and and things
like that and well it will horrify us I
think it will horrify us it well maybe
we'll using the word in two different
ways I mean horrify in the sense of
losing our grip on uh like becoming
insane um I think it will horrify us
perhaps in the sense of the numinous but
it I I I meant more in like like you
find yourself in the shining or
something like that um okay right but
there is a potential in Tantra for going
insane um and I think that's when some
that's when people try to imitate that
kind of behavior um emulate that um and
it doesn't come from from wisdom it it
comes from you know the darker aspects
of the ego um you know we have a there's
a word in Buddhism for called um what it
is it's sort of the ego monster it's
called rudra
and so one one could one could be one
could develop a Similac of of that and
of course it's dangerous because maybe
people meet people who are not really
that and they and they're they're
seduced by by by by a certain kind of uh
behavior and and and so the whole game
is very very very very very dangerous um
and it requires I think a lot of
preparation a lot of clearing the ground
a lot of real ethics real serious ethics
not not um um just you know hippie
experiment you know yeah no no I I I
that's what I was trying to get at I was
trying to get at that there's a there's
a musicality to it it it uh yeah Chris I
I uh I get what you're saying there
could be an element but I'll I'll use
the term numinous for what I think you
want to put your finger on there right
um and so but and so the saint would
strike us as really real
because you know when you have that
moment of intimacy with the Beloved and
you get that sense of the depth the
inexhaustible depth in them and then
they become really real to you um and
you know and you know that's the
velvetine rabbit and it's also aan um
and we we have a lot of uh mythological
tropes around this and I'm wondering um
this is allowing me to form a question
Andrew did you experience something like
and I don't mean I'm not excluding but
I'm not also restricting it to AOS but
did you experience something like that
initial impulse that that comes to
fruition and love when you met these
saintly people did you feel yeah yeah
that's what I wanted to know well I
think it is a love relationship uh you
know you know I kind of almost see that
between you two guys uh you know it's
it's older and younger um there's
there's there's there's a love
relationship you know we we we limit
love to to sort of you know romantic uh
you know relationships with the opposite
opposite opposite sex but you could love
a man or or
Elder you know so so so deeply that that
that um it's almost like that trumps
that that's that's the primary love
relationship and it it's reflected in
all of your other other other
relationship that that that is the
disciple you know Guru
relationship it's it's it's a profound
relationship of of of love and and sort
of um
gratitude and and I and I think a lot of
the problem people have today is they
try to do it all themselves um so they
don't you know allow from that that
trans Elder trans trans transmission um
uh you know we we use the word guru and
it's become an ugly word uh in the west
but but um and are we we we want to you
know love love Jesus or something but
Jesus isn't here right now you know
Jesus is he is in some way but but but
but it's the person in front of you who
is who is who is the um who who embodies
that who who is more important than
Jesus or or the Buddha so to
speak yeah and and that figure shows up
I mean that figure shows up in the hands
of bonafide Christians I mean when one
thinks of the brothers karamazov and
dovi and you have the one brother that
who's clearly a saint um or the idiot
who's a saintly figure perhaps a Christ
figure
um yeah I I that well that um but you
put your you put your finger on a point
which is and you know Chris and I have
used the term of Guru fication part of
that um the way the word guru has become
a pejorative term
um because there's been so much abuse
right and that's problem yeah that's the
problem and the problem with that is you
see and uh and soon as we get and again
this is Death in Venice as soon as you
open yourself up to these Powers the the
potential for also right uh being
overwhelmed and and being diverted into
a self-destructive kind of decadence
which is what the story is about is also
profound uh so what well one thing you
know you know you mentioned the idiot
and I love that book um but I but I
think the Christ figure what was his
name um Prince Michigan yeah again he
he's an idiot seant in a way whereas
whereas the the elder or the you know
the the master in the East uh is not an
idiot savant
he's wise to the ways of the of the
world and so you can respect him on that
level um uh and uh uh yeah I think we
fall too easily for the the the um the
idiot ID idiots s uh in the
west yeah that's a good point I like
that that's a very good distinction
that's a very fine distinction do you
think um do you think the bodh ATA is
something strongly analogous to the
Saint yeah sure of course I think it's
the you know it's just another word for
for the same thing again and you know
probably in the East it's it's a word
that is abused just like the word yeah
are abused but I remember pem and Chan
talking about reading about these Saints
and there were and how they you know she
didn't feel that that she could connect
to them because they were all so holy
and they were all Martyrs and they were
you know whereas the some of the Eastern
saints were were magicians and you know
really bad people who who changed or
criminals and yeah you know or who who
lived with with prostitutes and um you
know like more like Jesus but but um but
I think I think I I think the there's a
problem with the sort of false Holiness
um there there has to be a rug Earthly
quality to to to to the sage that makes
him profoundly
trustworthy not not not not NE other
otherworldly you know that's why
Augustine holds such a prominent place
for me uh as a model of a saint because
exactly that there's no way you look at
Augustine and get the idiot Sant you
know pure Holiness like this guy is
deeply deeply capable of
self-destructive behavior and he's
honest about it and he wrestles with it
I I have my criticisms of him uh but
yeah I I agree with you about that I I'm
I'm very and I think that's one of the
ways in which I try to distinguish
between the guru in the negative sense
of the word and the guru in the saintly
sense of the word I think the saint is
somebody who is who is willing to um
show their
sin and is and and is willing to be open
to self-correction in a profound way uh
whereas the guru in the pejorative sense
is trying to present a pristine product
uh that is beyond question in order to
Marshal an authority that is always
Beyond
question yeah yeah I mean the real thing
for me you're you're struck by the
intense humanness um yeah not not by
otherworldliness and also it's it's it's
somebody who is you know going to go to
the restaurant and you know tip the
waitress not not somebody who's sitting
up on a throne you know somebody who's
very very very very human um and and
devastatingly human like like somebody
that goes down the mountain not up the
mountain you know in the sense somebody
comes comes down to to be with with the
suffering of of other others you know
and is almost like
um that's almost unbearable for that
person you know
um somebody you know he I spoke to a
teacher who said that just Enlightenment
is unbearable because you're open to all
the suffering of the world it's it's an
unbearable
um state state to to be in no matter how
um full it is so it there is a sense
that being here is unbearable on some
level and and the more we can bear the
unbearable maybe that's a good
definition of a saint ah I like this a
person and bearing bearing it for us is
that what you're also implying I take
it yeah bearing it bearing it bearing it
for for just um you know not
in
uh not in a top down sense I think
there's a with not just a for yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah good good good
bearing it with us but they're doing
something nevertheless that is
demonstrative that is exemplary because
they have a porousness they're they're
open to the unbearable in a way that we
might be closed off to and yet they're
making that uh potentially bearable
bias is something like that yeah I mean
the T yogis in Tibet let eat poison you
know and that's a metaphor for the fact
that they're they're eating the poison
of the compassion of taking on the
poison of others they're ingesting the
poison there's story about yogis who who
drink Mercury and you know they're
drinking our own deathliness sort to
speak that's you know kind of a cool
analogy I like and that's why poison is
a very
important uh thing in in Tantra is is is
is is the is taking some of the poison
and and taking on the poison rather than
being removed um
uh um a principle of
non-rejection well well it's also uh uh
important in the socratic platonic
neoplatonic tradition the word for
poison is pharmacon where we also get
medicine from and Pharmacy so the the
the the wise person is not the person
who gives us the nectar of the Gods
they're the person who can use the
poison in the way to heal us rather than
to kill us
to transform it into the nectar of the
god so to speak right yeah at least in
its at least in its actions yeah you
know I'm a r I'm okay with this kind of
corny um romantic language because I the
Tantra has a sort of you know outrageous
romantic quality to it it's kind of
absurd Romanticism on some level it's
very Baroque so so you have to kind of
like that um um I think people I think I
think
I think some people of sort of refined
intelligence you know have have a hard
time with with with it's not does so
appealing
um taking on this kind of outrageous
Romanticism you know because you you
criticized atticism in the past and I i'
I've thought about that and I thought
it's it's a it's a valid criticism but
what's what what but there's still still
we still have this romantic
in nature and what do we do with
it yeah I'm gonna I'm going to turn
things over to Chris for a sec but I
like I think the romantics rediscovered
the imaginal but I think they they
severed it from the logos U because of
what had happened to the logos in the
hands of the Enlightenment um and I I
think what you what you can see in the
neoplatonic tradition is the imaginal is
remains bound up as it should be as it
should be love and logos are both maxu
they're both in between they're both
structive they both are at home and and
they belong together in the imaginal and
so my criticism I I now I'm now I hope
more careful I now say decadent
Romanticism I think the original insight
into the the Revelation the recovery in
tolken sense of the imaginal was
something to which for which we should
be grateful for the romantics but I
think that's that longer term severence
uh from logos which to be fair to them
was due to the fact that logos had been
reduced to
logic but that's the problem so I see it
in a much
more um uh Dynamic way uh which of
course is my want um but I'm gonna stop
because I wantan to Chris has been
holding uh back and I want to hear what
he has to say we need to hear more from
Chris don't we yes
yeah no we don't no we don't um uh well
maybe there the moments ped for it I I
think I was just sitting with this idea
that um I mean canonically you know we
disambiguate what we mean by sainthood
and place it in its corresponding
tradition within that tradition the
lives of the
Saints some more evidently than others
cleave very closely to the sources of
human decrepitude right like necessarily
so that's not an accidental feature of
the life of a saint that's an essential
feature of the life of a saint is that
they make direct conscious
contact with the Bedrock of sin and
finitude and all that makes
Humanity fallen and
exhausted and the and the idea
of manifesting an otherworldly
countenance and wisdom that is aaric to
the naked eye and making contact with
that bottom of decrepitude or
dialectical
features of the same countenance right
so you like there's something if there's
something essential about that in the
story that it's not just that you know
this this idea of the saint as the the
cleanly Tidy holy moral morally
beneficent creature is I think somewhat
anachronistic I just don't I just don't
think that's that's what we mean or it's
if we're talking about something
different we're not talking about Saints
if that's what we're talking about even
though we've retroactively made them
into that the the the the the character
of the saint is its proximity to the
Divine and the Divine is numinous and
horrific in addition to whatever else it
is and so the takes and funny and
humorous of course and ironic and there
Abs full humor I I want to add that to
the maybe that's what the East adds to
the the the story because that's been
kind of brushed under the roof because I
don't believe that
one
extreme intense sense of humor yeah I
want to push back on you Andrew I think
while the Bible seems to be lacking in
that the lives of the Saints are not
lacking in humor um that especially the
desert fathers there's a lot of humor
and irony in those texts there's a lot
going on but but what's what's striking
sorry I don't I mean like like that the
watered down Christianity of oh yes yes
now I understand I see of the mega
churches and and and whatnot and and and
you know this kind
of I know Essence saood is the same in
all the Traditions it has to be like
like like it's it's in the Sufi
tradition it's in esoteric Christianity
for sure it's in T it's in all of them
but it's it's
profoundly humorous it's it's that's so
important because humor humor is holding
two different perspectives that could
undermine each other but holding the
tonos and resolving it with play and
what I'm hearing is the saint is
exemplary for holding the tonos of
finitude and Transcendence yes they're
approximate to the Divine but they are
also always proximate to the human and
they are holding that together in an
exemplary way whereas we tend to and
this is what the literature like that
I'm doing through in the literature we
tend to lose the tonos and we Kine
between falling into our infinitude and
despair or expanding into our
Transcendence with huus but the saint is
exemplary right of holding that together
and keeping those two things that could
so readily degenerate into a clash of
absurdity or antagonism but keeping them
together and I believe the platonic
proposal that the holding of the tonos
of our finitude and our trans
Transcendence is the proper realization
of our Humanity of our humanness and so
the saint would therefore be an
exemplary human being in that fashion
this is now the way I'm going to update
the proposal I'm making about what the
saint
is yeah
that's so fully fully like vertical and
fully horizontal um yes us and also also
also fully connected did the Beyond it's
like and in that way in the Christian
tradition they would be Christlike in
the way that Christ was in the
Incarnation binding the human and the
Divine together um and and but of course
U that that doesn't have to be a feature
because there's other ways of
understanding we talked about this last
time the inter relationship the
interpenetration of the finite and the
Transcendent um um and it's humor yeah
yeah and it's it brings up this question
again about the kamu quote right can one
be a saint without God and you know one
way of thinking about the role of humor
and its necessity and its relationship
to wisdom and numinosity
is the way I like sometimes like to
think of it as this you know the the
human being cannot hear the voice of God
directly but as it makes its way through
the principalities to the human ear the
sound that is most proximate to it is
laughter nice and so the saint can hear
the laughter the saint can hear the
laughter that's that's very interesting
because laughter sits on the border
between speech and non-speech and it's
and it's filled with the it's filled
with flow it's filled with uh Insight
it's filled with Des Des selfing you're
decentered when you're laughing um yeah
this that's very very good Chris that's
very very good I like that that really
captures it a lot we should move towards
wrapping this up this is our usual
amount of time for a voices with I was
just getting
started was just getting
started it's always just getting started
when it
finishes
start I I like the fact that the Silk
Road and I think this was
completely right in Germaine the Silk
Road became a dialogos about sainthood I
think there's a reason why that happened
and I I don't want and there's an
intuition and I'm not going to probe for
the intuition like I don't want it
explicated right now but I just want to
I want to acknowledge it there's a
connection there a deep one I think the
pilgrimage um you know on the Silk Road
is IM meshed with the saint um in some
way not that the pilgrims are Saints but
um they're typically following uh I
don't know what to call the
Milestones that have been cast by the
Saints uh along the way that that is
what a pilgrimage is by definition isn't
it following the path of the Saints so
that's exactly exactly what else would
it be uh we're walking in in their
footsteps um and and and
um what's the word I'm looking for not
it's not even pray it's supplicating
their their their um you know their
their wisdom in in our in our
Frailty and and and in our
misunderstanding and in
our um ignorance you know we we we need
that down download of of of
energy I mean mean the pilgrimage in so
far as it's a quest is something that
deeply reminds us of our finitude by
making us sore and exhausted and tired
and sick while also orienting us towards
the horizon of transcendence uh and so
yeah I I think we have to and we and
it's aspirational and the thing that
predi predicts successful aspiration are
reliable role models and I think the
Saints are appropriate I'm gonna thank
my dear friend Chris and give him a
chance to say any final word and then
Andrew as always we have the guest
you're both guests but you're uh this is
your first time I think on the channel
we give you the final final word um and
it can be whatever kind of word you want
you can be provocative uh you can be
summative you can be cumulative um
whatever but I'm going to turn it to
Chris first and then it to you Andrew
and I just want to right now my final
word other to say goodbye to everybody
is to
uh thank both of you very
deeply thank you this was fun as it
always is over to you
Andrew um yeah thank you
for um giving me a vocabulary and uh and
and the ongoing uh conversation and and
for being so present uh present in in my
life in in the reflections you know I'm
making and I I deeply uh appreciate you
guys and thanks for having me you know
talk about my own stuff stuff that was
that
was that I appreciate I appreciate that
and um and uh obviously uh to be
continued I
hope yes very much thank you my friends
