so I'm a computer scientist I guess um
but I mostly work on problems that look
like this um so this is intensive car
unation in the neurological Intensive
Care Unit in Columbia where my
collaborator runs this tries to treat
patients and has really complex uh life
has all these different sensors they're
not talking to each other um my interest
is trying to make sense of this kind of
data and see if we can find Cs and
models that maybe helping better treat
patients um I have no ability to
intervene we can't do randomize trials
um I have no ability to change what's
measured about the patients so life is
quite difficult um but on the other hand
humans are making decisions every day
and working this environments and so the
hope is to make this a little bit easier
um with
technology it's also been weird being
computer scientist sort of um working on
causality for about 15 years um there's
been es and flows in people's interest
in this and lots of people say things
along these lines that maybe for making
predictions we don't really care how
things work we just need to know that
they work work uh my favorite part about
this quote was it was written by a
former Google employee after Google flu
uh really failed spectacularly um and
was predicting cases of the flu really
well and then all of a sudden failed and
was predicting twice as many cases as
there were um so it seems like maybe
there's something else we need other
than just prenotion um and so the thing
I think we need is causality um so I've
devoted a lot of time to trying to get
cause relationships from this
observational data we of no hope of
exper experimenting can't change
anything about what's measured we have
different things measured for different
patients different things measured over
time there's huge amounts of confounding
wrote some books about that um and then
over the last five years um I've come to
believe that causality isn't enough we
need something more than that and I
think that something more is where
everyone here comes in uh because it's
an understanding of people and human
behavior which we're really missing in
our compation of cause models so I spent
five years um trying to analyze this
data that came from stroke patients um
the goal is to try to understand just
what's happening during recovery um we
had a lot of problems with missing data
that we work to solve after five years
we came up with this um so this is a
cosmal model this is not a Bas net
anything here that looks like a Bas net
is not a B net um just so you know so
don't be alarmed when you see cycles and
things there's also hidden time I'm not
showing you all these relationships they
could be positive they could be negative
they have different intensity they have
different time Windows um not showing
you any of that because I don't know how
to visualize it in a nice way um if you
have thoughts on that let me know um and
this is what we found so we're looking
at two different periods right after
stroke there was the first 96 hours in
the next period um where doctors thought
there might be this transition and these
are just the variables related to the
brain so this is not everything that was
measured um and what we're seeing here
is in general one there's more cause
relationships later on which was
interesting um maybe things are
reorganizing as the patients recover and
also the causes of brain swelling which
none of these variables are things
you're going to know that's fine TW at
the bottom relates to brain swelling uh
the cause of that changed over time
which is interesting because if the
causes of the thing the doctors care
about are changing maybe your
interventions also have to change over
time um so that was really exciting to
me but the whole model looked like this
um and after five years I was like you
have the ca a model I believe it this is
really cool and my very blunt
collaborator said this is an Unholy mess
um and he was not as excited as I was um
we spent about three hours going over
the model uh I was answering his
questions why is this thing not there
I'm like well it never changes and so
without any variation it can't find any
CA relationships um other things are
only measured in people who are
unconscious and so again lack of
variation some things are measured at
the wrong time scale and so you're only
seeing things um at equilibrium not the
problem we had um and so we went through
this process of like me trying to
explain to him why things he expected to
see weren't there why other things were
there eventually he kind of B into it um
but it wasn't the reaction I was looking
for I was expecting like I've solved all
of your problems and you're going to use
this to treat patients and like this is
amazing you know we're we're done here
we've solved strength
recovery but I don't think it was unique
to me or this diagram um you see these
kinds of things in a lot of places this
is really well-known diagram um created
to model obesity um it was intended to
help policy makers and since was created
this the for OBD map um it's been mostly
used to show wow OBD is really
complicated and I don't know what we can
do about it right so if you imagine
you're trying to figure out what's going
to be the effect of your policy right
which of these things can you change and
if you come up with a policy to change
one of them what are its effects going
to be right it's almost impossible to
look at that and figure that out um and
then once I started thinking about this
these kinds of diagrams are everywhere
uh these things that we think are
helpful or also just used to argue that
some things are hopeless uh this was
diagram about the Afghanistan war M
crystal said once we understand the
slide we'll be able to win the
war it also used uh with Obamacare so
this was the Republicans said basically
this is what's be between you and your
doctor right and so this is GNA be the
result of Obamacare this is a terrible
policy basically right because there's
gonna be this overwhelming complexity um
I was hoping to find a diagram showing
Tor Swift's effect on the local economy
couldn't find that so homework for
people um but there are tons of these
diag right because all these systems are
really really complicated and if we want
to find these accurate models of what's
Happening they're going to be
complicated I started to worry that you
know we haven't really tested is this
helping people make
decisions as a computer scientist um our
valuations look like this uh they all
vary a little bit but they're pretty
much similar in flavor do we find more
of the correct cause relationships and
we find fewer wrong ones right and our
value system is more is better right if
you find more of the correct
relationship ships obviously we've done
a better job our algorithm is better
than the other algorithm um and if we
find few wrong things right well that's
good we want to make few mistakes um but
it encodes this idea that one every
cause relationship is equal we're just
counting up the number that we find um
and that we want to find the maximum
number sometimes we also look at how
much data we need or runtime or things
like that but really our evaluation is
based on do we find more none of that
really has to do with how well people
can use CM models um so I thought well
computer scientists we don't know a lot
about people clearly based on some the
things we built uh but psychologists Doo
right and you all had a lot of very
positive news right children are great
finding CA of models that was really
nice um I collaborator with an mdphd who
actually does grain surgery is
not so had some concerns there um but
overall this was uplifting right the
people can finded CM models and use them
in a variety of situations right quite
reliably um but there's also a
disconnect these are generally much
simpler than the kinds of models I give
to my collaborator um and my
collaborator already has a lot of
hypotheses about what's going to happen
right he knows a lot about the brain he
knows a lot about physiology um in some
cases might be hard to change his mind
because he's had a lot of evidence about
some of these things um and so he's not
coming in with blank sleep right where
he's just trying to you know learn how
this new room Works he's coming in with
these ideas and trying to fit them
together with the cause so about five
years ago I started wondering can and
the kinds of models that we find with
machine learning and AI um help people
make choices in familiar situations so
um not this you know blank sleep robots
and Aliens but everyday choices like
what should we have for breakfast or
things like
that so I'll show you a series of
experiments they're all large online
studies um one was mechanical chk the
rest are all prolific studies um and
they look kind of like this and so this
is you know a familiar situation you
have a person here they have some con
straints they have a goal and they have
some options and the important thing is
their options aren't you know turn
variable a on or off um it's an actual
action you might take in the worlds and
so I might give you a diagram that tells
you about you know carbohydrates and fat
can work together to slow the rise of
blood sugar but you're at a break of
conference and have a few options of
food and have to decide which one to
right you're not intervening on you know
grams of carbohydrate and fat you're
deciding should I have that croissant or
not uh should I have some coffee but
going to be the effect of that right so
there're all these very specific actions
to take at this point I was still sort
of hopeful um and I thought this is kind
of like taking an open book exam uh we
gave some people no diagram some people
saw a CM model that looks like this and
some people saw the same information
text um so might be a difference how
information is presented um and that's
the gap of disillusionment um we did
this and after all this time spending my
life arguing we need calls and models
people didor with calls and models
and it was really fun giving a talk
about this to my funding agencies funded
all this
work we found the CA and models the
positive news is people are actually
pretty good they know what they should
do U with no information accuracy was
89% uh but it PL with the clausal models
and it didn't really matter if they were
text or diagrams um clausal information
seemed to hurt so this was quite
distressing uh we looked at lots of
different things you know are they
spending time with it the more
information we show people the more time
they spend on the problem they're not
ignoring it they're doing worse um you
looked at how they felt about their
decisions they're becoming less
confident so not only were they making
worse choices they're less confident
about them and the people who were
confident shouldn't have been um and
something changed when we started
looking at domains where some people had
experience and others didn't and there
we found a difference so people who had
some experience they were doing worse
people had no experience started to do
better um and all these people also did
control questions like with aliens
robots and did just fine and so it seems
to be something about having this prior
knowledge however we know that a lot of
what people know is wrong um we all have
lots of incorrect beliefs often about
health um but we don't necessarily know
that right so we thought maybe if we
help people realize there's a gap in
their knowledge we can come in with our
Cs and models and we can fill that Gap
so that next study trying to change what
people think they know make them more
receptive to the models see how that
goes um we tried two different things u
i this also work with Jessica Mar she's
in the back uh and maybe endorses things
I'm saying maybe
doesn't and we triy two different things
one subjective so lusum explanatory
depth people rate how much they know
about things like how type two diabetes
develops write out the whole causal
story of how people develop diabetes
reate their knowledge we saw the
expected drop in knowledge and we also
tried just giving them a quiz with and
without feedback and so there quizzes
about diabetes knowledge true false uh
people actually realize when they're
guessing and so they don't actually need
the feedback of this work which is
interesting so we did these two
different things to see if we do this
before we give you a diagram we maybe
realize you need the help U and use a
little bit better was not the case um
and so the best we had here was the
cause of model the um the interventions
to help you realize limits to knowledge
U inoculated you against the drop but
didn't make a CM model better than
nothing and so basically CM model no
information was same an accuracy
and without the intervention people had
worse results and it didn't really
matter which intervention it was the
results were the same um so for a long
time that was the most positive results
I have is C models are as good as
nothing which is really really
depressing uh again spending my whole
life learning C models and arguing why
they're really
important um and so I realized my mental
model of the cosmo model was like this
that you have this Gap in your knowledge
I'm coming in with my call a model I'm
filling the scap perfectly and you
should be really grateful and excited um
um and it's actually more like this that
I'm giving this call a model you are in
the situation where there are different
gaps in your knowledge and you really
don't know necessarily how to fit this
this cause model in with what else is
happening and so trying desperately to
get some positive results um we thought
well maybe what if we focus people's
attention right so we're giving you the
cause model and we think about how we
get health guidelines and other
guidelines they're often very generic
and meant for multiple situations and so
if you look at American Heart
Association or different Health um
organizations they give you guidance on
blood pressure weight management things
like that and you have to pick out which
parts of that are relevant for you right
they're not just telling you here's what
you specifically should do you're
getting a number of different options
and a number of different things and
have to figure out from that what's
important um and the same thing in our
call and models like the one I showed my
collaborator these are meant for
multiple situations right there are
things related to brain swelling brain
temperature blood pressure all of that
and he has to figure out which parts are
relevant in addition to figuring out
which interventions um can affect these
things so we adopted that really
complicated obesity diagram that's been
derided into something that's still
overwhelmingly complicated but not quite
as painful um and then developed a set
of questions where um there were
different uh interventions people could
do related to diet and we showed people
in the simple condition just the part of
the diagram that they need and so only
the clausal cths that were relevant for
the choice and didn't show anything else
um and compare that to this complicated
condition questions were very similar to
the other ones again with have a person
they have some constraints they have
some goals and they want to make one
specific lifestyle choice to manage
their weight here so this guy can just
give up say weight Stree can't do
anything about it um pass forward
through 2D commercials get some takeout
add vegetables and so
on so finally here we had some positive
results uh simple diagrams help
basically once we put blinders on people
you just the relevant information
suddenly CA the models were helping
people make better choices I felt better
about my choice to study CA the models
um and the node diagram and complex
diagram were basically the same um so
that was not so great the other
interesting thing was in the question I
showed on the previous slide um we gave
people a causal chain and in that
question we didn't give them just what
was needed we gave them what was needed
plus one extra node to see how that
would change their preferences and what
was interesting was Simplicity can also
push around people's preferences people
like to intervene on root nodes this is
well known and by making something seem
more like a rude that suddenly becomes a
much more popular answer uh which also
suggests there are some downsides when
you're simplifying your models because
you might make something seem more
prominent and like a more likely
intervention Target if it seems like a
root in your simplified model so we were
quite excited by this we again had
positive results finally after many
years um expanded to a lot of different
domains outside of health so we looked
at lifestyle choices
uh you know picking College voting uh
increasing voter turnout saving for
retirement health related things and all
these domains applied the same um thing
found the same results so that was
really exciting this replicated across
16 different topics in four different
domains um so same things seem to be
happening we also tested what happens if
we just highlight the relevant paths so
highlight them in Orange even though
people see the whole model had the same
effect so that was good you don't have
to just you know show people part of the
model you can show the whole model and
just focus people's attention question
was why is this happening um is it just
you know any extra information is it
about the amount of extra information um
so we tried adding just a couple extra
nodes and edges um see what would happen
call that simple plus and turns out uh
basically any amount of extra
information is
bad and people in that condition had the
same results as the complex diagram and
no information and so is anything
whatsoever that that was extraneous and
not relevant for the decision led to
worse choices
um one question you might have after
that is you might think I'm a person who
needs all the research or I like to
really beat up on stuff before I make a
choice I see all these results and think
well I would do better with complex
information right um in all the other
experiments we randomize people to the
conditions so here we tested what if you
let people choose um and they can make
different choices for each of the 16
J um and so they would see at the
beginning here's what it would look like
if you choose most complicated
information simplest information
different things for one question your
next question is GNA be about increasing
voter turnout how much information do
you want so people could could choose
and also they could see over time um how
much information what it would look like
um and change their
choices so in terms of what people pick
the most popular answer is the simplest
model which is good because that turns
out to be the best model
um but people do still pick no
information um or say that they want you
know a little bit extra information or
the complex diagram and once again we
find the same thing as the other
experiments the simplest diagram is the
most helpful one um and so that's that's
the best choice whereas for people who
think that they need the most complex
diagram uh turns out they're not right
um complex diagrams here and no
information were basically tied for last
uh so people who think that they don't
actually need any help and they know
everything or that they really need all
the details um didn't have the ability
to predict
that uh the other sort of interesting
thing we found was this was a much
larger experiment than the others we had
1,200 participants and so we could look
at demographic differences um and we
found significant differences in gender
also education unfortunately for
graduate students uh highest levels
education were not helpful for making
good decisions people with less less
education made better choices and
consistently with every information
level women made better choices um you
can see there's also distinct
differences in confidence levels across
these groups um unfortunately it didn't
imediate the effect but we measured
confidence at the end and it's possible
with a different measure of confidence
that might explain things because these
These are both really strongly
correlated
okay so going back to Lauren's talk this
morning we think of what computer
scientists find and how we evaluate what
we find all the causes are the same
right we're not thinking like is this a
cause that's modifiable is it's a weaker
cause a faster acting cause a stronger
cause right we're just treating them all
the same and assuming that more is
better um but maybe some of those would
be better for being able to modify
things right and thinking that we need
to prioritize what we show people we
probably should be evaluating them
differently and thinking about what
kinds of caus Are We finding and then
show people here's what you can actually
modify or act on right so if we model
type two diabetes uh genetics is a risk
factor but you also can't change it
right and so maybe showing people think
things that are not modifiable given the
effect of complexity is not super
helpful um but this is not currently how
we evaluate machine learning in AI um so
I'll just finish by saying I now my
current belief is we need causes for
Action um but definitely the most
complete model is not immediately useful
right there's some extra step we need
after we find the cause a model to make
it valuable for a person to make
decisions from uh and need to think
about new ways of evaluating AI machine
learning right just looking at Precision
recall is not enough there's something
else to figure out what makes a model
useful and how we can present them in
ways that are useful to people so say
thanks to all the collaborators and
funding
agencies great talk so what curious
about so in all these vignettes these
are like real world situations where
people presumably have their own
intuitive model how so this is the case
where there might be some sort of in
congruency between the model you're
showing me the model I think and what
you see is the result when trying to
bring this um so imagine like a new
situation where there's a totally
novel experience that has no real world
basis would you expect if you're you
providing all as to yeah yeah so great
question absolutely um in most of these
experiments we've done this I didn't
show the last one we had a control
condition with like an alien dance off
um and presumably you know people have
no experience with alien dance offs and
they do fine the results are totally
different
uh we've done other work trying to get
people's mental models um we done a lot
of work trying to figure out how do we
know for right and what does it mean to
like get people's accurate mental model
which is a hard question by itself um
we've also done thinkaloud studies where
people describe what they're doing when
they answer the questions so it's
qualitative data and they're you see
people are adding so much extra stuff in
that's not in there and they're like
well if she does this you know then
maybe she'll walk to work every day and
then like she'll get a dog and like all
this other stuff is going to happen and
so it's going to have this like Snowball
Effect and that'll me better but none of
that's in the model right um and that's
part of I think why it's so different
when the other condition like you can't
add in all this other stuff about you
know the blicket because it's it's not
like Rich environment that you can sort
of contribute to whereas this other
stuff you can think oh it's hard for me
to take medication or I don't like
medication people write a lot people are
overmedicated or it's hard to do two
things she should start small and do one
thing even though it's not optimal and
so they think about all this extra stuff
um it's really hard change models which
is the other thing is we've had people
draw the models before and after um one
hypothesis we had was maybe there were
people who were combining into one model
and they did better than people who kind
of maintain two models but it turned out
that basically everyone was trying to
combine into one model um weren't doing
it well and so maybe that's a place to
intervene is to help them build the
model or give them feedback on the model
I don't
know
so back to question
compel Compu science a lot talk about
generalization
say but not
necessarily generalization
TOs
and where the complex models seem to
fail most might be in
generalization
to it's I it's possible maybe
there's
motivation I was like well people don't
follow guidelines right so maybe if I
tell you the causal story like maybe
you'll you know believe that take it um
the on my to-do list is comparing if we
just give you you know a directive
versus giving you something possible if
there's a difference there but we
don't it might be there than a little
bit different like in a real world
situation like with your doctor and
there's no explanation at all for how
the medication works or what it's going
to do versus like some
these are
lower um so I've done a lot of
experiments that are not published here
because we thought that there'd be some
effect of like the model sort topology
that like density might be an effect or
number of nodes and edges might have
different effects it wasn't the case we
were in so many experiments and the only
thing that mattered was the number of
nodes U which was really
disappointing because there was just no
feature of like Cycles or I really
thought it surprised me a lot that
density had no
effect um no so they they were small
enough right that like the you know
could pull it in your memory it was they
were also sort of chosen in a way when
possible that they could rule out an
answer so we maybe add in one that said
like alcohol is bad for right and then
one of your options is like have a got
some wine before bed and so it should
kind of help you rule out a second
answer um I think it just gives you
opportunity to overthink right I see it
like when I give students exams right
that there's a question that I think is
so easy and I get so many questions
during the exam about the question
because they don't think it could
possibly be that
easy
yeah it's possible uh but it's also how
people get guidance right they get extra
information and so they are invited to
to one and then you actually the effect
on the othery to do and I that would
change I I do think the results might be
different if people could interact with
the caal models the problem is like then
thinking about giving Health guidance
nutrition guidance I it's not feasible
for people to always in trct with the
model when give them information at some
point you have to be able to provide
static information and so the hope is to
figure out how we can do
that hard have scen but I mean like in a
reality like a doctor's office where
they're giving you something it's like
coming track with my call model and we
can make some some predictions versus
like here some information about how
this medication might work or you know
how this might change your your odds of
survival
