I don't think there's been a video that
has ever been asked for so hard for me
to watch and so we're going to watch it
big box s by the way check it out big
boox we I have never been harassed so
much about watching this this video
which makes me think okay it's from Big
Box everyone's asking me to watch it it
probably mentions me that's that's
that's probably where this going I'm
hoping that I'm not going to get dunked
on but let's find out I I'm ready to get
F dude it's going to be Vim he's going
to dunk on Vim I already know what's
going to happen and then I'm going to be
sag okay all right okay software is
known for producing a lot of scams think
Nigerian prince Tai Lopez crypto nft AAA
gaming industry but I ain't talking
about all that I'm talking about the
lies sold to developers and it's a
pretty long list so buckle up clean code
see I knew it I knew it I knew it sock
mustaches look at that look at that
that's skill issue okay that is a skill
issue I can already tell it's about to
happen I can already feel it I knew I
came in I came in on the defensive here
because I knew I knew what I was getting
into this is a skill issue I'm sorry if
you you can't grow up monache you got
skill issues okay clean code you see the
way Charles Ponzi put the Ponzi and
Ponzi scheme Uncle Bob has put the be in
bakas clean code has gone through a
reputational Renaissance similar to
Ellen Jimmy and James Bros whole book is
a filler episode when you take the
energy of a junior engineer and combine
it with such riveting advice that's how
you get a PO request the size of
Epstein's list ain't nobody reviewing
that bro
I just give us the list just just just
do it just do it what's the why why not
why not man this is this is already it's
too much but uh it is true man I do I
I'm very curious what Uncle Bob has to
say of why four to six lines per
function like why put that arbitrary
limit on a function I just can't imagine
anything good comes out of that because
I have this I have a my my opposing
uh which I think HTM X has claimed the
best uh as far as like a term for it
which is locality of behavior the more
you have to jump from function to
function like the less it's the less
easy it is to hold in your head what's
happening right the equal thing happens
when you have a really long function
that does a lot of things it's really
hard to hold it all in your head but I
think it's significantly easier than 40
functions all in your head trying to
figure out what what those things happen
locality of behavior is is is is very
very very useful
and so I I just would rather air on
slightly longer functions that maybe it
does one and a half things as opposed to
four to six line functions is like
considered like a good a good range
anything beyond that is considered like
time to refactor now obviously that's
not a hard and fast rule but you know I
think you would like the philosophy of
software design I very would very well
could by the way for those that don't
know it's right here I think that
locality of behavior Carson gross the
primary feature for easy maintenance is
locality locality is the characteristics
of source code that enables a programmer
to understand that Source by looking at
only a small portion of it this is this
is good the behavior of the unit of code
should be as obvious as looking only at
the uh at that unit of code this is good
this is exactly what we're talking about
locality of behavior it's very very uh
it's very very different than uh clean
code clean code is the the polar
opposite of locality of behavior code
and I'm not saying locality of behavior
doesn't have its own own edges and and
issues it's certainly does and it can
certainly get out of hand easily barely
read my own code and that's Jamie
Oliver's recipe for a 3 a.m. Christmas
Eve production outage and off the back
of the last famous Manifesto Uncle Bob
decides to write his own on the topic of
Agile development now this is the
manifesto that deserved US military
intervention because it infested the
whole world from Brazil to India Orlando
to Ohio we're all super happy sitting in
another Sprint planning agile was a
9,000 IQ chess move by the Boomers to
get into Tech without coding but quite
honestly we're the plebs because we
listened to the Boomers and fell for the
next scam CS
degree there were so many shots fired
I'm not even sure what to do I'm not
even sure how to process all of this and
I've I've stopped at this Frame this is
the frame that we've decided to stop
at okay um that was just a massacre dude
that was just a massacre Brazil
mentioned potentially Brazil might have
been mentioned um
I'm going to say something and I think a
lot of people might be upset about it
agile in its
Manifesto is
great let me let me explain why let me
explain
why every
team themselves should de decide how
they commit and run their own little
units right that's like one of the most
basic forms of
agile I think that's great every Su
little team should have their ability to
make the decision for how they follow
their own
process what's the problem what's the
obvious problem of it all a sub team
isn't isn't an island onto themselves no
it's not management
well I mean you could call it management
but not like people management it's that
there's that that each team then needs
to also get in line with each other and
so what ends up happening everyone
discusses hey we need to come up with
some sort of everybody is in step to
make the same decisions across this
thing and so what ends up happening you
get the average of everyone's decision
okay I don't know if you know this but
here's the this is why group decisions
suck this is why you should have an
informed captain and you should never
have a group of people making decision
because on one side you have really
really bad decisions bad ones right here
right and then in the middle you have
just like just the place that makes
nobody happy right and when I say bad
decisions I mean someone else's opinion
at this point okay and maybe it's
actually not that bad it's kind of like
an inverse an inverse normal uh normal
curve and this is great Decisions by the
way these are my ideas okay these are
your ideas that I don't like these are
my ideas that I do like and this is the
middle ground which is actually the
worst place to be it is actually the bad
ideas and so what happens is that when
you get a group of people well we can't
go over here and you can't go over here
so you compromise right here you
compromise right in the middle and guess
what you've created the worst possible
solution and now we call this we've
codified this term today we've actually
created a word for this exact thing in
that word it's called scrum scrum is the
codification of agile inter interacting
among many teams it's just the worst
possible outcome ever and so what I
really mean by this is that agile truly
is communism it always fails and people
always blame that we did not do it
correctly all right I'm sorry this is
designed by committee it is all right it
has never been tried I get it it's never
been tried really there's no real
Scotsman you've never done agile
correctly JavaScript can work on a
server I've heard it okay I've heard it
a lot of times I'm also trying to
equally offend as many people as
possible and by the way I have a lot of
opinions on this one and so this one's
already triggering me so this is
actually I'm I'm I'm still a pro college
person but let me just give you my base
take before we go on I think that
computer science would do a lot better
if we dropped all of the core
requirements all the stupid stuff to
make you a well-rounded person when I
say stupid stuff I actually don't mean
it's stupid I think people should go to
school to become well-rounded but the
first initial courses in becoming a
well-rounded person are absolutely
worthless okay nobody cares about the
cop and weather system okay the fact
that I'm going to be like well Brazil is
a you know is a is a class a subb
tropical rainforest a cop and weather
system like people don't care no one
cares it's completely worthless why are
we doing this why are we doing this to
ourselves okay no one cares that
California has a Mediterranean uh
climate on part of it and that's what
makes it such a desirable place for
people to live I get it but nobody
actually cares okay that's not helpful
information doesn't make me more
well-rounded okay I can say the word cop
and weather system and it doesn't mean
anything okay I had to spend an I think
I spent a semester learning about dumb
geography things when I was a senior in
college because I did too much LSD as a
as a freshman in college and so I had to
make up a bunch of core classes and one
of them was geography it was worthless
it wasn't I didn't become a more
well-rounded person I didn't get to go
like read the great poets like imagine
if I had to take a class that was like
Reeds Wordsworth and and and Augustine
and Thomas aquinus and Coolidge like
that would have been a great experience
why didn't I get the reading of the the
poetries of the peoples instead I got
some stupid ass cop and weather system
so I I totally get it this is why
college is bad uh I would really yeah
Marcus raes i' i' totally down to do
that hot take uh master's degree is the
new Bachelors um doubt anyways I do
think it'd be really awesome if we had
something like a trade school for
programming and I don't mean a boot camp
see boot camps are fundamentally flawed
because Boot Camp's goal is to just make
you learn one thing and get you out as
quickly as possible and in a market that
was starving for uh need no I don't want
that I want something that's like a
2-year kind of traditionalized school
that's at a fast pace that that like
forces you to build a compiler that
forces you to do some operating systems
some database stuff like you actually do
real real part of it like a trade school
right I think a trade school would be
way way way way way better because I
don't think you need all of this I I
think college is a dying sport for a lot
of people and so CS degrees is how we
get a lot of that and so but boot camps
are pieces of  and largely leave a
lot of people disenfranchised and are
terrible there's like a tech school
somewhere in between right that I think
would be really really good anyways just
a thought that's what I think a lot of
colleges suck too yeah absolutely I the
thing the thing that makes College nice
is that they have something called abet
accrediting and what makes it really
nice is that with abet accrediting it
forces you to teach certain subjects so
even if the teacher sucks you have to go
off and Learn by yourself and read the
the book and become good at it right and
and and and at least you force yourself
to go see stuff right my favorite I
started off uh at Montana I was also at
Montana Montana State University best
one ever but I dropped out and
transferred to Colorado State they
wouldn't accept my dumb General
electives I refused to retake them and
God accepted upper level uh electives it
isn't about being well-rounded it's
about getting those tuition dollars well
at one point it was about being
well-rounded the whole point of getting
a a a a bachelor's degree was for you to
be able to Leisure well for you to be
able to study and read the poets and do
all that so the original college degrees
that's why it had so much emphasis on
writing and uh and reading the poetry
and all that kind of stuff right anyways
all right now that we've said all that
and now you know exactly where I stand
it's time for me to become emotionally
damaged now although degrees are a
society level scam leave it to
programmers to over engineer education
like in any other occupation you have
simple linear career paths you want to
become a plumber go to trade school you
want to become an accountant get a
degree but the path to software
engineering is like a fidget spinner
there's like three options and none of
them work anymore and it's also out of
style despite your education all
developers can agree leak code is a me
okay can can we got we got to quit
having Dev rails convince we this this
right here just has to stop can we all
agree that you're not helping your case
Cloud Flair no ain't nobody helping
right now okay this just has to stop we
just got to stop doing this all
Developers K agree leak code is a
massive scam look man it's been
discussed to death but all I'm going to
say is do you think mechanics need to
build a car from scratch to get a job
all this grinding just to code some
front end but wait that's another
scam okay this too many scams are
happening at one time uh Le
code so I I dude I the some of the worst
insults I've ever received are because I
have a mixed feelings about Le code and
so I always get this I
get Prime is out of date because he
thinks people should do whiteboard
interviews so what's the alternative
right the alternative is what
apprenticing for free or some paid
contractual amount like that's going to
happen that's not going to happen Okay
that may work for some people but that's
largely not going to work two a
take-home okay so you want me to work
for what 10 to 20 hours on a takehome is
that what you're suggesting
you no that favors people who have no
kids that have free time right it's it's
it's it's it's all it you optimize for a
certain set of people with any interview
take homes are absolutely the worst I
know so again what's the alternative
there's someone has one where you go to
the place and you and you get a problem
where you work on where you have to like
hook up to an API and make some calls
and do all that six months
apprenticeship it just ain't no way
right I'm not taking a contract for 6
months
the thing I like about leak code and by
the way I I've told you many times don't
do leak code I think the only leak code
you should do are the array problems if
you're going to do anything with the Le
code learn data structures and
algorithms okay be good at data
structures and algorithms you can solve
most um you can solve most problems just
knowing a few data structures like
almost all problems in interviews can be
solved with this again I get just
hammered in the comments about this
specific thing which is that if you just
know your data structures and algorithms
you will pass most whiteboarding inter
you will uh the third one is just come
up with better whiteboarding interviews
I think that that largely works if you
can come up with good ones one of my
favor questions to ask is an async
request queue just simply go out there
and just build something that takes uh
that takes in a promise or that takes in
a promise Factory and produces out a
promise and when you're done with that
promise and when you can execute that
promise Factory you will execute it get
out the promise resolve it and return
out the return value or propagate
forward the error like it's just pretty
simple it's not like a hard thing to do
it it's pretty easy but man I've watched
some pretty crazy things by the way I've
seen people prompt interview by the way
I gave this as a question and I watched
somebody prompt interview me I watched
somebody do this it was awful okay I
watched somebody give me the old AI okay
uh I watched them go go like this this
is what they' literally do they had
their camera on on them and they go like
this
and then I tell I I kid you
not they actually had the gall to tell
me I've never worked with typescript I
don't know typescript and then proceeded
to do the following thing const Fu
equals array. shift
bang they did that after telling me
they've never worked with script and I
was just like bro you tell me you've
never worked with typescript but you
just did a false or a a a uh what's it
called a forcing undefined removal in a
single bang like that that ain't no way
ain't no way you don't know anything
about typescript and you're hitting that
what's array shift bang it forces out
the uh out the undefined so it just
becomes T it becomes type T and so to
tell me that you never did it you're off
looking at a screen and typing and then
you hit me with a bang T at the end
ain't no way
ain't no
way right how did you respond of course
I didn't say
anything you I I don't I don't call out
people because I wanted to see where
they could go and guess what what
happens when there's a single problem
and you are doing uh and and you're
using chat
GPT what happens with chat GPT when
there's a problem it reproduces a new
set of code yeah so guess what that
person did they also went I'm going to
do it in I I'm going to start over
erased everything and started over from
the beginning
yeah yeah certainly anyways chat GPT
ridiculous and so that's my take on leak
code which is if you know just a little
bit of Le if you know if you know how to
do the array stuff which by the way I
actually think this is a very positive
part about a Le code and probably the
most beneficial practically to your
career for the rest of your life is
learning to be effective with arrays do
the array problems with Le code I think
they're like cityscape completely piece
of  annoying problem takes like an
hour to get correct it's just like such
a tedious exercise but man does it make
you good with a raise being good with a
raise is very very very beneficial I
strongly recommend you at least do that
right and that will just help you for
your career just being strong with them
is never a bad thing and so I recommend
that plus DSA and you will be able to
conquer most whiteboarding interviews
now if you can't conquer conquer the
whiteboarding interview and likely if
you know all of your base data
structures and you can't do it to me all
it says is that
whoever designed these interviews
designed them in such a way that they're
complete morons and you probably don't
want to work at that place to begin
with okay it's as simple as
that Dynam yeah exactly if they give you
some crazy ass Dynamic if they like ask
you the coin change problem it's crazy
it's actually
crazy
anyways is a massive scam look man it's
been discussed to death but all I'm
going to say is do you think think
mechanics need to build a car from
scratch to get a job all this
grinding to be fair they would build an
engine from scratch in some sense and I
I I'm sure there's plenty that would
love the opportunity to do that and I'm
sure there's a bunch of Gearheads who
have built a lot of their own stuff
together and probably the best mechanics
do like real talk I bet you some of the
best mechanics out there are are into
that are are into building things as
much as they can right obviously you
can't build things from scratch in the
sense that you can't like you can't like
build your own engine block but most
certainly they put things together and
let's just face it a mechanic putting a
bunch of pieces together is not much
different than the front end
okay okay can we be real here for a
second you put a bunch of pieces
together and you call
that come on you you put a bunch of
pieces together you don't actually build
any of the pieces and then you connect
them all together and you're like oh
crap something's not
working you're just glue engineering I
hate to tell you this people being just
a code some front end but wait that's
another scam front end is easy front end
being called easy is a scam perpetrated
by insecure backend Engineers because
they think gluing together some crappy
spring boot to postgress is real
engineering they're probably coding that
mess in neovim and preaching the next
scam to unsuspecting
developers I already knew this was
coming okay we knew for a fact what was
about to happen Okay okay I'm not mad
I'm not mad I'm I'm not
mad okay I'm not in shambles night sh
dude I'm not in shambles we're not in
shambles okay I'm shambling I'm not mad
can can I get can I can can c can can I
get a second C can a man get a second
here can can I get a second first off I
would just like to let you know okay Mr
Big boxu you think I'm not keeping the
receipts Mr Big boxu I already knew this
was coming okay I already knew it was
coming I already knew it was coming yeah
Mr Big Box by the way go follow him on
Twitter great guy let's go in here uh
look at
this he uses Vim motions okay which
means he used vs code hurts but he likes
Vim motions
too okay so Mr Vim is productivity scam
who also uses it I'm internally maling
okay okay but let me be real for one
second about why I why okay let me give
you you my pre my precursor okay let me
just let me just tickle the tip just a
little bit um the reason why I choose
neovin is because I like to craft my own
environment okay I like all my own
shortcuts the way I want them I like the
ability to be able to create whatever I
want to create like right now we are
creating uh a real-time rendering engine
in neovim right now and it's been
fantastic and for me that is just
absolutely lovely I really like my tools
I like to be able to go deep on my tools
and neovim is by far the best Editor to
go deep on second I think Vim motions by
themselves are the superior way to edit
text I think if you're doing lots of
programming if you're not using Vim
motions you're just you're you're just
wasting time okay you're just wasting
time all right and some people you can
use Vim motions in your vs code you can
have your nice luxurious scarf on with
your nice
little you know you can totally do that
and no one no one is hey I copium yeah I
know but you can do that all you
want okay just saying just saying
acoustic AF maybe the Acoustics are a
bit off in here
okay Vim productivity Vim productivity
is stage one of toxic developer disease
otherwise known as tdd which often
develops into Stage 2 iuse Arch by the
way and the final stage is when you
spend half your salary to buy a keyboard
split up like bang adition okay
okay the Kinesis 360 Advantage is a
great keyboard okay what is this this is
this is a direct this is a literal
Direct attack against me okay this is
not even fair it's not even fair it's
saying it's split like Pakistan and
Bangladesh
just I'm getting owned right now
Pakistan to hook up tier overpriced
think we were going to finish setting up
our system
76 after a couple more videos
people so not really sure what to do
with this at this point
I I feel targeted okay I feel I feel
genuinely targeted in this
one Pat only to be paid half as much as
your coworker with actual Hobbies a
girlfriend and a life outside of
programming but wait you're having a
maladaptive Daydream because you don't
have any co-workers because tech jobs
are literally a scam sure you're highly
paid but the amount of time you'll spend
unemployed from layoffs averages out to
working at McDonald's the biggest pain
of being laid isn't even losing money
it's over hearing your mom say oh B what
to do my Beta no study no job no sh you
see Auntie your beta fell for the
biggest scam everyone should learn to
code a scam pedal by politicians and
their buddy businessmen when they
Outsource your job to a
develop I do think he's right on this
one and what I mean is that I don't
think
um I don't think
it's not that I don't think everyone is
not capable of being a great programmer
I don't think most people want to put in
the effort it takes to be a good
programmer no job no
shouty got me it's true and so that's
where I think a lot of this comes from
with where where where people say
everyone should learn to code the hard
part is like man you got to you you got
a full asset as Judo says as the man
Judo says you got to full ass that it's
it's hard it's Harding country no no no
it's for the greater good of of the
economy Tech Bros love spouting on and
on about how anyone can learn to code
and build a startup my dude Mark
Zuckerberg dropped out of Harvard you're
dropping out of udmi and getting kicked
out of free code Camp design patterns at
this
point there is a little bit of a
difference there is a little bit of
difference and I also think you know
like real talk you cannot like I've
always hated that phrase where be like
well Mark Zuckerberg dropped out of
Harvard all the best all the biggest
Tech entrepreneurs these days have
dropped out of
Harvard
there's
also this fundamental problem which is
that during that
time there wasn't much on the internet
it was a giant a giant a giant
opportunity like just well sitting there
for anyone to make anything and then
second the Gold Rush is over the Gold
Rush is over it's no longer it's no
longer possible to do what they did back
then also can we can we do the second
thing they got into Harvard
okay so step one they were already
smarter than you step
two they were so smart they just left
and did something different you know
what I mean so I hate to tell you this
dropping out of college does not make
you a genius okay Counterpoint
Counterpoint I got into
CMU and I'm an idiot okay fair Step Zero
Rich parents that's one of the easiest
ways honestly if you guys really want to
do this you should just have Rich
parents it's honestly the easiest way to
make a lot of money is just have your
parents give you a lot of money like
simplest it's the most straightforward
way so if you just got better parents
honestly work out pretty easy thanks for
the advice Prime no problem no
problem yeah yeah I only give the most
based based uh advice around
here I but you know I real real talk I
just wanted to be such I wanted to be
such a Chad that I just I personally
chose not to have Rich parents okay I
was going to make all of my money off of
$5 a month that's what I decided okay
that's what I decided personally so
thank you for all the $5 a month
personally chose that one personally
strats strats and strategies okay you
wouldn't understand honestly I you know
what I dropped out of Harvard so hard I
didn't even go to Harvard think about
that point A good rule of thumb is that
if Uncle Bob has a book on it you really
shouldn't be using it design patterns
like many aspects of software
engineering great in practice impossible
to implement
similar oh gosh I just had I just had I
just had I just had Earl Gray come up
into the nose on that one I was not
ready for that one I was really not
ready for the for Uncle Bob catching
multiple Strays on this one I was not I
was not I was not ready for that
one
okay two best practices oh did you even
catch that picture you really shouldn't
be using it design pattern like many
aspects of software engineering great
and
practice the person's writing this looks
like they're getting hung in the
other this is pretty clever impossible
to implement similar to best practices
and if you disagree you can kiss my dry
yagy ass because your code is always
going to be slow and unreadable not that
it matters if it's fast because code
performance is literally a scam code
performance is like astrology for
developers I mean it could have an
impact on your code but more often than
not it's just to sell you a course your
real performance is actually how quickly
you ship features this whole industry is
full of scams man but you know what
isn't a scam the
spons we'll get we'll get to the sponsor
don't worry we'll get to the sponsor um
actually that's that's the one I kind of
partially disagree with in the sense
that if you don't make something to
begin with it can be really
slow right and let's just face it when
you use a slow application it's pretty
infuriating right there is a good enough
threshold absolutely I think you like
you should definitely consider the
program you're making right you should
definitely consider the program you're
making and it matters more and more and
less right if if if you are making a
simple website then 600 milliseconds is
fast as  okay if you're making like
you said SSH that hurts you know if you
you have to press buttons and everything
is super slow that hurts that that's
emotionally painful and so there's
definitely there's definitely you got to
rate the program you're you're you're
using you know what I mean uh I don't
think some apps are intentionally made
hard to use I don't believe that even
one bit what I believe is that the
average app is just what people think
people like and what most people think
is good ux is not good ux okay I'm sorry
I hate to tell you this but just because
you call yourself a UI engineer doesn't
mean you know what makes good ux good ux
is hard and I think it's really I think
it's very reasonable to have somebody
that thinks only about ux I think it's
really good to go and actually have
qualitative research on what makes good
ux I think it's really really good to
test proper ux to be able to have two
different user experiences and test them
in production to see which one's
actually better quantitative and
qualitative research is really really
important and the bigger the company the
more opportunity you have to do that now
smaller companies you just have to kind
of guess right you kind of just have to
guess and you hope that you got it you
got it good enough but it's painful
serve today's video brilliant.org bril
oh brilliant uh hey thanks for the hype
Train everybody is an app and website
with an amazing collection of lessons on
math and science I love learning new
things but learning math and science has
always been super tricky most of the
material online is very drawn out and
not as engaging I've also recently been
trying to get into game development and
needed to brush up on my physics
fundamentals with the lack of time and
resources I needed a solution and that's
where brilliant came in you see
brilliant uses a combination of
techniques such as visual learning with
interactive diagrams and reinforcement
learning with experiments but the more
important thing is that it's delivered
in super concise and fun lessons I've
been using my commute as a key trigger
to use brilliant and in the past few
months I've gotten to the point where I
can understand and think critically
about basic physics problems don't
believe me you can get started with
brilliant for free for 30 days that's
brilliant.org big box site the link is
in the
description do that you'll also get 20%
off the annual subscription thank you so
much to brilliant for sponsoring this
video and thank you for your time I am
big box let's go let's go let's go that
was great that was great it was a scam
definitely got scammed hard uh with the
I don't know I I have you know I know I
can't tell where satire ends and where
it begins in that video cuz I don't
think he likes clean code right I really
don't think he likes clean code but does
he not like all of those things or are
some of those things I can't tell
Einstein had a mustache exactly exactly
exactly see it's not that simple that's
the point I can't tell I can't tell when
things end and begin it's impossible
anyways I really I really satire ends
when he talked about the split keyboard
yeah that was just the split keyboard on
on system 76 was clearly a he was fist
fighting me and he just landed one right
in the gut and I'm very upset about it
the name the
name it's the prime engine
