Grace welcome to Scot anomic can you
tell our audience a bit about yourself
your book vulture capitalism which we're
going to talk about today really is is
so impacting on me like the shock
Doctrine but please do tell us about
yourself first very much so yeah I'm
Grace Blakeley I am an author of a few
books including this one vulture
capitalism which I'm G talking about
today um I am um a kind of a economics
commentator and political commentator um
so I write for Tribune magazine I used
to write for the new Statesman I appear
quite a bit in the media so you know
just did question time which was good
fun um and all that sort of Jolly stuff
um but yeah the main thing I do is write
books and talk about them you're you're
a an Oxford or Cambridge graduate though
aren't you Oxford yeah for my sins and
what did you study there I did the
degree that every single terrible person
who has ever run this country has done
well our respective countries uh
politics philosophy and
economics it's a good way to know know
it's a good way to know the enemy isn't
it Grace I would say so yeah to frat
with
them so Grace in your introduction you
state that living under capitalism um a
system of pervasive unfreedom um but how
could anyone object to a free market and
is that are these markets truly as free
as they purport to be so the whole
premise of the book The Argument of the
book is that capitalist societies aren't
really free market societies um and I
you know one of the reasons that I
wanted to write this book was to kind of
take apart the misconceptions that
people have about capitalism and also
about socialism um so the inspiration um
was that I was um doing a lot of uh
interviews and things in uh during the
covid-19 pandemic um and this had been
after the 2019 election um i' had been
you know quite viously campaigning for
Jeremy Corbin and I was asked on a lot
of these news shows you know uh the
government's doing loads of Staff it's
bailing out loads of businesses it's
spending loads of money you got what you
wanted even though you know labor didn't
win the El ction you got socialism
because the government's spending loads
of money and I started to get really
frustrated with this this misconception
and misunderstanding as to what
socialism was I think perhaps because of
the legacy of the Cold War a lot of
people seem to have this view of kind of
capitalist and socialist societies as
divided between kind of free market us
style systems and centrally planned
Soviet style systems um with the idea
being that in the US you know the market
decides the production allocation of
resources and in the USSR the state
decides everything um so there seemed to
be this idea that if you get more state
that means more socialism um and if you
get kind of more Market that means more
capitalism um and it was just very clear
to me that that was a a really
fundamental misreading of the way that
capitalism Works um and there are a
number of reasons for this firstly
capitalist systems aren't free market
systems and secondly there isn't this
separation between politics and
economics between states and markets
under capitalism that you might expect
from you know the the worldview that
I've just outlined so first and foremost
capitalism isn't a free market system um
most like big markets within capitalist
societies within the global economy are
dominated by uh a couple um you know
maybe like four or five massive
multinational corporations that dominate
um their industry and which are capable
of wielding immense amounts of power um
in the economies in which they are
headquartered and in the global economy
as well um so they have kind of
monopolistic or oligopolistic Power
Within These markets um and that allows
them really to plan who gets what you
know the whole free market idea is that
in a an actual Market nobody has the
power to plan because the market
basically decides everything you know
there's lots of different firms all
competing um for you know the same kind
of uh market share um and if any of them
goes wrong makes the wrong decision if
the managers kind of invest in the wrong
thing at the wrong time or put prices up
then they will lose customers and
ultimately they will go under because
there are so many other firms for
consumers to choose from this is not
obviously how uh most markets work but
it's very very far away from how markets
work under capitalism because you have
these massive corporate Giants that
don't really have this Market discipline
pushing them in all these different
directions they're really able to make
active decisions to plan who gets what
and and I look in the book at how that
planning takes place within the
organization so how these kind of
organizational hierarchies exist to
basically kind of Dominate and control
labor to control workers and how that
planning works at a societal scale and
at a global scale um so how um you know
corporations can wield corporate
sovereignty how they have kind of
Imperial power how they're able to kind
of um you know manipulate m markets um
and kind of even manipulate law and
create their own kind of versions of law
as well so because you know these
corporations have so much power they're
able to plan and it's not really a free
market system but there's also is the
the state isn't separate from the market
so we have this kind of liberal view
which is that um you know if markets
aren't working very effectively so if
there is a bit too much Market power
amongst a few corporations then it's the
state's job to step in and enforce
competition or kind of regulate those
markets more effectively the issue is is
that the state can't do that because
what happens within the state is
influenced by the balance of power in
society as a whole so if big
corporations have a lot of power over
the economy they're also able to wield
that power within the state they're able
to influence politicians they're able to
influence legislation regulation really
kind of shape um you know the political
environment as well as the economic
environment so these two fields of power
aren't separate and in fact they tend to
reinforce each other so capitalism is
this system based on a kind of fusion of
public and private power in service of
the interests of those at the top and
I've got a bunch of examples in the book
that show precisely how that works yes
so we're going to come on to some of
those so so but before that I'm going to
talk about the more philosophical
aspects of the book as well because you
go into you talk about Friedrich Hayek
um you know who was the author of the
road of road to surum most people
probably know this that you know thata
was a big fan and she used to carry this
book around with her um but you know he
he he was quite clear that you know
these were freedoms this Market Freedom
these were freedoms that some people
could enjoy but not everyone he was
quite honest about that and what I
wanted to bring to your attention as
well was a fabulous um H speaker a
Scottish speaker um um and I'm trying
Jimmy Reed and he was on um Parkinson
years ago and he was talking about this
very distinctly and we'll maybe put that
clip in later um so you know haek and
also um ke as well they both had quite a
a you know a patronizing look at Society
they didn't really think you know that
society as a whole could really
influence events and it was really up to
the elites um you know I was really
taken back most especially by the
thinking that Keen thought this way as
well yeah so you know I think the reason
I look at uh hyek and KES is they're
traditionally pitched as the two kind of
you know Heroes of the battle in
economics that took place over the
course of the 20th century um which I
think is fair you know these were the
central figures in the movements for
social democracy when it comes to canes
and neoliberalism um when it comes to
Hayek um and you know the battle lines
were effectively around the size of the
size of the state and the power of the
state within nominally market economies
um now uh KES was obviously writing in
the wake of um the Great Depression and
his work centered around how to kind of
tame the irrationalities of market
system so he saw that you know because
of um the kind of psychology that un
that like underpins human behavior in
free markets or just in markets in
general um you can get these big booms
and big crashes um and you can get kind
of collective action problems regarding
uh issues like investment for example so
you know if everyone's pessimistic about
the future nobody invests and then they
create the kind of scenario that uh that
they're kind of uh that they most fear
so the state's role is to kind of step
in and almost solve some of these
Collective action Problems by investing
when no one else will invest or kind of
you know enforcing competition and
regulating uh the excesses of some of
the um the biggest actors Within These
markets and particularly also taming the
power of Finance which tends to
exacerbate both the ups and the Downs of
these Cycles by like pumping credit into
the booms and and pulling the rug out uh
during the busts um so kanes was very
optimistic about the capacity of the
state to tame the market basically and
that was the foundation of of social
democracy um with that Keynesian
thinking was the foundation of the
social democracy of the the postwar
period now whilst K's had this you know
pretty kind of Rosy view of how this
State could work the only reason we
actually ever got social democracy it
wasn't because suddenly politicians
turned around and all decided that kanes
was right there was a bit of that going
on it was primarily the fact that
working people were so well organized in
the wake of particularly the second
world war when you'd had the demands of
the war economy for the employment Etc
um that they demanded a lot of things
that kanes had been talking about
alongside things like you know a welfare
state investments in Social Security Etc
um so you had this Alliance basically
between kind of um workers and and
unions on the one hand and Keynesian
thinkers on the other hand that pushed
through this Social Democratic shift
that saw you know a much more active
State um a kind of corporatist model
really and by corporatist I mean um the
State playing a role as kind of mediator
between capital and labor between
workers and bosses so you had workers
bosses and politicians all kind of
working together sitting around the
proverbial table to to plan what was
going on in the economy right this is
the argument I make in the book is that
you know all capitalist societies have
an element of planning within them the
question is who is involved within that
planning under social democracy workers
had a seat at the table alongside bosses
and and politicians and representatives
of the state the transition to
neoliberalism this was all framed around
hiek view um that the state had gotten
too big and that we needed to shrink the
state to create greater space for the
market and he had you know this very
interesting perspective about how
markets work that was based around
complexity Theory you know the idea that
economies are too complex to centrally
plan and that doing so will create um
you know uh unforeseen consequences as
well as kind of corruption and and lead
us all down the road to Surf them um so
his argument that was we need to kind of
you know basically tame the Social
Democratic State and do a lot of things
that the near liberals uh ended up doing
but the argument I in the book I make in
the book is that actually existing
neoliberalism did not shrink the state
at all um it uh did Cut State spending
in some areas particularly when it comes
to uh support for workers but spending
also increased in other areas um so you
know particularly around when we're
thinking of um you know handouts to big
businesses um the revenue loss in the
form of tax cuts subsidies to big
businesses um and a lot of kind of
off-balance sheet support um in the form
kind of implicit subsidies by central
banks um Outsourcing all of this other
stuff where a lot of private AC ity
still relied on the state but it wasn't
necessarily actively being undertaken by
the state as well as the dramatic
expansion in the kind of police
authority of the state when it came to
kind of breaking up unions crushing
demonstrations um you know all those
anti-union laws and stuff the power of
the state was used to kind of split up
and divide working people as well so the
state didn't get smaller by any stretch
of the imagination with the neoliberal
shift um what happened and this I argue
was always really the aim of the
neoliberal movement if not Hayek himself
uh was that workers lost their seat at
the table so the Social Democratic model
was planning tripartite planning
basically um and with the shift to
neoliberalism in the 1980s workers lost
their seat at the table um and instead
you had centralized planning that was
taking place just amongst
representatives of large corporations
and financial institutions alongside
politicians and bureaucrats within the
state and this is kind of how capitalism
has been throughout most of its history
the Social Democratic period was uh the
exception rather than the rule that
workers had an input into this process
um but the fact the existence of
planning didn't change under
neoliberalism so this is why you know
highx arguments are kind of interesting
to apply to the neoliberal States
because this idea that you can't
centrally plan something as complex as
the economy is a criticism you could
level at neoliberal governments at every
government basically that has been
inspired by Hayek because they have have
um you know nominally kind of privatized
certain things nominally deregulated
other things but actually increase the
kind of orbit of the state increase the
reach of the state into lots of
different areas of the economy and
indeed into lots of different areas of
of society as well and this all
culminated of course with the financial
crash in uh 2008 when the government
just said right well you know all of the
liabilities of the private sector will
just soak them all up and bail the
bankers out and then impose the costs on
everyone else and that really showed
that the argument that planning is place
in a capitalist economy was never really
about planning because this is mass this
is planning on a mass scale it's
actually about who gets the to plan who
has the right to sit at that table where
the planning is taking place yeah I want
to move on to the chapter that you wrote
about Boeing um and I want to give some
some insight into the just the horror of
this story that you start off with so in
2018 Jakarta
2019 uh 181 passengers on board the
plane as well as six cabin crew and two
pilots died and in 2019 Ethiopian
Airlines flight 302 had plummeted out of
the sky and hit the Earth at a speed of
700 mil hour the wreckage from the
flight was driven 30 ft into the
surrounding Earth and the impact crater
was 90 ft wide and 12 ft long all 157
people on board died instantly this is
shocking and how did Boeing allow this
to happen yeah so the Boeing story is
really really shocking um and it's a
fantastic example of kind of capitalist
planning gone wrong basically um and how
you know um large corporations can get
away with so much and then basically you
know feel no accountability uh because
the market um is not going to impose um
costs on a firm as big as Boeing and
even if it did it was protected so much
by the American state so this isn't
actually just a story about Boeing it's
a story about Boeing in alignment with
the the US state so the 737 Max
disasters as as you've just highlighted
were two plane crashes involving the
Boeing 737 Max planes um now these
planes have been M manufactured by
Boeing um to they were called the 737
Max because they wanted to they wanted
to make a plane that was seen to be as
similar as the Boeing 737 which is one
of the most successful plane designs
ever um and Boeing had made agreements
with a bunch of Airline carriers that uh
the planes would not require any new
training so they the pilots wouldn't
have to be retrained so they would be as
similar to the 737 Max as possible um
but the issue was is that these were not
smaller 737 Max planes they were massive
um and and the reason that they wanted
to make these planes so much bigger was
that it increased profits to the Airline
carriers because it allows you to get
more people onto a single flight but to
do that they had to make these planes
with massive massive engines and then
you know for issues to do with how the
plane takes off and lands they had to
shift those engines back on the plane um
and they found that the positioning of
the engines why would their size create
this problem that the the plane had a
tendency to stall um so this is you know
a really significant problem but rather
than dealing with the problem headon
they decided to create this software fix
which is basically whenever the plane
starts to stall um a a sensor on one of
the Wings detects the stall and then
automatically pushes the plane's nose
down in the ground basically to stop it
kind of tilting up like that so it
pushes the plan's nose down and this was
called the mcast system um now this was
an automatic system um that it would
have been you know extremely difficult
to correct man manually uh because of
the force that was pushing the plane
down into the ground um it wasn't you
know part of the Pilot's training so
they weren't really aware as to what
this system was the pilots who were
flying this plane and and it was only
connected to One sensor so if there was
a malfunction on one of the sensors as
is what happened in both those plane
crashes then the nose of these planes
would just dive out of the sky and just
plummet into the air you know killing
everyone on board now it emerged in the
wake of these crashes at first Boeing
tried to blame the pilots but it emerged
in the wake of these crashes that senior
Executives at Boeing had known um about
the problems with the play about many
many problems not just this multiple
different problems uh with this plane
before it went to markets um The
Regulators had basically been asleep at
the wheel because they had moved to this
philosophy the FAA had moved to this
philosophy of self-regulation which was
the same philosophy as that which um
underpinned uh regulation of Finance
before the financial crisis and
effectively well Boeing was actually
being regulated by a unit which sat
inside Boeing and whose employees were
paid by Boeing um so there was just a
massive conflict of interest here um and
the FAA kind of highlighted some
problems with the plane but these were
effectively ignored and it was allowed
to go to market anyway uh Boeing had
also um spent an a lot of time and
resources lobbying Regulators to reduce
regulation around the airline industry
constantly putting forward this argument
that um you know they operate in a
competitive market and no manufacturer
would deliberately manufacture a plane
that was faulty they would have very
rigorous standards because doing so
would kind of undermine its business now
this argument is something that has been
disproved quite clearly in the wake of
these extraordinary crashes and all of
the um the chaos that has befallen
Boeing since then um but it was you know
a one that was used to kind of change
the nature of the regulation in the
runup to these crashes as well and and
entrench this philosophy of
self-regulation on top of all this you
know this was um really the culmination
of the transformation of Boeing that
taken place over several previous
decades um so Boeing had been kind of
renowned as a firm that really placed
engineering expertise at the core of its
business um and really respected
engineers and and pilots and Pilots were
kind of always in control of Bo planes
which is why they liked to fly them but
it was during the 80s that Boeing kind
of abandoned those commitments and those
values and really shifted towards
becoming a company that was solely
concerned with maximizing shareholder
value
um and part of that was to do with a
merger that took place between Boeing
and another firm McDonald dougas
McDonald Douglas and that was kind of
running into the ground but it was
really important for the US uh military
industrial complex which supplied um the
a lot of it was important basically to
the US states that McDonald Douglas kind
of survived so the state organized this
merger between Boeing and McDonald
Douglas and McDonald Douglas's culture
which kind of was oriented around like
cost cutting um um and like
managerialism rather than kind of
prizing engineering expertise really
became embedded within Boeing um and
under successive CEOs particularly Harry
ston Cipher um who oversaw the
development of the 737 Max uh this
culture of just like slashing costs like
um undermining engineering expertise
lionizing middle management um and
really just focusing solely on
shareholder value became really
ingrained and embedded within the firm
and that's the kind of cultural shift
that that underpinned um the uh the
failings around the 737 Max because
whistleblowers had come forward you know
there was a lot of concern about these
thingses but it was ignored basically to
protect the bottom line um so that was
the kind of the context and and as you
can see the American government had
already been very very involved with
what had been going on whether that's in
the form of you know the changing
regulation to which the firm was
subjected or this murder that had taken
place but Boeing was also one of the
biggest recipients of corporate welfare
in the whole of the United States at the
time so it had massive tax breaks
massive subsidies at a state and a
federal level it um was it had lots of
like government contracts um so you know
was quite dependent upon that and then
even after the 737 Max disasters it got
a massive uh backdoor bailout basically
during the covid-19 pandemic this was
after wrongdoing had come to life
um and there had even been kind of
criminal charges that have been brought
against the company um so the Boeing
story really does show that it doesn't
operate in this competitive market um
it's this kind of monopolistic Market
structure it's just Boeing and Airbus
competing and Boeing because it has such
close links with the American states can
always rely on that political support to
make sure that it stays a floats so even
after these massive crashes when you
would read that and think I'm never
flying on a Boeing plane again
it's still operational it's still
manufacturing planes it's still selling
planes despite all of this chaos that
would have put any other firm under now
that isn't a real Market that's a
corrupt Market it's h a market that's
you know so dominated and controlled by
a couple of Institutions and their
political allies that it doesn't really
function as a market anymore yeah such a
good example yeah and and for for
Watchers and and uh and listeners this
chapter was particularly shocking for me
some of the details in really are blood
curdling um I want to move on to Ford
not the cuddly man who paid his workers
enough um so that they could buy the
products that they made can you tell us
a little bit more about Ford yeah so I
picked the example of Ford because it's
this company that traverses the whole of
the 20th century basically um so it kind
of becomes operational around uh the
1900s and stays in business you know up
to the to this day um so I thought it'
be an interesting way to kind of study
the transformations of capitalism that
we've seen throughout this period and
see what's changed and what stayed the
same so what's changed between the
transition from lass Fair pre um Great
Depression capitalism through to Social
Democratic capitalism through to
neoliberal capitalism and for turns out
to be a really great case study for
understanding these changes because the
the nature of um Ford's business and for
management and its relationship with the
state does change over this period but
the Thing That Remains the Same is that
Ford has never operating really in a
market and it always has very close
relationships with the state um and the
authority and power of for of Ford's
managers over the company and indeed in
some senses over society as a whole is
always quite significant although it is
challenged more at different periods so
you know Ford emerges it you know is
a monopoly because it's you know at
first the only kind of company really
producing cars um has a huge amount of
Market Power Ford himself is this weird
character who is virulently anti-Semitic
um he like pushes all these kind of
anti-Semitic conspiracy theories is even
mentioned positively by Hitler um and
you know is very keen on keeping the us
out of any involvement with the second
world war um he's also relatedly
extremely anti-union so absolutely hat
unions hires thugs to basically go and
beat up Union organizers and is someone
who is obsessed with having a very rigid
control over the life of his workers um
so he's this kind of like Ardent like
you know Christian fundamentalist type
who um uh you know wants basically
workers to kind of behave in certain
ways and tries to enforce that he
doesn't do so very successfully until he
introduces the $5 day um which uh is
actually composed of a $250 basic w and
then a $250 topup which is contingent
upon a bunch of Behavioral guidelines
including the workers not drinking their
wives not working outside the home all
of this stuff that Ford really wanted to
kind of push on his workers to try and
control them and obviously a big part of
the reason for this uh giveaway was to
undermine the threat of Union organizing
which was building at that
time um so this is very you know it's a
very hierarchical company with this guy
Ford at the very top kind of managing
everything he also during the period or
during the 30s tries to set up a rubber
Plantation in the Brazilian Amazon so he
buys up this wave of land and basically
runs it almost as like a kind of miniate
ships a load of Americans out into the
Brazilian Amazon um creates a little
American village with like Picket Fences
golf courses swimming pools very odd and
hires a bunch of local workers that he
keeps in very different conditions um
and again tries to kind of subject them
to these like rigid controls but the
whole thing is a disaster the workers
Rebel a lot of the managers die of
diseases and they're not very good at
harvesting rubber anyway and eventually
they come up with a synthetic
alternative that means that the whole
project kind of doesn't really get off
the ground but again it shows the
ambition of this guy he kind of acts as
though he's like you know an imperial
planet or a colonist I suppose like an
imperialist that can go up and just buy
up a whole sway of land and be like this
is my little mini he literally called it
fordlandia it's my mini kind of
territory and govern it as he governs
his own company as he governs workers
and tries to these rigid controls over
their behavior um so the power that this
guy has is really really significant the
power and authority that he's able to
exercise over his workers and over
society as whole very significant
because again he doesn't have that many
competitors and he's very closely
aligned with the American state as well
this Corporation only escalates during
the second world war Ford is playing
both sides so there are Ford uh
companies that are supporting the German
war machine Ford factories sorry that
are supporting the German war machine
and um Ford is also manufacturing a huge
proportion of um you know certain uh
like aircraft and weapons and things
that are used by the us as well um and
during this time kind of cooperation
between Ford and the government steps up
uh there's like a whole new Factory
that's built with a load of support from
the US um and they just become very very
closely intertwined and this is the kind
of this is also a period during which
his workers start to get organized yeah
um and Ford doesn't like this very much
but eventually the UAW wins recognition
um and is able to really fight to get a
seat at the table and this obviously
reflects the trends that we were talking
about earlier you know the demands of
the war economy full employment um a
general kind of increase in in workers
power that are taking place over this
period so that when the second world war
ends Ford's workers are just much
stronger and more powerful relative to
Ford and this is also the kind of
beginnings of like you know Democratic
capitalism so the state is taking this
role as a kind of mediator between
bosses and workers there's lots of
industrial disputes um within Ford at
the time and within a lot of the other
auto manufacturers um and um the US
state in various different ways
including setting up a bunch of
committees tries to act as the mediator
basically trying to balance the
interests of workers and bosses to kind
of come through to an agreement and just
the fact that workers are included in
that process is an indication of how
much their power has increased uh since
the the
30s so over this you know this time
period you get um a for that is kind of
really in in expansion mode it's you
know producing a lot as employment is
increasing a lot but its workers are
kind of demanding much higher wages
eventually you get to a point um around
the time of the neoliberal transition
you've got competition from abroad and
um the managers at Ford are angry
because this is a point at which profits
are being squeezed by that Global
competition so the the postwar period
you can kind of think of as like a piie
expanding period so there's not as much
conflict as you might expect between
workers and bosses given how much more
powerful workers are getting because the
pie is kind of increasing but when you
start to see that that growth slow
because of the pressures of
international competition along with a
whole bunch of other things like the oil
price spike then that conflict really
pushes back into the fall um and so a
bunch of these committees that the um
that have been set up start to break
down you start to get more threats of
kind of Union organizing um but be
partly because of the kind of changing
political context as well the bosses
ultimately end up winning they say you
know we can't give you higher wages
because we've got competition from Japan
so we're actually going to you know cap
your wages automate a lot of production
and massively reduce employment so from
the 80s employment at Ford really Falls
drastically and what's interesting as
well um and I think this is really
pertinent to the argument that you we
see among the neoliberals about you know
free market capitalism um Ford rather
than um kind of becoming this more
efficient and competitive firm due to
International competition it shifts from
being just an auto manufacturer to an
auto manufacturer financial institution
by 2008 most of Ford's profits are
actually coming from its lending arm
which lends to Consumers to allow them
to buy cars and because of this it had
built up a huge amount of debt kind of
you know astonishing for a motor company
and it was really you know under threat
when the financial crisis hit so
obviously it gets a backd door bailout
um it doesn't get kind of direct TP
funding from the US but there's a kind
of back route that Ford goes through
that I talk about in the book that
allows it to get a big loan um to cover
some of those those costs and again you
see employment decline you know Ford in
general in this state of decline um and
um you know becoming even more deeply in
meshed with the US government basically
so it's hard to kind of see where the
market ends and where the state begins
by this point and Grace I was just going
to say just if I could take you back to
kind of Ford in the 1920s 30s 40s and I
don't think it's covered in your chapter
but I just kind of wanted to highlight
the relationship between Ford big oil
and the American state and and this
takes you right through to the huge Road
building program that was going on in
the stat because there's no demand for a
car if there's no roads so the state is
deciding that personalized vehicles are
what the people of America demand and
they're doing that by providing the
services for it and also big oil is
there looking for a
customer which which it can now have
with um with with personal vehicles and
also the stories around um some of the
vehicle companies buying electric trams
I think San Francisco is one example
where they bought the electric tram
system and ran it into the ground made
it it lost a huge amount of money they
turned all the services off basically
and they now said to people well
electric TRS don't work you have to have
cars and again there was a huge support
from the American government to move
people towards this personal consumption
and I think that really helps emphasize
or underline the main point that I got
from your book was how this social
surplus is designed by The Establishment
and you know they're looking at the
products and the services that they will
be able to make the most money from that
benefit them and they provide that and
if they're not interested in using those
products or Services they're not
provided and and I think the example I
like to give is you look at the High
Street there's a reason that our high
streets are in such poor repair and
that's because the establishment don't
shop on the High Street and it's the
same with the National Health Service
they're not using the National Health
Service so why put a huge amount of
resources to that and for me that was a
wonderfully made point and theme across
all of the stories that that came across
in your book yeah that's a really good
point I I hadn't actually thought about
I had didn't really know that about the
the US Road building program but yeah it
seems like that's a really really
critical point because as you say the
whole infrastructure of America when you
look at like the planning of cities and
its infrastructure it's all designed
around cars and planes um and it didn't
obviously have to be that
way very well from it yeah exactly so I
think a lot of our listeners and viewers
may be already aware of the clear line
that you paint between the first SE
crisis and the Y Kapur war in October
1973 and then the rise of neoliberal
governments the more recent SE crisis
was caused by the Taiwanese
containership the ever given on the 23rd
of March 20121 but what you revealed
there was that 10 companies control 85%
of global Shipping capacity and they
collude with each other in plain sight
of The Regulators can you tell us more
about this yeah so this was um a a story
that I was looking into actually during
the pandemic was the chaos that was
going on in in global Shipping um and
this was something that kind of was
taking place across 2021 and 2022
basically um that because of lockdowns
um like constraints on people's
movements um and like really strict
border controls a lot of containerships
weren't able to dock in the ports that
they were supposed to they were supposed
to dock in um and you can really think
of the the system of global Shipping as
this very finely tuned machine so you
know one ship goes into a PO unloads as
quickly as conceivably possible leaves
another ship comes in you know it's all
like lots of different moving parts so
when that starts to break down it
creates these ripples throughout the
whole system and suddenly nobody can go
anywhere so there was this period where
there were tons and tons of ships and
you could see them in various different
ports like of California and and China
just out at Sea unable to dock unable to
move with obviously lots of very poorly
paid workers stuck on those ships for
extended periods of time um and so that
was you know partly just a problem that
had come about due to uh the imposition
of lockdowns but it reflected this
broader issue um which was the moves
towards like the steady moves towards
containerization and these massive
massive Mega ships that take a really
long time to load and unload and kind of
introduce uce more potential blockages
into the system because they can only go
to certain ports they require a lot of
Labor and a lot of kind of specialized
equipment to to move things around um
and when one of them gets you know is
unable to to dock um in this port that
it's it's supposed to be going to it
creates these backlogs that really kind
of reverberate throughout the whole
system they also create this problem of
like getting stuck in the sez Canal so
the ever given obviously got stuck in
the sez Canal which again exacerbated
these problems by create creating an
even bigger backlog uh because you know
a lot of ships basically had to like not
do the sewers canal and go around the
Cape of Good Hope which you know creates
massive massive more uh delays um so you
know global Shipping was in chaos right
and it was partly to do with these
Trends um that have been pushed by the
big shipping companies because obviously
you know it's a similar sort of thing
with with the airline manufacturers the
more people you can get onto a plane the
more um profit the Airline carriers make
the more containers you can get onto a
ship the more profits the shipping
companies make um so this had been a
whole reason for like the transformation
of infrastructure that has changed the
kind of spatial geographies of entire
countries right if you have one massive
ship that can only go into one very very
deep water Port suddenly a bunch of
communities that have been based around
docks are like you know unable to to
provide employment anymore which is
something that you've seen in a lot of
different places and and all around the
UK as I'm sure you both well know but
when you get up to covid and this whole
system breaks down
um you eventually start to see this
showing up in massive profits being made
by the shipping companies because they
exploit this chaos to charge
astonishingly High rates for anyone who
needs their goods and this combines
also with an increased demand for goods
because people can't consume Services
anymore because economies are locked
down so you know the classic example is
the gyms are closed so everyone's buying
a peleton or whatever um so there's high
demand for goods chaos and Global Shipp
the shipping companies jack up prices
massively and what's really interesting
about this is you know we're told about
inflation today it's all the result of
the war in Ukraine and Rising oil prices
but actually a part of it is to do with
these shipping costs because the lag
between the costs of shipping something
and the prices on the shelves is about a
year a year and a half so a lot of the
kind of postco inflation that we saw was
at least partly to do with this massive
increase in shipping cost that we've
seen over 2021 22 into an exent 23 and
all or profiteering Grace exactly had
gone had been sucked out of the profits
of consumers and into the pockets of
these giant shipping companies that are
run by some of the wealthiest people in
the world yeah I'm going to come to the
last chapter as well so taking back
control in your last chapter you talk
about the decentralization that could
have been in Chile under Al's government
do you think that he moved to fast for
the time and do you think that he could
have succeeded today with all the
technological um advantages that he
would have had
today you know the big problem that iend
faced is the problem that all
governments in the global South Base
which is the problem of imperialism
basically and this was particularly
acute at the time that a was was trying
to do this because obviously it was in
the context of the Cold War and um there
was this idea that you know no even like
moderate form of Socialism would be
acceptable to the US in its backyard um
I.E in most of of South America and you
know the United States had propagated
some
horrendous um basically crimes
throughout Central and South America
over the course of the preceding decades
to kind of undermine the threat of
socialism often supporting into Power
horrendously authoritarian brutal
governments um whether you look at this
what happened in Guatemala for example
with the United Fruit Company which I
talk about um or yeah of course what
happened in Nicaragua um and what's
happening what happened in Chile uh
under aende so aend comes to power tries
to implement this kind of neither
Washington nor Moscow model of
democratic socialism uh which is based
on kind of worker control like um
citizen control over Public Services
decentralization a real democratization
of society so it's not a kind of
centralized plan he was actually very um
well a lot of people in his government
were really ofay with systems theory
which is what Hayek had had used to
write about the economy and they knew
that like a really rigid Central plan
wasn't going to work um so they kind of
wanted to create kind of democratic
alternative and they they did that using
the technology that was available to
them at the time which wasn't
particularly sophisticated and they
might have been able to do a lot better
had they had access to kind of to
different kinds of Technologies like the
ones we have today but the main issue
was that the US would not let this
happen and you know when you've got a
massive superpower that is saying you
will not do this and when you don't have
the kind of global South solidarity that
allows poor countries to come together
and say you can't stop us then there's
not really any way around it um this is
why you know any kind of attempt at
socialism is always re has always really
struggled in global South countries even
up to this day and it's why a lot of
socialist leaders end up pursuing much
more moderate approaches like for
example Lula in Brazil during his first
term um and you know there that is a
real problem it's not something that you
can just kind of get around but it's
also why you know the potential for kind
of socialist organizing is so important
in rich countries as well as poor
countries right because if you were to
look at the global economy today you'd
be like oh well if Revolution is going
to happen anywhere it's going to happen
in the poor world where people are kind
of denied basic rights um they are you
know often living in extreme poverty
their governments are completely
unaccountable and corrupt um you know
you would think there's the potential as
well as the opportunity for kind of
Labor organizing that would really
challenge this model the issue is
imperialism which keeps you know what
like it keeps maintains in power
governments that Crush these attempts to
organize um and just you know oversees A
system that thoroughly disempowers
workers in the global South um what we
really need is kind of international
solidarity um in the sense that you know
uh a socialist movement in the rich
World um could definitely support
socialist movements in the poor World
literally just by getting out of the way
um as well as doing things like you know
undermining um tax avoidance and evasion
like London for example the city of
London facilitates a huge amount of tax
avoidance and evasion that sucks wealth
out of the global South and redesigning
some of the rules of the the
international rules based system that
are actually heavily weighted in favor
of of Rich economies um but you know the
whole meaning of international
solidarity should really be about you
know socialist movements in the rich
World supporting socialist movements in
the poor world and undermining threats
by their governments like the threats
the very real threats made by the us
against the government that ultimately
resulted in that government collapsing
and a ruthless neoliberal dictator
coming to power who literally used to
abduct people and throw them out of
helicopters that was the kind of you
know alter Democratic socialism versus
this like rigid ruthless neoliberal
authoritarianism and obviously given the
choice between the two the US the home
of Freedom chooses the ruthless NE
authoritarianism Grace I think that's
another example of you tying governments
to um multinationals again and if you
look at what happens in South South
America and the you know right from the
1920s onwards American imperialism is in
support of large American Producers and
they're making sure that the governments
of South America are supporting the
extraction um from South America to
America again so those connections are
really clear in that kind of state and
Corp
collusion yeah absolutely and the United
Fruit Company which I write about in
Guatemala is a really really good
example of that yeah later in your
chapter you you sorry that you lament
that as long as capital controls the
means of production it will also control
the technological development of society
which will constrain our ability to
imagine new ways of organizing Society
in light of this what gives you hope
that this can change
Grace yes this point about technology is
really important and it's a point that
Mark makes in the grund Rea um when he
talks about how capitalist societies are
the only societies where Innovation and
technological development becomes a kind
of business in itself um and that
business is really oriented towards
producing Technologies and and products
that are going to have profitable
Outlets so you know we end up like using
so many of our Collective resources to
create crypto currencies and like these
massive social media platforms that have
no discernable social use um but which
you know eat up a ton of our resources
and create huge profits for certain
people um you know you can just imagine
the kind of society that we'd be living
in if
technological um development had been
oriented around social use rather than
profit it would be a completely
different world um the issue is is that
yeah you know the capitalists control um
it's you know this this uh Fusion
between public and private power between
capital and the state controls the
direction of technological innovation so
it's generally kind of State uh armies
and militaries and defense departments
that invest in in um research and
development and then big kind of private
corporations and you know you can see
this today with like Elon Musk trying to
get to Mars to escape a dying planet um
so bringing technological development
and Innovation under Democratic control
would be like a massive step um towards
you know building a different kind of
economy um and I look in the book at
like a number of different ways that you
can do that so um I think all like some
of the ideas that mariina mikar for
example has in her book which looks at
this are really good like I'm a bit more
skeptical about the potential to just
get the state to do good things you have
to build power to force politicians to
do things differently this this is
Marian Mao's idea of a mission economy
isn't it exactly yeah which I think you
know that could be good if it was driven
by the right power dynamics so you have
to start by like building a base to
demand a shift towards a democratic
economy first um but you know the whole
idea of the mission economy I think
works alongside measures to kind of
democratize finance and investment which
I also talk about in the book so like
having kind of Democratic National
Investment Bank kind of people's asset
manager that sort of thing that could
put the funding behind um different
kinds of technological innovation and
the idea ultimately I think is you know
there are lots of discussions as to
whether you can have a truly kind of
democratic economy um because it relies
on a lot of kind of human decision-
making as opposed to the kind of elegant
hands-off decentralized approach of the
market but there is an argument to
suggest that with the right kinds of
Technology you can actually build an
efficient and effective Democratic
economy um it would just require that we
were looking to develop very different
kinds of Technologies right it would
require a lot of focus on that
particular area um so that potentially
puts in place the technological
foundations for a transition to
socialism basically uh but it requires a
lot of building power in the here and
now to even begin to think about what
that might look like fantastic and I
think it's great to have a Marxist book
doing so well and knowing that so many
people
