reviewed for
instance reviewed by more quantitative
um uh Scholars that you don't do random
sampling you do theoretical sampling and
actually sampling is ongoing in time so
as you proceeds with your research and
as to the extent that you start
understanding what might be going on you
deliberately pick your next uh uh uh uh
point of uh entry to the to the to the
to the fields and that may be another
organization it may be another you know
uh informant within the same
organization uh many different things
are uh possible so theoretical sampling
and then the idea is that you continue
with this whole process until you have a
theory that is sufficiently R Rich
plausible and consistent which we call
saturation uh the next one
please now a very important thing is
that
um GED theory is based on the principle
of
coding so uh and coding is a particular
approach to doing qualitative research
which is not uh say embraced by all
qualitative
researchers um code is a a word or a
phrase that you use to identify a chunk
of data that can be uh you know
a part of a transcript of an interview
but it can also be an observation U it
could be many different things any type
of qualitative
data next one yeah so now um in some uh
approaches using coding there is the
illusion that coding can be uh like
almost an automatic process you know if
you do it in a very automatic way then
you know it would be uh objective now
but that is not true because the the
decision to code a particular chunk of
data in itself already is an act of
interpretation and so why you know is
this particular part of the interr
interesting and the next part is not
that is already based on an
interpretation of what it could what it
could mean and how it could function
ultimately in your in your theory so
it's it's never mechanical it cannot be
and it should not be and it also
reflects the the research question if
you have one I suppose in most cases you
do have one uh and the theoretical
perspective now in classical grounded
Theory to be honest this idea of a
theoretical perspective was frowned upon
you shouldn't start with a particular
theoretical perspective uh nowadays we
understand that that is actually
impossible and you always if if not
explicitly then at least implicitly have
some theoretical perspective which which
which will guide your
expectations but one important thing to
memor to to to to keep in mind is that
coding is a a fracturation of the data
you you you chop the data into little
pieces and this is completely different
from what we will see in um classic case
studies where there is a much more
holistic approach and so there normally
you will not have a practice like coding
and you will try to to interpret the
case and understand the case in its
entirety not not cutting up the data in
little chunks uh the next one please
Louisa now there are a number of
different steps in this uh
process um as I already said you you if
you do pure classical grounded Theory
you will not have a theory to start with
you will not have any theoretical comp
guiding your
research so what you do then open coding
and so the the the codes emerge from the
data uh and U so they're not existing
the opposite uh approach would be that
you have particular Concepts and you try
to recognize those in your data so for
instance you would have a concept like
organizational identification and you
would look in your data for all the
instances
where things that respondents say uh a
point at some some level or form of
organizational
identification um In classical grounded
Theory it's the opposite there is no
concept to start with the concept emerge
from the data so open coding so then you
have a a number of Concepts then you
start with comparing those actual coding
Rel make relationship between them maybe
you know you can collapse some codes uh
or maybe you can split up codes or you
can uh just post codes this is the
opposite of of that H or this is is
leads to
that and so uh uh you start making
connections and then the final step
would be theoretical or sometimes called
selective coding where you say okay what
is The Core theme of my investigation
what is what what the phenomenon that I
really want to understand and explain H
and then you start systematically
linking all the codes that you have
created to that uh uh Core theme so
maybe the next slide Louisa so here's an
example from my own work uh an older
paper um where we were interested in
consensus at the interface between uh uh
uh the business interface between
Japanese and uh uh uh Dutch firms so
obviously and this was done very much in
a classical grounded uh Theory way so
the ultimately the the the uh The Core
theme were the attributes of consensus
which differed between the Japanese and
and the Dutch and then we said okay what
are in the in the views of those uh
informants uh antecedence of consensus
and are they the same for Dutch
respondents as for for for Japanese
respondents and what are the
consequences of uh of consensus so what
you very often see in this type of
research is that this is a kind of an or
organizing missing organizing mechanism
you have this Central uh theme which you
you know is the center of your attention
what is causing it and what is caused by
it U that is that is but it could also
be different but this is something you
see a lot and next one
please so now there has been a lot of
criticism of classical grounded Theory
and I think uh with good reasons um so
we will'll see it it lives on very much
I think many many um qualitative
researchers nowadays call themselves
grounded Theory researchers but they do
things in different ways uh so one very
obvious criticism is that the original
idea of glazer and Strauss that their
observations would be Theory free is
simply untenable that is not possible we
we are not capable of observing the
world uh without somehow you know being
Guided by expectations and the
expectations of course are formed by our
theories implicit or
explicit and so it's also um uh uh yeah
I mean it's it's a bit naive this would
be pure induction and pure induction I
think is uh is simply
impossible now another thing is if you
look at um as especially the early
formulations of uh grounded Theory H the
idea was that you are completely free in
where you go what will be the next uh
step in your research where will you go
now U so that that's suggests complete
freedom of choice in in selecting your
informance selecting the organizations
where you'll do research Etc well of
course that is not the reality for most
of us and we have restrictions so um in
many cases you have to uh uh you know
agree beforehand with an organization
how many interviews you will do uh you
know who will be interviewed whoots Etc
uh and you have limited time so we
cannot simply afford to go on and on and
on with our research until we have some
form of saturation we mostly we have a
first a fixed time uh uh available fixed
period of time available and then it
needs to be finished so that is also
something that U uh really is not not
very realistic
anymore
um yeah finally finally no not finally
but the next point is that U there was
also something strange going on in the
idea of glacer and Strauss that um the
theory so it's just discovery of
grounded Theory so the theory somehow
was expected to be already out there in
the field and that is also an idea that
of course does not resonate very much
nowadays so the theory is in our minds
not in the fields the theory is
something something in our minds that
helps us to make sense of what we see in
the real world um so we should really
see that as social constructions and not
as something that is inherent to
reality and then some other some maybe
minor things very often um uh at least
in the past uh the phrase grounded
theory was used as a kind of an excuse
to you know I'm not going to discuss the
literature I'm just going in you know
the fields with a uh a a a a Blanco
blank sheet uh and but you cannot ignore
the literature that's
impossible uh so it doesn't work you
know a lot of research would then simply
replicate what has been done already uh
what are you doing yeah uh and sometimes
also and that is also something that
that really doesn't work uh it's a
routine technique yeah so it just a kind
of a cookbook method if you follow the
steps you will have good research but I
said you know the core of grounded
theory is uh coding and coding is not
and can never be a a mechanical routine
uh uh uh procedure yeah it's always
implies that you are interpreting what
you are seeing otherwise you know we
couldn't we wouldn't be able to code
okay the next one
please okay so that's that's that's
classical grounded Theory now
classication studies and and we will see
this is really something quite different
so this is a research method that
involves investigating one or a small
number of social entities or
situations about which data are
collected using multiple sources of data
I think that is an important part and
developing a holistic description
through an iterative research process so
there are some similarities this
iteration you go from the from the from
the fields from the data collection to
your interpretation to your theorizing
back to the field Etc so that is
something which is very different from
the uh the procedures in quantitative
research where you're supposed to have
your hypothesis ready before you go into
the field of course we all know that
it's not always the case but at least
that is the ideal uh we want to live up
to now that is not the case in
qualitative research and not the case in
uh classic case studies
either so and and uh typ iCal is that
you have many variables you may have
only one case but a lot of things are
going on so uh from a uh statistical or
mathematical point of view that wouldn't
make sense so you would would need many
more cases than variables but in case
study research the the idea is you you
can have many variables and just one or
just a few cases and next one
please so and the reason is that we are
interested in a configuration of
variables it's not like measuring
variables isolated from one another it's
it's the whole set of variables together
or factors if you want to avoid the word
variables that helps us understand what
is going on in a case and uh so there is
really I think a a great uh contrast
between case studies and grounded Theory
so case studies typically don't use
codee coding if you want to to write a
case study you are interested in the
story as a whole and that is very
different from you know cutting up the
data in small parts and making
comparisons uh between those uh data
chunks and connecting those data junks
so it's it's a very different way so if
you if you use interviews to write a
case study you will do that in a
different way than when you use case
studies to do grounded Theory
Theory um so case studies are
particularly F fits for exploring how
and why types of questions uh how uh
that means that you would spell out or
or
uncover uh mechanisms or change of
causality something happens because
something else happened before and we
know that cality is is is is
particularly difficult to establish also
in cont ative research so a lot of
quantitative research is of a
correlational nature actually rather
than being able to to establish
causality now of course case studies
being just a study of one or a few cases
can also never give certainty about
causality cause effect relations but
they
can uncover the mechanisms that link
cause and effect and in that sense make
it more plausible that there is indeed a
Cause
relationship then when we would just
have data you know data point before and
a data point after and we don't know
what connects these two so that's the
how question and the other one is the
why question uh that is case studies can
also be used to understand why actors in
a particular situation let's say an
organization that was in a situation of
Crisis why they acted in a particular
way what do the actors think they are up
to to borrow the phrase from Clifford
gears okay next one
please yeah so now I will move to the
the present day uh methods these two
Joya method which is strongly rooted in
grounded Theory and the Eisen heart
method which is u a more we could say a
contemporary form of case
studies uh in in the case of ien art
always multiple cases uh starting with
Joya next one yeah yeah so Joya very
clearly is a a a present day version of
grounded theorizing uh using coding uh
typically uh but what is very specific
to this particular way of doing
qualitative research is the emphasis on
the transparency with regard to the
trail of evidence so very important and
actually uh according to Joya himself
and I I think I agree the strong point
of this method is that you actually can
show the readers how you came from your
let's say your your your your
observations or interviews to your
theoretical
Concepts so the methods is particularly
used to understand how actors create
interpretations of organizational
reality and act on these interpretations
so Joya says you know I
will uh bent backwards to try to
understand the phenomen that I'm
studying in the uh in the in the using
the concepts and the language of the
actors living in that reality so trying
basically to to to to look with from the
perspective of people in the field and
then make the next step and say okay how
can I as a researcher understand that um
it is mostly used in an abductive way so
not pure induction so normally you will
start with some the itical Concepts but
in the course of this of the research
you may uh you know unearth new emerging
themes or concepts or you may split up
Concepts uh uh into into into
subcategories Etc so next one
please so now one one
back so um it's there's something very
similar going on as what we saw with
Glazer
Strauss also again three uh steps in the
coding process you start with what Joya
calls first order codes which are
basically chunks of raw data what are
interesting relevance observations and
you you you put a label to it in the
case of Joya if possible a label
expressed in the language of the uh of
the uh uh
informant then the second step would be
trying to you know you know make
relationships between these Concepts
these emerging Concepts so you know they
they can be you know brought together
they are particular instances of the
same general theme uh or they can be
different or they can they can have
course effect relations etc etc and then
ultimately you uh uh order them in what
he calls third third order themes or
Dimensions which are the main building
blocks of your theory now if you go to
the next
slide this is an
examp back on this is an example uh of
uh a paper where we looked at how
managers try to influence the
interpretations of employees during uh
the post merger integration process uh
sense giving and we said okay looking at
what we see in the data so we started
with than Thanksgiving we knew that we
wanted to study SG
but actually going through the data we
found that there were very different
things going on sometimes management
really wanted to to um uh silence
particular interpretations yeah what we
call sense breaking or sense hiding
actually that sense breaking was given
it another meaning to what people
actually said uh and sense specification
is okay yes what you say is going on but
we give it a slightly different uh uh uh
meaning so different forms of sense
giving were one of the things and then
sense giving was one of the main
building block blocks of the theory that
we made based on those observations but
what we see here is very typical of the
Joya matters the data structure so the
data structure really is the is the is
the core of this particular methods and
it the strength of this is that it um
allows you to see how particular uh
dimensions and concept ceps are rooted
in the data so on the left hand side in
the ideal case there are concrete
observations or or or quotes from
interviews the the the more concrete the
better and then on the right hand side
the more you go to the right hand the
more theoretical it becomes but it gives
an overview very clearly of how you you
know how you came to your conclusions
ultimately okay next one
please so one B
back there are some concerns like with e
methods also about the Joya
methods um so some people think it's a
bit
naive to think that what participants
say and do in Social settings you know
what you base your research on uh that
it actually gives you Insight in their
authentic inner worlds and they might
manipulate you and to a certain extent
that of course is true uh so it's not uh
Beyond
criticism uh some people say well you
know this is abduction so you always
start already with some theoretical
concept so what are the chances of you
finding really something
new um I would say maybe okay but what
are the chances that any of us in our
academic career find something really
new and most of us you know work in in
in in the further development of
theories the refinement of theories and
U there are only only only few
researchers who really come up with
something new so I don't think that is a
very serious uh
problem the the third bullet point maybe
is and here we also find the big
difference between someone like Joya and
someone like eisenhard so eisenhard
would be skeptical about the possibility
of really developing Theory based on a
on a single uh case she would say well
you know only if I can compare and
contrast cases that will give me a solid
empirical basis for developing a
theory and the the the next one is
actually I think um uh also a serious
one uh especially since the Joya me
method is is is quite often nowadays
applied as some kind of cookbook methods
you know if you follow the steps you
will get you know a publishable paper
but there is one big
uh uh problem Joya has never made clear
and probably cannot make clear how you
come from you know this more or less
mechanical or routine process of you
know going through the data and you know
going from uh raw data in in a couple of
steps to theoretical Dimensions now how
to find novelty how to make make uh uh
make it interesting that is not
something uh that is self-evident so
that you can do a lot of research you
can do all the work you know and and you
know come up just with d
generalizations uh and then final Point
yeah nowadays there's there's quite some
push back from uh uh reviewers from
journals who say well you know this is
the there have been SE I've seen so many
papers that that that try to to uh apply
this Joya methods in a in a mechanical
way uh can can't you think of something
else H so it it should not be something
that be be becomes very uh uh uh yeah
uninspired and and routine next one
please okay and then uh finally the ien
heart methods which is uh in many ways
yeah contrasting uh with the Joya method
uh so this is here there is where
whereas in Joya the idea was you know we
want to basically understand the reality
the the socially constructed reality
from the perspective of people in the
field here the idea is no I want to
understand objective
reality uh not so much you know the the
lived reality or the perspectives of uh
uh
participants so a different uh uh uh way
of looking at it so the justification of
this type of research typically is that
it's it's phenomenon based I see
interesting phenomenon uh but we do not
have a a satisfactory theory that is if
you look at eisenh heart's work and and
and people following this methods this
is typically how it starts we we we see
a particular phenomenon that we don't
understand like for instance you know we
know a lot about uh you know once there
is a particular social network with a
particular structure we know that that
structure uh leads to you know giving
more opportunities to some players and
and and and fewer to others
but How does the structure come about so
that type of question could be asked
typically well multiple cases she says
it really starts with four cases um and
above 10 it becomes
problematic so between four and 10 uh
cases but as I will show later um
sometimes you know you can have cases
within cases and I'll show an example
again from my own work where we had
eight cases within one particular uh
post merger integration
process so it can be cases within case
so sometimes your your opportunities to
use the eisenhard methods are maybe
bigger than you think if you think of
only one case no maybe you have multiple
cases within that case uh and in this
research the common Dimensions across
cases are
emphasized uh whereas in the Joya method
it's more about the uniqueness of the
case that is emphasized yeah the next
one please
so here also again theoretical sampling
uh so uh in that sense it looks a bit
like a grounded Theory by the way Katy
eisenhard calls herself a grounded
theorist so although she doesn't follow
those
standards so uh in this case in in
eisenh heart's case it would typically
be a selection of cases at the start of
the research and she in her in her on
the the previous slide I've given some
um you know uh titles of papers where
she describes her method uh and she
typically starts with you know um you
know a number of firms in a particular
industry at a particular point in time
uh and and then Compares how they are
doing and what are they doing
differently that leads to these
different
results um so it could be
interviews uh but it could also be
others k K ktie eisenhart is very much
into you know collecting any type of
data you can including quantitative
data uh the interviews will be very diff
different from those in a Joya approach
where it's more like um you know why did
you partic do particular things what was
your motivation to do so what was your
impression what were your perceptions
maybe even what were your emotions Isen
art was more what was happening when who
did what courtroom style questioning
trying to find the objective truth and
again data collection and data analysis
like in the other approaches typically
overlap the next one
please so the first step would be
normally to to write a case
narrative so understand each of the
cases that you study uh as a whole so
this would be a bit like the classical
case method uh but it's just the first
step because the real beef is in the
cross casee comparison so the within
case narrative very often will not even
be in the final paper because they take
too much space so you will maybe
summarize the cases in a table or
something but the narratives you use you
use it's a step that is necessary for
yourself to have full understanding of
what happens within the cases before you
start comparing comparing them and there
there's the real I would say core of
this methods how can you compare these
cases and she gives a number of tips on
how you could could do that you know you
could have different categories small
firms big firms uh and then say okay how
do the small firms differ uh from the
big firms how they are are they similar
to each other that type of thing
pairwise comparison you know where you
have uh uh you know the the most extreme
cases maybe polar
cases uh also sometimes comparison of
different types of data you know I have
maybe data on market share and I have
data on you know how company think they
uh uh they have performed and you know
do they point in the same direction we
have well performing firms according to
management and we have well performing
firms in uh in terms of their sales
figures are there differences between
those and and why so that that there are
many ways in which you can compare these
cases next one
please and then uh you start building
the emerging Theory uh very important
are the construct so whereas Joya
normally talks about Concepts eard talks
about
constructs uh and and these constructs
are typically Illustrated in a table uh
maybe go to the next one now and then we
can go back to this one uh oh no one
more yeah so this is would be an example
of a construct table uh so speed of
strategic decision making so on the
vertical axis we see the the the cases
zap Forefront promise Triumph
Etc and um then we see uh some data
about uh that on the right hand side
there is a number how many months this
did the decision uh process take so
there's a good example I think that um
of how different types of data are are
mixed typically in the eart approach
maybe you can go to back now
Louisa yeah so uh these construct tables
are very important so for for uh Joya
the data structure is the core you could
say and for eisenhart the construct
table is the core and now I think an
important thing is that um these things
you know don't come automatically so
what you see in the work of eisenhart is
a kind of a mutual calibration between
data and construct
because you need to find a level of
abstraction that makes it theoretical
enough but at the same time provides a
good fit with your data and an example
that came to my mind you know preparing
for today was a a paper from 2018 by
Hana and eisenhard about the residential
solar energy Market in
California where she uh based on her
data distinguish between three
strategies three types of strategies
that these firms have uh the bottleneck
strategy the component strategy and the
system strategy now these are rather
specific um constructs that fits this
particular industry in that particular
time frame uh and and and which are at a
very different level of generalization
and abstraction than for instance uh
Porters uh generic strategies
so I think part of the art of of doing
Eisen heart type of research is finding
you know the right level of abstraction
of your of your of your constructs they
fit the data very closely and they are
abstract enough to allow
theorizing okay go please go to the next
one H and then as in all theorizing of
course it is about the why so why are is
there a relationship between for
instance having a particular uh strategy
and uh uh leading to a particular
outcome and she says well you know there
can many things can can help uh can help
you find it um one particular Source
could be the explanations provided by
your informant which would also be a key
factor for Joya but what she call you
know the more detached logic of the
researcher would also play a role So you
you're not you're not stuck with the
explanations that the informants give
you and you can actually rise above that
and say okay this is what how they see
it but for me with my more let's say
theoretical background I can also see
that there might be a different more
theoretical explanation and then you
have to weave that into a a coherent
theoretical story so you see there's a
lot of art here in in the in the in the
Joya approach as well as I and art
approach it's it's it's not something
that you do automatically it's it's art
um okay next one
please that we have that one next
one okay now just to it reiterate the
the the the differences and I think this
is important so
um Mo in most cases you would you you
should do either Joya or
okay um so eisenhard is more positivist
looking for objective reality uh Joya
interpretive uh is an interpretive
researcher that LIF reality Eisen Ard
emphasis on objective facts and events
Joya subjective per perceptions and
meanings isart uh is more interested in
representative cases so if she studies
the solar
energy Market in in in uh in California
she studies cases of firms that are you
know representing the whole uh gamma of
of of firms uh uh active in that
particular Market geographically and in
terms of of the time
frame
um uh yeah so in Joya I think there's
there's more emphasis on also developing
new Concepts eard more on relationship
between concept that might already have
been known or specifications of concept
that we already knew so there are quite
some differences between the two yeah
maybe the next
one now um I'm very uh pragmatic in
these things and I think I know there's
not one particular methods or approach
that I am you know loed into uh I
believe in horses for courses meaning
that you select whatever fits your
interest and your you know uh uh uh
research question uh or your data if you
can go to the next one uh Louisa yeah so
typic
typically you know people would say okay
I first have a research question this
research question dictates the type of
data that I need now if your research
question for instance is about what
motivates managers to you
know do a particular thing
uh then you would have to interview
managers if your research question would
be more like you know what happens to
companies when they make losses in three
consecutive years you would need
financial data and so the research
question is assumed to lead to the type
of data that you need which then leads
to the the research method that you need
need but I think you know you can also
look at it differently sometimes you
have access to data interesting data and
then you start thinking okay what is the
question that I can answer using those
data or you have a a pet methods you
want to use a particular research method
okay fine with me you want to use that
research method what is the question
that fits that and what are the data
that that fit that and so for me you
know you can start at any points in this
triangle uh maybe go to the next one and
that's already the final one
so from that
perspective uh you know you can more
easily make a choice between these two
main approaches that I've discussed so
for Joya in those cases where the
informance view is vital where you're
interested in the lived experience yeah
that that is then you use that method uh
or you are interested in articulating
new Concepts uh take Joya uh or you know
you have access to inter few and
observational data but not really
numbers and maybe only one case Joya is
the man now on the other hand if you're
more interested in the objective truth
if you're interested in explaining
outcomes company results you know why is
company a successful and Company B not
Eisen art is more the way to go uh if
you're interested in combining data from
different sources and different types if
you have access to multiple cases maybe
uh the isart method is better for you
and sometimes you can actually combine
them sometimes you can you can say Okay
I I have I objectively know and I'll
show an example in the next slide I
objectively know what happened in a
number of
cases but I also want to know you know
what that how that was
interpreted H and perceived by people in
that
reality uh and we may have various types
of data there and and and but of course
then you also need multiple cases and if
you can go to the next
one that is an example again from my own
work uh sorry for that but here what I
already mentioned we had one single uh
post merger integration process but we
observed that in different parts of the
organizations there something very
different was going on so some of some
of the Departments or units were fully
integrated between the two companies
others there was just you know some
selective displacement of tasks some
something that one company wouldn't do
anymore and the other would do uh there
were some that were you know hardly
integrated at all so we said okay these
are actually eight different cases and
to be honest you know it was a
reviewer who at a certain moment said to
us well you know because we as you see
also in our this is part of the data
structure so if you have multip cases
why don't you use
eisenhard uh so in the end we we we
ended up with combining actually
eisenhart elements and Joya elements so
it can be done uh but you must be aware
of what you're doing then because it you
can also uh antagonize some of the
reviewers if you do so so that is an
example of you know uh it's not black
and white there are also uh Shades of
Gray in between sometimes you can borrow
a bit from one method and introduce in
the other but you must be aware of what
you're doing and maybe next the next
slide I think is the final one almost
the final one so I've just discussed
these but of course there's much more
going on in qualitative uh uh research
you know you have process studies which
lean a little bit more to the Joya uh
SES although fewer process researchers
are tend to be critical about the more
cookbook nature of of the Joya approach
you have the more e etnographic studies
eisenhard says she does ethnographic
work but I think most etnographic would
not probably agree with her and you have
the the the text as data studies that
you nowadays the discourse type of
studies that are are blooming and and
which are not easy easily you know
locked into either of these two so
there's much more going on but I've just
you know focused on on these two main uh
Representatives at this moment and next
one please yeah that's it and uh we have
some time for
questions thank you very much Neils uh
for your very comprehensive presentation
and also providing us with several
Alternatives that one can use uh so let
me open up the floor to questions
from um please use your electronic
hand and in this way we can identify you
or even your physical
hands accepted as
well uh maybe I can uh kick off uh the
Q&amp;A session until people come up with um
their questions and um I have seen some
pre-submitted questions so one of them
uh would be asking to clarify a little
bit or to talk about mixed methods in
light of what you presented about
qualitative studies qualitative research
sorry yeah so um that is that is a
difficult issue um I I think that in
theory mixed methods could be great I I
have little experience I've published
one mixed methods paper uh to be honest
not more than that uh but it's it's
typically something that will be very
difficult to get published uh because
you some of the reviewers will like your
uh will like your quantitative part but
not your qualitative part and vice versa
so uh that is difficult plus there is
another difficulty that probably all of
us know I mean it's always difficult
enough to keep your paper within you
know the word count and the page count
uh that that the journals
prescribe uh and you know with mixed
methods that would even
because you have two finding sections
you have two method sections uh and it
becomes really problematic uh having
said so uh sometimes it it can work uh
but uh yeah I I would I would not advise
uh to to to to try it what can work
sometimes you know if if actually R
viewers ask you do you also have some
know some qualitative evidence for
instance that is that's great okay okay
now now you can put it in or vice versa
might also happen but uh do you have
some you know quantitative material
supporting your conclusions it might
happen uh but more often you find that
okay rers say okay your quantitative
analysis is fine but you know can you
breathe some more life in it with some
qualitative examples okay great if you
have those yeah right thank you um there
is one question
on the chat
box
um uh so when dealing with qualitative
methodology sample sizes always comes as
a limitation so what would be your
advice as to how many would be enough
taking for example a case
study yeah so that depends very much on
your question uh so uh if you if you
have very You Know Rich data and deep
access in a single case that can be
sufficient to do interesting work um uh
for other questions you will need to
compare between cases and then you
know it it starts it starts obviously
with two but then probably you have more
value if you can add some some
additional cases uh but again you know
above 10 it becomes quite
unmanageable in a truly qualitative
study and then uh uh uh you would
probably have a qca type of of study
earlier than rather than than pure
qualitative work so yeah I mean again
horses for courses so I I believe in the
in the in the strengths of a single case
if you focus on questions that can be
answered by that single
case and there will always have uh
limitations in generalizability of
course uh there's another question by
Olga uh which is about well she asks you
mentioned that coding is not suitable
for the classical case studies can you
give examples of how to analyze case
studies data that is a good question so
if you look at the classical case
studies there typically is very little
information about how um the researcher
came from the data to his or her comp
Solutions um uh so because you
know if you have very rich data uh what
stops you from just very selectively
quoting from that data um you know to
draw whatever conclusion you want to
come at so that is that is a fundamental
point which is actually echoed in Eisen
Hearts work eisenhart uh is also uh
quite um let's say a u uh
intransparent in the steps that she
takes in the in the data analysis and
that is I think a big um a big uh
contrast between ien heart method and
Joya me Joya step by step you know you
show what you do uh and eisenhart it's
it's but she says it's also difficult if
not impossible because I have these
multiple cases you know if I also then
step by step then simp you know it
becomes a book rather than a paper uh
now um so In classical case studies was
very
little uh I think the uh in in in in
Eisen heart's multip multiple case study
it's very much tied to the the
development of constructs so you you you
develop these constructs that are that
are relevant are important to understand
those cases and you illustrate them very
very thoroughly with as much material as
you as you can um but to be honest there
are also very different ways of writing
case studies which are much more let's
say yeah impressionistic if you
like so there's not one you know
approved uh and generally accepted
method great thank you Neils uh another
question um would you recommend me
mixing the classical ground grounded
Theory method with the Joya method for
instance study designs uh feed the
classic grounded Theory but you can use
joyous data structure to show how you
have developed your uh theoretical
codes now well I to be honest um but
this is my personal opinion I think
classical grounded theory has outlift
its uh its uh you know usability it's I
think um the Joya method is a much more
realistic and and um yeah uh uh
acceptable way of doing grounded Theory
so you will do grounded Theory but
avoiding some of the disadvantages of of
the Glazer and Strauss approach so I I
don't I don't see much value in going
back to those uh to those uh
prescriptions uh by the way Panos there
are also some questions in uh uh okay in
your in in the in the chat I think I
don't know to what extent they have been
covered well these are the ones I have
been using but okay yeah yeah uh there
is there there are a couple of questions
that were submitted before the talk on
uh different software packages and tools
that may be recommended so do you want
to comment on that yeah I don't have a
lot to say there to be honest I I I've
worked on I worked with two different
packages uh Atlas Di and Max qda for two
different papers but my conclusion
basically was that it didn't help me
that much so what I now do or what I've
done most of the time and still do
mostly is simply use Excel I put I put
uh these uh quotes Etc in Excel and and
you know use that to organize and maybe
it's not the most advanced and
sophisticated method but it works for me
um but that is very personal but don't
expect miracles from the software that
is I think something you know it's it
can help you it's it certainly can help
you uh to um you know do more
efficiently this this this this just you
know going through the data and you know
reorganizing the data but in the end it
will be your decisions that count by the
way something that's you know can be
extremely helpful and I wish you know
that that that uh would have existed
when I was doing most of my qualitative
research uh that is the the software you
nowadays have like jet GTP to transcribe
interviews that is really good and uh
you know uh if I if I
just recall how much I spent uh having
my interviews transcribed in India and
then getting them back and you know
having made having to make so many you
know improvements it's that you know
this this is much better now faster and
less costly yeah um there is one
question about uh dealing with reviewers
so it seems to me that reviewers will
not accept an analysis that is not based
on codes and preferably on the Joya
method nowadays and the single case
study case seems to uh out of the
question how can we convince on the
contrary
yeah so I'm not so pessimistic about
that so uh on firstly uh you know uh
eisenhart and her students and people
working in that tradition get their work
published in uh Strategic Management
journal and uh Academy of management
Journal all the time so
apparently uh but of course what what
counts here is that um isenhart and our
students get very very good access to
companies as so that is something that
helps and that we you know simple
Mortals uh sometimes you know can Envy
can EnV for so I think if you have good
access to to data Etc you can uh publish
also uh you know without any
coding um and the single case again you
know I see papers published on on single
cases that
uh uh yeah I I don't think that in
itself is necessarily an impediment but
make if you have if you have really rich
data if you have a single case and your
data are not you know that deep and Rich
yeah then it becomes difficult if you
have multiple cases and your data are
less Rich you can you know you can um uh
compensate for the lack of richness and
you know by by making those
comparisons but if you have a single
case it really needs to be in depth and
hopefully something interesting comes
out of it in the interest of time I
think I will ask one last question from
the chat box uh which is the person asks
for the first order coding in Joya we do
it based on the literature so somehow we
already have a theory before our Theory
beforehand is it still congruent with
the Joya
method um uh I I yeah I understand the
question
um uh I think think it would not be uh
uh say in conform to the Joya methods if
that would be the end of the story so I
think that it's very important that you
you keep your eyes open for maybe
unexpected observations actually that is
also what makes the research interesting
you know you find something that you
know you didn't even think about or
maybe it's contrary to your uh
expectations and then make the most out
of it so um what is interesting
interesting interesting is something
that goes against you know what people
conventionally think or or expect so if
you can find something like that you
know for instance a caal relationship is
the other way around from what people
think you know uh then you know then you
probably you know you you have the the
material to write an interesting paper
that uh has a good chance of being
published if you if you yeah somehow you
know you have to find that that the
Nugget of gold that makes your work yeah
interesting to read I'm sure we could
continue endlessly the discussion uh in
the interest of time we will need to
draw this uh webinar to a close so I
would like to express our special thanks
to Neils for sharing with us his
expertise and uh wisdom and we have all
learned a lot today about qualitative
research and also the different
contingent contingencies that may apply
and how to deal with them so let's give
him an electronic Round of
Applause okay thank you
fora and Alexandro for helping with the
organizing organization of the of this
of the webinar thank you very much thank
you NE thank you Panos great
seminar and I understand that the the
slides will be uh downloadable from the
your own website
yeah okay
everyone byebye Thanks for
attending well okay I guess I can close
it yeah I think everybody is uh moving
out okay maybe you can stay just a
little bit maybe a question I wanted to
ask
you ah so should I well I doesn't matter
it's no secret
ah so I just thinking about um
so the this this this project that we do
on the history of Europe uhuh so um we
must find a moment that we can think
about okay what are some of the
historical materials that you may still
have at the office U so I was wondering
for instance um is there anything you
know photos and things like that that
you have from the periods when uh yasam
was still at the at the in the rud
mon
uh um I've looked at the internet if
there any materials you know from that
time but I couldn't find
anything I will have to ask my
colleagues because evidently I wasn't
there yet okay you came in later yeah
yeah we had if you look at the the um
the first meetings we that we had that
was in the rudm ah okay yeah I have I
have the minutes of all those meetings
yeah the minutes but I I think you know
it would be really nice if we could have
some you
know
atmosphere so yeah the only that's
thought that came up with me because
Peter asked me to talk briefly about
this project tomorrow in the F meeting
and I thought you
know um the more
uh uh material that we have to make it
to enliven it you know that's that would
be much nicer than just
text of
course I have a look what there is yeah
yeah so let's let's think about it so if
you maybe you know if you come across
colleagues that they may know okay we
had that meeting or whatever and some
pictures were taken I don't know yeah
yeah nowadays of course there's much
more material but at that time you
didn't actually make pi that much no we
didn't make pictures with the phones
that's the issue no that's the big
difference yeah so I I will see what's
in the files because I don't see where
else I can look for it don't I don't you
know just keep your keep your keep your
mind open for and maybe ask some people
who have been around for a long time
okay good uh okay and that was it and
now someone want once in bit late ah I
don't think that's was much used to that
well some people get the time difference
wrong yeah I think so probably that's
what's going on okay so it was a I think
it worked well this uh I'm I'm okay I'm
happy I think it was a bit uh yeah I
mean there was not much weren't many
questions afterwards but it's okay no no
okay okay see you soon bye bye n bye bye
