the titles and click bait it's true as
far as I can tell Sherlock Holmes never
once makes an actual proper formal
deduction but how can that be we see all
sorts of examples of Sherlock Holmes
deploying his logical genius in order to
come to conclusions based on the
information he receives isn't that what
deduction means no and that's what we'll
explore in this video on reasoning
deduction induction and abduction
explained
what does it mean to reason usually
reasoning refers to the idea of taking
some information and reaching new
conclusions I encounter a piece of toast
a reason it was once bred and that it
was transformed into this new entity in
a toaster Sherlock Holmes observed that
a woman's wedding ring is significantly
cleaner on the inside and concludes that
she is a Serial adulterer a lot like me
really I'm a loyal wheat of X-Men but
the temptation of country nut conflicts
is often too powerful to resist but in
reality there are actually three
different types of reasoning deduction
induction and abduction they're all
different and refer to very specific
methodologies for taking information and
reaching conclusions and yes as you've
probably deduced by now even though
Sherlock refers to his method as the
science of deduction he never actually
employs deductive reasoning in his
arguments to see why let's go over the
three types of reasoning and we'll start
as always with my favorite topic
definitions all reasoning can be
stripped into arguments we have the
information given and we have the
information concluded the fact we are
given are called the premises and the
premises aren't always obvious to pin
down back to my toast example one
premise is this is toast another premise
is red becomes toast in a toaster even
though it sounds obvious that is a fact
that we are required to take as true if
we want to conclude anything about the
toast's origin so since it's the fact
we're taking is true before making any
inferences it is a premise the fact at
the end that we are acquiring as a
result of the reasoning is called the
conclusion so in my toast example we
concluded that this was made in a
toaster more complicated reasoning
requires multiple steps so in my
Sherlock example Holmes has the premises
her otherwise dirty wedding ring is
clean on the inside Rings which are
clean on the inside are removed
frequently conclusion her wedding ring
is removed frequently this then becomes
a premise in the next stage of his
argument along with an additional
premise those who frequently remove
dirty wedding rings are serial
adulterers conclusion she is a Serial
adulterer and is a very brief aside in a
mathematical implication P implies Q we
call P the antecedent and Q the
consequent but we'll stick to premise
and conclusion in this video if you want
to learn more about mathematical logic I
have a video last point before we move
on in general the number of premises is
always greater than the number of
conclusions that's because reasoning
generally occurs when we are combining
facts together in order to acquire new
knowledge so with that out of the way
let's look at our first type of
reasoning deduction
it is the key to deduction the
conclusion is always a necessary
consequence of the premises it is
impossible to disagree with a valid and
sound deductive argument we'll get to
what validity and soundness are in just
a moment but the key really is that
simple deductions are unarguable in
controvertible 100 definitely actually
factually true here is an example of a
deductive argument premise one all
apples are fruits premise two I am
eating an apple conclusion I'm eating a
fruit the conclusion is inescapable the
majority of deductive arguments take
this form you're basically establishing
that one category is a subset of another
category demonstrating that something
belongs in the smaller category and then
concluding that therefore it belongs to
the larger category this type of
argument with two premises and the
conclusion is called a syllogism and oh
what a word perhaps the most famous
example of a syllogism is this
premise one all men are mortal premise 2
Socrates is a man conclusion Socrates is
Mortal again premise 1 establishes that
the set of men is a subset of the set of
Mortals premise 2 establishes Socrates
as a member of the set of men the
conclusion is that he is a member of the
set of Mortals all of mathematical logic
takes the form of deductive reasoning in
my video on logic I looked at the
following mathematical implication X is
a multiple of four implies X is even if
we wanted to write a deductive argument
that uses that implication
syllogistically we would say premise 1
if x is a multiple of 4 then X is even
premise 2 x is a multiple of four
conclusion X is even and what is special
about deduction is that the content of
the argument doesn't actually matter
take a look at this one premise 1 all
multiples of four are apples premise two
Socrates is a multiple of four
conclusion Socrates is is an apple as
weird as it looks this is still a valid
argument if the premises are taken to be
true it is impossible to argue against
the conclusion it's the structure of a
deductive argument that matters and it's
for that reason the fact that it's the
shape or form of the argument that
matters that this process is part of
formal logic growing up I always thought
that this was formal logic we can even
make this abstract premise one
everything in a is in B premise 2 x is
in a conclusion X is in B we can replace
a b and x with whatever we like and as
long as the substitution is correct the
argument will still be valid and that's
what we refer to as validity a deductive
argument is valid if the structure is
such that the conclusion follows from
the premises by necessity now the
structure that we've been looking at so
far is usually written like this premise
one if a is true then B is true S2 a is
true conclusion B is true it's so common
that it even has its own name this
structure is called modus ponens but
it's not the only valid deductive
structure that's out there here's an
example of a different structure premise
one nothing in a is in B premise two x
is in a conclusion X is not in B in
Practical terms we might use an argument
like this when we're discussing
something along the lines of premise one
there are no odd multiples of four
premise two x is odd conclusion X is not
a multiple of four so validity pertains
to the structure of an argument if a
deductive argument is valid we can't
argue with the truth of the conclusion
except let's go back to this argument
that we had before that concluded that
Socrates is an apple I mean this must be
wrong in some sort of way because we
know that Socrates wasn't an apple or at
least that's what we suspect so what's
wrong with this argument how can we
challenge a valid argument like this
well in this case we challenge the truth
of the premises a valid deductive
argument is such that the conclusion is
true so long as the premises are true
but that's if the premises are true
which in this case they're not so what
we say here is that while this argument
is valid it is not sound a deductive
argument is sound so long as the
premises are in fact true now take a
look at this one premise one some
mammals are cats premise two some
vertebrates are mammals conclusion some
vertebrates are cats now this seems like
a through and through deductive argument
it certainly sound because it is the
case that some mammals are in fact cats
and it is the case that some vertebrates
are in fact mammals and the conclusion
is even true but this argument is not
actually valid this isn't a valid
syllogistic structure to see why
remember that this argument must be
valid regardless of the content of the
argument so to see the floor in this
argument let's go abstract premise 1 sum
of B is in C premise 2 sum of a is in B
conclusion sum of a is in C but this
doesn't follow by necessity premise 1
establishes some overlap between B and C
so premise 1 establishes that at least
one thing exists in both categories and
premise 2 establishes some overlap
between A and B but nothing can be
concluded about the overlap between a
and C it doesn't follow by necessity
that something in a is in C and a quick
substitution will reveal the floor
premise one some carnivores are cats
premise two some humans are carnivores
conclusion some humans are cats and we
all know this is wrong as no humans are
cats at least that's what we suspect so
deductive arguments need to be valid and
sound to be proper deductive arguments
the only way to contrivert a deductive
argument is to question its validity or
to question its soundness validity is
usually easy to check as the argument
will take one of a few number of valid
forms more on that in a future video but
soundness can be tricky take this
argument which is an active part of
atheist theist debate circles known as
the Kalan cosmological argument it
attempts to prove the existence of God
premise one everything which begins to
exist has a cause for its existence
premise 2 the universe began to exist
conclusion the universe has a cause for
its existence the structure of this
argument is completely valid if the
premises are true we are necessarily
required to accept the conclusion the
only refutation must come in challenging
the soundness then are the premises true
true that is is it true that the
Universe began to exist or has it always
existed eternally in one form or another
or what about premise one is it true
that everything which ever began to
exist did so with a cause or are there
some things which come to be without
cause another brief aside here we can
also pit the conclusion against the
commonly cited aim of the Kalam which is
to prove the existence of a God but even
if the Kalan were valid in sound and we
necessarily accepted the conclusion all
it does is demonstrate that the Universe
came to be with some cause nothing about
whether that cause is a God now this
isn't a video about proving the
existence of gods and I don't claim to
prove that one way or another I'm just
bringing this argument up as an example
that soundness isn't always easy to
verify anyway I hope that gives you a
flavor of deduction and why Sherlock
Holmes doesn't actually employ deductive
reasoning in his arguments let's go back
to my toast example and write the
argument syllogistically so premise 1
red becomes toast in a toaster premise
two this is a piece of toast conclusion
this became toast in a toaster this is a
sound argument but it is not valid a
toaster is sufficient for toast but it
is not necessary there are other ways to
make toast like under a grill or over an
open fire for instance I used my
airfryer to make this one for the
express purpose of demonstrating my
ability to make toast without a toaster
which none of you would have noticed had
I not pointed it out so I'm pointing it
out now because I didn't go through all
the effort of using my airfryer just so
that you would think I used a toaster
like a mere mortal were my Socrates and
practically every argument Sherlock
Holmes employees has this flaw he makes
an observation he conjectures one way in
which that observation can arise and
then concludes that that is in fact how
it arose or his arguments simply aren't
sound let's look at that wedding ring
again presented this way the argument is
valid but is it sound particularly that
second premise is it true that Rings
which are clean on the inside are
removed frequently if you think about it
if the ring is always on and pressed
against the skin maybe it isn't exposed
to the same levels of dirt as the
outside and it's a similar story with
the next stage of the argument here we
challenge the soundness again just look
at that second premise is it true the
one who removes a wedding ring
frequently Must Be A Serial adulterer no
because some people take their rings off
every single night even when they're
being faithful swimmers often take their
rings off every time they go swimming
because chlorine can damage and precious
metals maybe she's at a consensual open
or polyamorous relationship and she
takes her ring off when she sees other
people it happens taking this into
account we can actually rewrite the
argument and say okay maybe not everyone
who frequently removes a wedding ring is
a Serial adulterer but surely those who
are serial adulterers do remove their
wedding ring frequently we're
effectively reversing that second
premise well I would still challenge the
truth of that second premise because
maybe some serial adulterers keep their
wedding ring on when they see other
people because the people they're
meeting don't care that they are married
and there's an even bigger problem now
and that's that the argument in this
form is no longer valid and it's
basically for the same reason that my
toast example wasn't valid we're
establishing that these serial
adulterers are a subset of the frequent
ring removers we're establishing that
the woman is a member of this overset
and then trying to conclude that she
must be a member of the subset which
doesn't follow by necessity so
Sherlock's arguments are either not
sound or not valid and therefore since
the conclusions don't follow necessarily
isn't deduction so let's move on and
look at the other types of reasoning now
and they are a little bit different in
that the conclusions Don't Follow by
necessity does that make them inferior
or weaker than deduction kind of but no
one of the reasons I love mathematics is
that we can execute this deductive
process and that's because mathematics
takes place in a space of idealized
circumstances where everything is pure
and beautiful and harmonious but the
real world isn't like that it's muddy
and fuzzy we have imperfect and
incomplete information and we have to
make new with the other types of
reasoning which are still very powerful
when employed correctly so let's move on
to the next one and look at induction
next
thank you
just gonna take a very quick break here
for some Shameless self-promotion just
wanted to let you know I'm offering my
services as a maths tutor so if you or
your child needs support with maths then
allow me to help I've got five years of
experience as a classroom teacher and
before that when I was studying for my
PhD I taught students at the University
so I've taught GCSE a-level degree level
whatever exams are coming up for you I
will be able to help you I've got the
necessary background checks as well as a
strong track record of securing good
grades for my students I offer online
sessions or if you're in the Manchester
area of the UK in-person sessions as
well contact me via my website
dr.magore.com I'd love to hear from you
and I'd be happy to help so induction
not to be confused with mathematical
induction which I discussed here
inductive reasoning is the sort of
reasoning used by The Sciences the
process can be summed up thusly forming
general rules from specific observations
if we look under a microscope at a skin
cell we see something like this a blob
containing a smaller blob that smaller
blob is what we call the nucleus a nerve
cell looks like this a bone cell looks
like this all have this blob within blob
structure using inductive reasoning we
make the following conclusion all human
cells contain a nucleus we are making a
general statement from specific
observations notice how this is in
contrast to deductive reasoning here the
conclusion does not follow by necessity
and as we know not all human cells
contain a nucleus because red blood
cells don't upon observing a red blood
cell we might adjust our general
statements by saying something like all
human cells which are not red blood
cells contain a nucleus this is how
science is done observations are made
and we attempt to find through inductive
reasoning the overarching rules that
explain the observations these
conclusions Don't Follow by necessity
but we improve our reasoning by ensuring
our conclusions are always consistent
with each of our observations and
testing our conclusions through
experimentation to see if they hold
predictive power once you're aware of it
you'll notice that you do inductive
reasoning in your head all the time here
were the first three general rules about
my life that I thought of while writing
this video if I exercise in the morning
I'll feel good during the day that's
because the few times when I've done it
it's felt good shopping at a supermarket
in the afternoon is better than in the
evening I will enjoy the next film made
by denieville nerve these are all
inferences made from repeated
observations the conclusions Don't
Follow by necessity but as a general
rule inductively it works the next stage
in scientific reasoning might be to try
and find the underlying cause or
explanation exercise releases endorphins
and they make me feel good more people
are working in the afternoon and not
clogging up the supermarket the needle
nerve makes dark and Moody High concept
introspective films and I happen to
really like that and my God just look at
that track record but again these
conclusions Don't Follow by necessity so
they are not deductions for example I
might hurt myself exercising in the
morning and ruin the rest of my day an
unusually high number of people might
just visit the supermarket one afternoon
the needle nerve might just make a bad
film it happens sadly like I loved every
work of David Fincher right up until
mine hunter aliens 3 doesn't count and
this isn't a video about films so moving
on there is a name for the idea that the
general rule always fits as a result of
specific observations the Black Swan
fallacy historically the term Black Swan
was used in the west to describe an
impossibility a modern equivalent might
be something like describing a flying
pig you know just something that can't
happen when Europeans arrived in Western
Australia for the first time and
observed actual black swans the term
Black Swan morphed into a term which
meant that supposed facts might later be
disproven given new evidence and hey
maybe one day we'll observe a flying pig
zigzagging our way to the bottom and
pain this is why mathematics is
different to science mathematics through
deductive reasoning makes and proves
true assertions science provides the
best understanding given the current
evidence and must always be revised
given new evidence does that make sense
feeble and fickle because it can change
any any moment on the contrary this is
the power of Science and inductive
reasoning given new evidence those
general rules and observations are
adjusted thereby strengthening them like
how when we discovered a red blood cell
we adjusted our general rule about human
cells thereby making it more accurate
now you will note that Sherlock Holmes
never seeks a general explanation for
his observations Holmes is famous for
his quick fire inferences given limited
information like in that example with
the wedding ring he never seeks a
general explanation like all wedding
rings clean on the inside are worn by
serial adulterers
and when I started this YouTube channel
I had no idea I would be discussing
adultery so much there is an observation
an explanation and that's it so what is
Sherlock Holmes doing well Holmes
himself said that once you eliminate the
impossible whatever remains no matter
how improbable must be the truth so
Holmes if he's not doing deduction or
induction must be doing abduction so
let's look at that but uh that phrase is
fraught with error by the way as it
often introduces incorrect assumptions
like for example what if Sherlock isn't
doing any of the three types of
reasoning but anyway abduction
foreign
reasoning seeks to find the most
plausible or most probable explanation
for a particular observation consider
this scenario I open my curtains in the
morning and see that the road is wet I
conclude that it must have rained during
the night this isn't a deductive
inference because the following
syllogism isn't valid premise one if it
rains during the night the road will be
wet in the morning premise 2 the road is
wet in the morning conclusion it rained
during the night this isn't valid in
structure for basically the same reason
the toast example wasn't valid we've
established that the rain scenario is a
subset of the wet Road scenario we've
established that we're in the wet Road
scenario so it does not necessarily
imply that we're in the rain scenario
rain is sufficient for wet road but not
necessary maybe it snowed during the
night and then the snow melted into
water maybe a water pipe burst and
sprayed water everywhere it could happen
it isn't a necessary consequence so this
isn't a deductive inference this also
isn't inductive reasoning because I'm
not seeking to establish a general rule
that whenever I observe wet Road in the
morning it must be because it rains
during the night having rained last
night is an example of abductive
reasoning other explanations are
possible but they are not likely so
having rain last night is the most
probable explanation like if you were to
track every single time in which I
observed wet Road in the morning and
measured what they were attributed to
then the fact that it rained last night
would account for the majority of those
circumstances and so it is the most
probable explanation visually we might
adjust our diagram to look something a
little bit more like this with rain
really accounting for the vast majority
of situations in which the road is wet
so if we observe wet road then we're not
guaranteed to be inside the rain subset
but it is more likely if I encounter a
piece of toast then through abductive
reasoning I conclude that it was made in
a toaster it's not 100 guaranteed but it
is the most likely explanation
foreign
that was terrible and using inductive
reasoning from one specific observation
I'm happy to make the general rule that
one should not eat toast made in an air
fryer that's been sat on your desk for
four hours while you've been filming all
day and yes this is what Sherlock Holmes
is doing whenever he makes observations
and inferences in season 2 episode 1 he
sees dog hair on the trouser leg of an
office worker and concludes that the man
works at Buckingham Palace of course
this isn't guaranteed because the guy
could work in any office and has just
encountered at least one dog since he
last cleaned his trousers but Holmes
believes that him working at Buckingham
Palace is the most likely explanation
and so it is abductive reasoning a great
emotional example of where this goes
wrong is in guy Richie's 2009 adaptation
Guy Ritchie by the way another filmmaker
I liked for his strong but patchy track
record until well
anyway here when Holmes meets Mary for
the first time and makes observations
and deductions we see that his
conclusions don't necessarily follow
foreign
foreign
reasoning isn't deduction the film
acknowledges that and turns it into an
effective story beat this film is
actually pretty good by the way and
features one of my favorite Han Zimmer
scores so check it out if you haven't
already it's much better than the
pretentious Steven Moffat adaptation but
not as good as the best modern
adaptation of homes which is of course
House MD Now abduction has a bit of a
weird place among the three flavors of
reasoning it isn't the approach taken by
mathematics or philosophy nor is it the
approach taken by science but I would
argue that it is the most practical and
pragmatic form of reasoning available to
us in our day-to-day lives we often
don't have the perfect ideal
circumstances available to us to conduct
proper deductive reasoning so even
though abductive reasoning is often
formally fallacious under deduction it
often doesn't matter when I lose my keys
for example there are always a few
places that I look for them first under
deduction this is fallacious as it isn't
necessary that I will find them there
but through abductive reasoning it gives
me a pragmatic first step for where my
keys will likely be and while
mathematics uses deduction much of the
process of doing mathematics uses
abduction like when I encounter an exam
question through abductive reasoning I
infer what the question is most likely
going to be about what on Earth is going
on here this is like a group's question
the symmetries of the shape a rotation
this is groups and even doing
mathematical research I made
observations and made abductive
inferences before seeking to prove them
using deduction
foreign now I know what some of you
might be thinking who cares isn't this
all a bit pedantic sure Sherlock Holmes
calls his method deduction and in common
parlance we say deduce to mean come to a
reasonable conclusion well to that I say
three things one I'm a mathematician of
course I'm pedantic two I mostly just
wanted to teach people about the three
kinds of reasoning and Sherlock's
methods were a good vehicle for doing
that three actually I do care about this
at least a little bit science is often
stretched in hilariously misguided ways
in films and TV shows and for the most
part I really do not care as long as
it's internally consistent and it's a
good story do whatever you want but I do
find something slightly Insidious about
the use of the term deduction and how it
has come to mean generally reach
conclusions because there are good
reasons why reasoning is divided into
these three categories I listen to a lot
of debates signed scientific political
theological and what I've noticed is
that many interlocutors and listeners
describe themselves as logical when
actually it becomes clear that they
don't know how to construct a logical
argument claiming that one's arguments
are deductive alleges that they are
watertight and incontrovertible when in
reality they are abductive at best and
are therefore more open to challenge
logic is very specific and it's actually
fairly unnatural for humans and more on
that in a future video logic requires
training and practice in order to use
effectively I'm not trying to be elitist
here there's nothing wrong with being
untrained in logic but I think the
misappropriation of terms like logical
and deduction has led to them becoming
synonymous with generally making sense
my hope is not for stories like Sherlock
Holmes to totally abandon the use of
terms like deduction just that we all
have a little more awareness so that we
can recognize things like a deductive
argument when they are presented but
that's just me maybe I'm overly worried
about the terminology maybe you feel
more adamantly that the correct terms
should always be used I'd love to hear
your thoughts on this one so let me know
down in the comments thank you so much
for watching don't go anywhere yet I've
got an update to the challenge I set at
the end of my last video I received a
lot of partial Solutions so thank you to
all those who attempted The Challenge
and sent me your methods I loved reading
them a lot of them were really creative
one viewer I can say has managed to
solve the challenge now I'm not actually
going to get into the solution right now
because I haven't decided whether or not
to make an entire countdown part 2 video
or just stick the interesting findings
and additional questions at the end of
another video but thank you so much to
all those who attempted the problem and
sent me your partial Solutions I really
enjoyed reading them and I will get the
results back to you in one form or
another very soon an enormous thank you
to all my patrons for providing such a
lovely and supportive Community if you'd
like to support me you'll find a link to
my patreon down below this has been
another proof under another roof and it
has been dare I say Elementary my dear
viewer
foreign
