so I follow education research pretty
closely and something I find interesting
is that when an idea becomes really
popular in the education sphere the
first place you see it in the world is
usually in like the toy aisle at Target
like the first time I saw steam so stem
is science technology engineering and
Mathematics and when you put an A in
that we'll get to it it's totally fine
that's steam the first time I saw steam
was in the toy aisle at Target when all
the toys that used to say stem learning
stem now they say steam learning steam
even though they they're the same toy
it's just that marketers are the first
people to co-opt education buzzwords and
just shove it into desperate parents'
hands be like you want your child to
succeed right you better buy the steam
toy like look at this slime it's
educational I bet there's a bucket of
slime in this box and maybe a little
piece of paper that gives you ideas on
how to make it educational but that's
that's not what an educational toy is if
something is going to be an educational
toy you need someone to have developed a
learning plan like what are the expected
learning outcomes for this project and
what is the metric by which you are
going to test whether or not the
learning goals were achieved otherwise
you know you're just throwing slime at
your kid desperately hoping it'll
entertain them for 10 minutes while you
get any time to yourself to make dinner
and that's fine but that's not an
educational toy but they're selling it
to you like it's an educational toy
isn't it weird how all the educational
toys are the weird loud goopy annoying
toys you would never buy usually but
they're educational now
so before we get to steam which is an
educational teaching Style with a
specific set of student outcomes and
goals we have to talk about stem which
like funnily enough is not that stem is
not a way to teach science technology
engineering and Mathematics classes
stem it's rooted in Immigration policy
which is I don't know that's kind of
interesting you can pin this on George W
bush in the early 2000s who like
revamped or you could say destroyed
public education with the No Child Left
Behind Act but also he talked a lot
about the importance of making sure
highly trained immigrants don't come and
take jobs that Americans could not fill
which seems like an odd way to phrase
that like I understand specifically as a
matter of National Security you want to
have citizens who are highly trained and
technically skilled and can do jobs and
make inventions that can keep our
country globally competitive I
understand that that is important it's
just a weird way to phrase it as as
immigration policy it's like well no no
no we don't want highly trained
technically skilled people to come here
and become citizens we want those to be
our own people it's like why why not
both but I understand it and this is
actually how most countries talk about
stem you you can read about it on
Wikipedia if you want if you go to
the.gov website on our stem policy
that's what you'll see
stem in itself is not a way to teach
those classes stem is making sure those
classes get taught by providing funding
to make sure all schools offer these
classes at the elementary school level
all the way up to the high school level
uh schools can apply for government
grants in order to like form robotics
clubs or get computers in the classrooms
all that stuff so stem by itself is not
a way to teach stem classes it is just
an identification of the government's
interest in ensuring that we have a sci
scientifically literate population and
we can be globally competitive that's
what stem is it has nothing to do with
how the courses are
taught when you tell people about steam
sometimes they'll laugh at it the person
who knows that stem is science
technology engineering and math and
they're like so you're just going to add
art and then you say no steam is about
the Arts and Humanities and they say
well isn't that just a liberal education
if you're doing all the science and all
the Arts and Humanities that's just all
the things and I do think that's funny
but that's not what steam is so what
steam is is a pedagogical approach to
teaching stem courses it takes the
critical thinking skills and the
creative problem solving skills you you
use in the Arts and Humanities and it
uses those in stem education so it's a
way to design a science course that uses
critical thinking and problem solving
skills a common complaint people my age
have about their science and math
education in high school is that it was
just memorizing fact after fact after
fact and there was no understanding
requirement it was like if you memorize
the science fact you got an A in science
class and steam is an attempt at
rectifying that steam wants to teach you
how to understand science how to be
scientifically literate a thing that I
think is very important but we'll get
into it but that is one of the reasons
people laugh when you say steam it's
because they don't really understand
what it is yet the second type of person
who laughs when you talk about
steam there's a very specific type of
person who thinks that they are like
morally Superior that they are a better
person because they study a stem topic
over everyone else who's decided to do
anything creative and I just I can't
believe these people exist like it's so
embarrassing it's like pathetic the
reason I bring this up is because that
type of person who thinks they're
they're better than everyone else
because they have an engineering degree
also has never read a book in their life
so they have very poor media literacy
skills so when I go on to criticize
steam education which is a thing I'm
going to do I don't want them to
misinterpret this video as me saying
Arts and Humanities are bad because that
couldn't be further from the truth I'm a
huge proponent of the importance of a
liberal education like art math science
Humanities all of it's very important to
be a well-rounded educated
person okay so let's talk about
steam I mentioned earlier that people of
my generation complain about their
education because it was like wrote
memorization and that's kind of how
science was taught when I was a kid it's
just like Kepler did this and so now we
know how planets work and then Newton
did this and now we know how calculus
works and it's just like that is not a
good description of Science and it's
related to the way people talked about
science when I was a child adults would
like look children in the face in the
90s and be like oh you're creative how
fun you're going to live in poverty for
the rest of your life but go have an
arts degree and then they would say like
oh you're smart go be a scientist like
the options were creative or smart which
is so insulting to everyone involved
because obviously artists have to be
smart and also science is one of the
most creative acts that exists and it's
so stupid for people to be like you know
scientist they they don't think they
don't think in the open box they just do
math or they're not creative at all like
that's such a stupid thing to say steam
wants to rectify that because steam
takes this creative problemsolving
approach to teaching science the way
actual science works is obviously a
creative Endeavor like you look at the D
data you look at the facts and you have
to Envision a solution to that problem
that matches all the facts and matches
all the data and gives you an
understanding of how the world works I
can't State this enough one of the most
creative Endeavors a human can do is is
to do science okay think of what you
learned in high school mitochondria is
the PowerHouse of the cell right you
have that memorized but what does that
mean did you learn what it means or did
you just memorize that the mitochondria
is the powerhouse of the cell like
imagine you want an explanation for how
human cells have something inside of
them that looks a lot like a bacteria
that has its own genome that's different
from like your DNA in the nucleus of
your cell how did that happen how think
about it use your creative problem
solving skills how can you go from
single celled organism to somehow having
something inside that looks like a
bacteria it's one of the coolest ideas
and science I really like talking about
that one that's not what this video is
about when I first heard about steam I
was
like this is brilliant like this is the
most important thing that we could do to
improve Science Education is to teach
science how it actually is science is
not oh here's the fact oh I discovered
this fact oh I discovered this fact it's
all of this information that you have to
sift through and study and understand
and put the pieces together like a
little puzzle teaching science as a
creative act great idea like think about
the bore model of the atom when you
learned that you probably sat in an eth
grade like physics class and they were
like here are the energy levels
calculate the energy level at n equals 2
and then you just wrote it down what if
instead someone was like well here are
the facts right they know that atoms are
neutrally charged right the the nucleus
of an atom has a positive charge
surrounding it are these little boys
called electrons that have negative
charge they know that when they look at
different chemical elements they see
Spectra different wavelengths of photons
being emitted how can you take all of
those pieces of information and know
what an atom looks like how did bore
come up with quantized energy how what a
brilliant solution to this problem and
you walk them through the steps why does
it have to be quantized little shells
why does it have to be specific
wavelengths of photons emitted
just what a great way to teach that
rather than just like here it is here's
the boore model calculate n equals 2
please great idea steam education is a
great
idea you know um but however let's talk
about the bad my biggest issue with
steam education is actually my issue
with most hot like buzzword education
ideas which is that the researchers have
developed this idea when you talk about
creativity and science people remember
the science better they remember the
scientific method better they're able to
have better scientific literacy skills
like later they can read articles about
science and understand what it was
happening better because of the way they
were taught these ideas and then that
moves all the way to the classroom
teacher and how that appears in the
classroom is often very different from
how it appears in the research and
there's a bunch of reasons for that and
one of the reasons is like education
research lag so you have these
researchers who work in Academia
applying for funding in Grants and doing
these projects with teachers with
students in classrooms and then they
write up a report right they write up
some papers maybe they presented a
conference but how does that information
travel all the way to the teacher the
teacher could get the paper from the
researcher and she could read it um but
is she trained on reading scientific
documents probably not like you you
become a teacher and you get your
Master's of education but you're not
really learning education research
you're learning how to teach how to do
an education right so if she reads the
paper it's going to take her a lot of
time to understand when is she supposed
to do this so teachers make like what
$47,000 a year they work 7:30 to 5:30
they have to develop lesson plans they
have to develop homework assignments
they have to grade homework assignments
they have to answer the 75 emails from
parents who are like why did my daughter
get a 9.7 out of 10 on this assignment
you know and then also they have to
teach for seven hours a day all of that
in the day when do they have time to
read scientific literature on education
they don't right maybe during the summer
except teachers don't get paid during
the summer I I'm against people working
for free so they should not but even if
they wanted to read literature in the
summer they used have to get other jobs
because rent doesn't stop in the summer
because you don't get paid during the
summer do you know what I mean so
teachers getting this information
directly from the scientists is not as
easy as it sounds like I don't want them
to work for free so when should they do
that do you know what I mean of course
the academics could be responsible for
disseminating their their information to
the teachers but they're also not paid
for that they apply for a grant and
usually it's like here's the money to do
the research
and that's it so on their own time they
have to write up the research and
present the research are they also
supposed to develop a workshop that they
can give to high school teachers and
then they're supposed to travel the
country talk they don't have time to do
that also they should not be working for
free look at me telling teachers and
academics to stop working for free like
that's ever going to happen stop working
for free stop it it's bad to do that
whatever anyway the academics also don't
have the time or the money to to get
this information so there's this huge
gap if you get your masters of education
you will learn the latest tools and the
latest ideas but then you just go
straight to the workforce you don't go
back to school like you're required by
States depending on the state to do a
certain number of workshops and all this
stuff but you don't go back to school
and start over so there is a lag time
between research being done in in
Academia and that research appearing in
the classroom okay this Gap though
unfortunately is filled with people
trying to Pro Prof it off the lack of
communication between these two groups
you have a bunch of scammers who are
like hey teacher who makes $47,000 a
year give me $1,200 for this course on
Steam education and then they just email
out like a bunch of PowerPoint slides
and stuff that's that sucks like the
teachers want to help the students and
so they they look for information and
it's just like scammers taking their
money and I mean not all of these people
are scammers you also have a bunch of
like bossy boss boss babes who are like
I used to be an elementary school
teacher but now I make money on
Instagram selling courses and like
they're not professionally trained
researchers they're
not they are not the experts who
teachers should be getting advice from
maybe they're not scammers but a lot of
it's just really bad information I'm
just going to play
one one of the things I'd first like to
introduce you to is using pipe cleaners
in your classroom they're not just for
little kids anymore pip cleaners are
great teaching instruments for so many
different ways as I talk and I give
direct instruction to my students I know
that they're not always going to want to
look at my face or the notes that I have
on the board and at times instead of
looking out the window I would prefer
for them to be looking at what I'm doing
that I don't necessarily need to be
paying a lot of attention to but that
what I'm doing is related to what we're
learning about so right now you and I
are learning about people and teaching
steam so I'm making a little person and
maybe if you have a pipe cleaner at your
house you might be following making the
little person but if you give your
students the pipe cleaners and they make
what you're making then they have a
tangible connection now I don't think
this woman is a
scammer but saying you're teaching steam
techniques and then your Technique air
quotes I'm so sorry your Technique is to
do the exact same science lesson you
would have done except hand all the
children pipe cleaners is not steam
steam is not adding art and pipe
cleaners are not art in that context
that's just a fidget spinner steam is
taking the approaches that people do to
teach art and doing it in a science
class you can't give the same lesson you
have to redo your science lessons and
approach science as a topic in a
creative and critical thinking problem
solving way handing everyone pipe
cleaners is not doing a steam education
and I can't believe she sold this class
for money there there of course could be
a reason you hand out pipe cleaners and
be like you just do something with your
hands while you watch me talk about
science but that's not steam education
that's just definitively not steam
education you don't know what you're
talking about and you're selling a class
this is like 20 years old I don't I'm
sure she's not selling this anymore but
it's still on YouTube this is the
problem right there is research and
there are people who work on the ground
and there is a lack of communication
with the two that is just filled with
nonsense which is why I think it's not
great that we are implementing seam
right now because the teachers I don't
think based on what I've seen based on
the courses and things that are being
taught and recommended I don't think
they know what steam is yet of course
handing everyone a pipe cleaner and
saying you're doing a steam doesn't
really affect how the course is taught
like you're still just teaching it the
same way it was taught before which is
not great but I mean it's not like
you're making worse outcomes for your
students however my biggest problem with
this widespread adoption of steam is how
I see teachers and schools talking about
steam because the thing about public
education is that it is not job training
STEM talks about how to be globally
competitive we need to produce strong
technical adults right but that is not
how how you teach the class you don't
teach calculus and imply to all the
students that the only way they'll ever
be successful in life is if they pass
calculus and they go on to be a stem
career and they keep us globally
competitive that's not what stem says
stem does not tell you how to teach the
stem classes steam wants to tell you how
to teach the stem classes but people are
taking the job search rhetoric about
stem and using it in the classroom just
like the 21st century Workforce is going
to need highly trained steam people we
got to do steam because we don't know
what the job force will be like in 20
years and it's just
like I love teachers I really do do we
think teachers should be giving job
hunting
advice no no we love teachers but the
traditional path of the teacher is like
they get their masters and then they
become a teacher and they've done like
one job interview in their whole life
like your average teacher has worked at
their school for 17 years do you want
your 15-year-old son to go talk to
someone like Mr Rodriguez who's the best
AP English teacher in the state and say
hey Mr Rodriguez I know 17 years ago you
had one job interview can you tell me
about like what employment is like and
what a career is like and what kind of
job I should get we love Mr Rodriguez
he's a great teacher but he has no idea
he should not be giving job hunting
advice to children because he doesn't
know that and we should not expect him
to he knows English and he knows how to
teach English and that's what he should
be doing have you ever been job hunting
and someone 30 years older than you is
like let me tell you what i' do get your
suit on you know what I mean if you have
not been job hunting like traditional
first time out of college job hunting in
20 years you have no idea what it's like
and you should not be giving advice and
the way steam education is presented by
Educators is like we don't know what
jobs are going to be like we have to
prepare them and I just how can you
prepare them if you don't know what it's
going to be like and also you haven't
had a job interview in 17 years this is
not your job public school is not job
training like why not just sell all the
elementary schools to Amazon fulfillment
centers and they can just go to the
elementary school/ Amazon fulfillment
center and get to work right away public
school is about education it is not job
training and it should not be otherwise
the capitalist win okay we want the
children to learn the science so they
can be good citizens so we can be
globally competitive so they can make an
informed choice on what career path they
want to go to it is not the job of the
teacher the high school teacher who has
not applied for a job in 30 years to
tell your 15-year-old son how to get an
engineering job because they do not know
okay it is crazy to to put that on them
it is crazy to suggest that they should
they should make predictions about the
workforce no no steam education is not
about the workforce steam education is a
way to teach science and math it just
paints this like really desperate
picture in my brain of like a teacher
getting trained up on Steam and every
time a seven-year-old student is like I
love drawing they just pivot them into
like you know sometimes computer
scientists have to make goys that's kind
of artistic you should go do that like
imagine how devastating it is for like a
child interested in art every time
they're like I would love to write a
play they're just pivoted into like you
know where writing is important
technical writing for technical manuals
you know some people with English
degrees can get jobs at like law firms
to write technical manuals how about
that like the devastation of taking a
child showing interest in a creative
field and just pivoting them
every time just like oh you like singing
you know you could sing while you work
the oil field they were headphones no
one would be able to hear you isn't that
great like maybe you should go into that
you know technical finally this is my
very selfish reason for saying this is a
bad implementation of steam education
which is that I think art is important I
want children who want to do art to get
to do that I want the seven-year-old
right now to write a book or a video
game or a movie 25 years from now so
that I can read or play or watch that
movie I I think art is good hot take and
I want children who are interested in
that to be encouraged to do that and I
want us as a society to value that art
and if we take every single kid and we
hard pivot them into steam because it's
kind of art there's kind of Art in there
that's real bad I don't like it I want
kids to be able to do art and I want
everyone to realize how good it is we
all like watching movies if we get rid
of all the artists we won't have any
movies I mean we already don't it's just
sequel after sequel after sequel imagine
Jurassic Universe we're going to have to
watch that my biggest fear with the way
I see Steam being pushed into schools is
that people misunderstand it people
think it has art steam does not have art
steam is a way of teaching stem courses
to be like creative problem solving we
already talked about it but it is not
teaching art teaching art and Humanities
is separate from Steam but My worry is
that six years from now when a school is
deciding whether to cut the art program
or the steam program they're going to
look at the steam program and be like
there's art in there that's fine just
throw away all the Arts just do Steam
and that's bad I have a fundamental
belief that a liberal public education
should be free and easy to get for every
single person in our society and you
know Civic pH and calculus and gym class
and art class and physics class should
all be held to high standards to make
citizens who are media literate and
scientifically literate and they have a
good base founding to go on and do the
career that they want to do and that
includes art I'm really worried that
this incorrect implementation of steam
is just going to shut out art funding
and that would be devastating of course
the solution to this problem is to pay
teachers more and pay them for the
summer so that they could attend
workshops that we pay academics to teach
during the summer just like more money
for everyone so that there is time money
equals time for these people to learn
how to correctly Implement stee into
their science classrooms that's the
solution but like we'll see it's
fine so I love education research before
I went into physics I was getting my
masters of education I was teaching at a
public High School like a physics class
and after I finished my masters of
education I wanted to do education
research like what is the best way to
teach science but instead I went into
physics instead don't I know who cares
about physics because I think what is
the best way to teach science is a very
interesting question because if you want
science to improve and move forward you
need a good founding of Science
Education and what is the best way to
teach science what is the research we
can do to discover how to reach the the
maximum amount of people and make sure
they understand how to think critically
and scientifically and when they read a
science article they can tell right away
if it's garbage because because they
have good scientific literacy skills how
do we do that what an interesting
question the problem is like it doesn't
matter it doesn't matter the real bad is
that it doesn't matter 0% of this
matters This research doesn't matter if
you are lucky enough to live in a good
school district and you send your kids
to safe happy school with teachers who
are paid a living wage and the district
has decided they want to implement steam
education because it's really important
for the workforce of the 21st century or
whatever all that means is that on
Tuesdays your second grader is going to
attend an hourong class where they play
with Legos and do an engineering project
I'm not saying the engineering with
Legos is a bad project it's totally fine
it's just like in the grand scheme of
things it doesn't really matter because
Republicans have been destroying the
public education system in America for
50 years you can draw a direct line from
Ronald Reagan's attack on college
students protesting the Vietnam War to
your student loan debt before Reagan was
the governor of California College
tuition in the state was free his goal
was to end government spending on public
colleges and he was very successful the
United States is fighting a war which
the students in the United States don't
believe in when we set out to try and
meet in cooperation with the University
the financial problem of this state
recognizing the need to keep the
University at its high level we intended
to meet with them around a table quietly
when I say we I mean the people of our
Administration the financial people the
budget Department to see how the
university which is a large share of the
general fund spending how they could
cooperate with us to help us meet this
financial problem and not harm the
quality of education and within 24 hours
we were being
attacked uh by these people as if we had
laid down an ultimatum and we were out
to destroy
education and we were out to destroy
education you can draw a direct line
from George Bush passing the No Child
Left Behind Act in 2001 to the reduction
of public school funding in every single
lower income community in America you
ever wonder why you were so good at math
in high school and then you go to
college and you have no idea how to
study and just failed out of the math
class you took it's because No Child
Left Behind lowered the education
standards in every single school in
America you weren't so smart the
government specifically prevented the
teachers from providing you with an
education you were robbed of your
education and in return you just got a
3.5
GPA George
Bush and we owe the Children of America
a good education and today begins a new
era a a new time in public education in
our
country as of this
hour America schools would be on A New
Path of
Reform and A New Path of results the
Trump Administration passed through
school choice reform which was so far
screamingly successful as a way to
funnel funding from public schools into
expensive privatized unregulated schools
and air quotes for Rich Kids the goal
the goal the stated goal which they say
aloud is to get rid of public school
education alog together and I would like
your your views on uh the relative
advantage of profi measuring doing
assessments and using them to measure
proficiency or to meas measure growth
thank you senator for that question um I
think if if I'm understanding your
question correctly around proficiency I
would I would also um correlate it to
competency and Mastery so that you each
student is measured according to the um
advancement that they're making in each
subject area well that's growth that's
not proficiency so in other words the
growth they're making is in growth the
proficiency is an arbitrary standard
reached a level the proficiency is if
they've reached a a like third grade
level for reading
Etc no I'm talking about the debate
between proficiency and growth yes what
your thoughts are on them well I was
just asking to clarify then well this is
this is a subject that is has been
debated in the education Community for
years but it surprises me that you don't
know this
issue you say a factual statement like
the Republican stated goal is to end
public school education people are like
they would never do that we would never
let them do that but they're saying
that's what they want to do and that's
what they're going to do if you went to
college in California in 1970 and your
total bill for all four years of
education was
$1,400 and I told you hey in 40 years
your grandson is going to go to the same
school you did get the same degree you
did and he's going to pay $6,000 would
you say no that's crazy we would never
let that happen because they said that
that's what they wanted and that is
what's happened when people show you who
they are believe them yes absolutely a
person says to you I'm selfish or I'm
mean
or I am
unkind or I'm crazy or I'm believe them
they know themselves much better than
you do listen to what people are saying
and it's actually super weird how vocal
Republicans are about hating education
it's weird right that's what they say
out loud Republicans specifically hate
children and don't want them to have an
education the federal government has
provided money and sent it to States for
lowincome children to be able to have
access to food which they would not
otherwise have access to and the
Republican governors of those states
have decided like no they would rather
have the kids be hungry they don't want
the money the money is just sitting
there they don't want it they would
rather the children be hungry unless
like you know they could just get rid of
child labor laws maybe instead of
reading Captain Underpants the
10-year-old could just go work at
McDonald's I guess like children yearn
for the
minds the Republican stated plan of you
know ending public school education and
making children go to work and making
sure that they don't have access to food
is in sharp contrast to the Biden
government at the very start of his
administration Biden had this America
family plan and it wanted to provide
comprehensive paid leave you know like
every other country in the world after
you have a baby get paid leave to spend
time with the baby and make sure you
don't die from sepsis it offered
Universal preschool for all three and
four year olds just like we have public
school for 5 to 18 and this is a huge
thing for me problems students have
later on in their education career can
be fixed by attending public school
because they would have access to a
breakfast and lunch they would have
access to trained Educators who could
recognize signs of them like needing
glass classes or needing early
intervention for walking or needing
early intervention for reading or all of
those things could be provided by people
who care for children and got those jobs
to do that by the way here's what the uh
Republican Vice Presidential nominee
thinks about Universal preschool
Universal preschool is literally the one
thing we could do that would cost very
little but improve the lives of the vast
majority of Americans by getting rid of
daycare costs by providing early
intervention by giving food to children
who do not have access to it and you
know there was other stuff like free
community college for 2 years uh getting
rid of student debt increasing the
pelant program but you know every single
Republican refused to vote for it so all
the good things were stripped and it was
just taken off the table it's weird it's
like Republicans vocally say that they
hate everything that's good for families
and children and vote against it because
they would rather the kid be poor and
stupid and hungry which is weird it's
like they're not interested in education
at all but you know what they are super
interested in children's
genitals this is really hard to talk
about because it just it's so disgusting
on a visceral level but you cannot talk
to a republican about education for more
than a few minutes before they start
talking about children's genitals and
what bathroom they use and shouldn't
they hire someone to check all the girls
genitals before they're allowed to play
basketball go to a school board meeting
and there are three people there who are
scared of books and also a really weird
guy who just wants to talk about
children's genitals and he wants to have
access to them so he can just check it
you know just in
case I just these people need to be on a
list like these people shouldn't be
allowed 200 ft of any space where
children are expected to be it's
shocking that this is their platform
their platform is I hate children but
also I'm super interested in their
genitalia hot take you know but maybe
don't let people who are super
interested in inspecting children's
generals make any decisions about what
happens to Children maybe they should be
on a list somewhere maybe we should
check their hard drives because I I just
I don't have
words I don't have words let's talk
about project 2025 and the future of
Education under Republican governments
the things they say they are going to do
I'm going to read from an education week
posting of it but you can just read
their wacka do 900 page document if you
want uh the first thing they want to do
is you know get rid of the Department of
Education they specifically want to
close the Department of Education voting
for a republican is voting to end public
school education they want to implement
Universal school choice a thing they've
already done where you can just funnel
federal government money that's supposed
to be invested in the community it's
supposed to be invested in children's
education and just give it to random
grifters that can suddenly become
tax-free education organizations they
want to get rid of Title
One title one is a thing that was
implemented in 1964 by LBJ it is uh
because we have this terrible system in
America where public schools are funded
by local and state taxes schools that
live in poor communities are going to be
worse and be underfunded compared to
other schools so Title One allows
Federal funding to bridge that Gap and
make sure all schools are on a Level
Playing Field it has been in place since
the 60s 63% of schools are only
functioning because title one exists
Republicans want to close Public Schools
so they want to get critical race Theory
and gender ideology excised from
curriculum things that are not in
curriculum but the thing about this is
like where like a librarian reading that
I have a dream children's book to a
bunch of first graders counts as
critical race Theory and so they just
want to get rid of that they just want
to get rid of talking about Martin
Luther King in school but like do that
with everything suddenly talking about
unions in a high school history class
counts as critical race Theory talking
about slavery counts as critical race
Theory you get it they can just remove
anything they don't want from education
because they want you to be stupid
that's the goal but don't worry they're
still obsessed with children's genitals
project 2025 proposes defining sex under
the federal Landmark sex discrimination
law to mean only biological sex
recognized at Birth instead of you know
talking about what the best way to teach
science is and how can we get more kids
involved in learning about technology
they just want to Define biological sex
all I want to do is talk about science
and learn science and they want to
destroy everything I love if you vote
for Republicans you are voting to end
public school education so sometimes
when I talk about politics in my videos
I get comments that are like stick to
science stay in your lane science isn't
political and I just have to laugh
because that's such a stupid thing to
say but also I've just shown you science
is political it's factually incorrect to
say science isn't political the people
who get to do science got good science
educations the people who get good
science educations go to good schools
Republicans want to close public schools
which means you don't get to do science
so many women people of color queer
people have to turn down jobs that just
happen to be in states that are hostile
to their human rights if you get into
the best school in America to study
curing cancer but in that state you're
not considered a human being you don't
get to go to that state how can we get
to Star Trek if more than half the
people who want to do science are not
allowed to do science science is
political because everything is
political anyway I don't want want to be
a Doomer I love America I really do
there are so many great things about the
American education system for example I
love how our liberal education system
allows children all the way up to 18 to
have a broad range of interests other
countries Force 12y olds to decide what
career they want to do and qualify for
an exam or they just never get to go to
the college they want to in America we
have the freedom to follow the career
path we want you know right now so
here's just a list of things we can do
to maintain this for the future the
first is to vote you know write down the
ballot vote for public school education
only one party wants to close the
Department of Education and close 63% of
public
schools so just vote for the other one
also you know vote in local elections
when people run for school board look up
when that is on like the random day look
up when that election is and call the
people people running for your school
board ask them how they feel about steam
education and if they start giving you
Republican talking points you know tell
your friends post on Instagram and
Facebook and say and just say this
weirdo wants to close public schools and
he's running for Schoolboard don't vote
for this guy and get a sign get the sign
for your local election for the guy that
knows what steam education is and put it
in your yard you have to be just as
vocal as these wacka are and this is a
big ask but I think we should all make
an effort to go to our local school
board meetings because the thing about
these freaks is that they are absolutely
a minority these losers drive from town
to Town showing up at Schoolboard
meetings and crying into a microphone
about how Ramona Quimby age8 shouldn't
be in the library because she used a
pronoun and I'm scared no one else is
there like that insane woman is the only
one that showed up
but if we were there to be like whoa it
sounds like you need to go to therapy do
you even live here do you even have
children here let's stop listening to
that woman and let's talk about steam
education this would just go away
because this is like one loser driving
across Massachusetts do you know what I
mean you see if you're there and you're
vocal you can just shut them down they
are a minority and you know finally if
you're at the school board meeting when
one of these weirdos just walks up to
the microphone and starts talking about
children's genitalia just have an
appropriate response oh my God what the
 why are you talking about
children's genitals oh my god there are
children here why are you at a
Schoolboard meeting talking about
children's genitals do you think this is
appropriate get out of here and then
take a picture of them and call the
police because these people need their
hard drives checked
