this movement you know that we now call
wokeness it hijacked what I would you
know call sort of at the time you know
bog standard progressivism but you know
it turned out what we were dealing with
was something that was far more
aggressive you're you're pouring
cultural asset on your company and the
entire thing is devolving into into into
complete chaos it's also I think the
case that the new communication
technologies have also enabled
reputation Savages in a way that we
hadn't seen before the single biggest
fight is going to be over what are what
are the values of the AIS that fight I
think is going to be a million times
bigger and more intense and more
important than the social media
censorship fight as you know out of the
gate this is going very poorly stop stop
there for just a sec because we should
delve into that there's a that's a
terrible
thing hello everybody so I had the
opportunity to talk to Mark Andrew today
and Mark has been quite visible on the
podcast circuit as of late and part of
the reason for that is that he's part of
a
swing within the Tech Community back
towards the center and even more
particularly under the current
conditions toward the novel and
emerging players in the Trump
Administration now Mark is a key Tech
Visionary he developed Mosaic and
Netscape and they really laid the
groundwork for the web as we know it and
Mark has been a investor in Silicon valy
circles for 20 years and is as plugged
into the tech scene as anyone in the
world and the fact that he's decided to
speak publicly for example about such
issues as Government Tech
collusion and that he's turned his
attention to away from the Democrats
which is the traditional party let's say
of the tech Visionaries and they're all
characterized by the high openness that
tends to make people liberal um the fact
that Mark has pivoted
is uh what would you say it's an
important it may be as important an
event as musk aligning with Trump and so
I wanted to talk to Mark about his
vision of the future he laid out a
Manifesto A while back called the Techno
Optimist Manifesto which Bears some
clear resemblance to the alliance for
responsible citizenship policy platform
that's Arc um which is an Enterprise
that I'm deeply involved in and so I
wanted to talk to him about the overlap
between our visions of the future and
about
the Twist and Turn of the tech World in
relationship to their political
allegiance and the Transformations there
that have occurred and also about the
problem of AI alignment so to speak how
do we make sure that these
hyperintelligence systems that the
Techno utopians are creating don't turn
into like cataclysmic apocalyptic
totalitarian Monsters how do we align
them with proper human interests and
what are those proper human interests
and how is that determined and so we
talk about all that and a whole lot more
and so join us as we have the
opportunity and privilege to speak with
Mark
andreason so Mark I thought I would talk
to you today about an overlap in two of
of our projects let's say and we could
investigate that there should be all
sorts of ideas that spring off that so I
was reviewing your techno optimist
Manifesto and I have some questions
about that and some concerns and and I
wanted to contrast that and compare it
with our Arc project in the
UK because I think we're pulling in the
same direction and I'm curious about why
that is and what that might mean
practically and I also thought that
would give us a
springboard off which we could leap in
relationship to well to the ideas you're
developing so there's a lot of that
Manifesto that for whatever it's worth I
agreed with and um I don't regard that
as particularly what would you say uh
important in and of itself but I did
find the overlap between what you had
been suggesting and the ideas that we've
been working on for this Alliance for
responsible citizenship in the UK quite
striking and so I'd like to highlight
some similarities and then I'd like to
uh push you a bit on on some of the
issues that I that uh
that that I think might be might need
further clarification that's probably
the right way to think about it
so at for this art group we set up as
what would you say a Visionary
alternative to the malthusian Doom
saying of the climate hysterics and the
centralized planners because that's just
going nowhere it's you can see what's
happening to Europe you see what's
happening to the UK uh Energy prices in
the UK are five times as high as they
are in the United States that's
obviously not sustainable the same thing
is the case in Germany plus it's plus
not only are they expensive they're also
unreliable which is a very bad
combination you add to that the fact too
that Germany's become increasingly
dependent on markets like uh like
they're served by totalitarian
dictatorships essentially and that also
seems like a bad plan so one of
our platforms is that we should be
working locally nationally and
internationally to do everything
possible to drive down the cost of
energy and to make it as reliable as
possible predicated on the idea that
there's really no difference between
energy and work and if you make energy
inexpensive then poor people don't die
and so there because any increase in
energy cost immediately demolishes the
poorest subset of the population and
that's self-evidence as far as I'm
concerned and so that's certainly an
overlap with the ethos that you put
forward in your
Manifesto you predicated your uh work on
a vision of abundance and pointed to I
noticed you for example you quoted Maran
tupy who has who works with the human
progress and has outlined quite nicely
the manner in which over the last 30
years especially since the fall of the
Berlin Wall people have been stri
thriving on the economic front globally
speaking like never before we' virtually
eradicated absolute poverty and we have
a good crack at it eradicating it
completely in the next couple of decades
if we don't do anything you know
criminally insane and so you see a a
vision of the future where there's more
than enough for everyone it's not a zero
sum game you're not a fan of the
malthusian proposition that there's
limited resources and that we're facing
a you know either um what would you say
a future of ecological collapse or
economic scarcity or maybe both and so
um the difference I guess one of the
differences I wanted to delve into is
you you put a lot of stress on the
technological vision and I think there's
something in that that's insufficient
and and this is what I this is one of
the things I wanted to Grapple with you
about because you know
there's a theme that you see a literary
theme there's two literary themes that
are in Conflict here and they're
relevant because there stories of the
psyche and of society in the broadest
possible sense you have the vision of
technological abundance and and plenty
that's a consequence of the
technological and intellectual striving
of mankind but you also have ju opposed
against that the vision of the intellect
as a luciferian force and the
possibility of a technology Le dystopia
and catastrophe right and it seems to
hinge on something like how the
intellect is conceptualized in
the in the in in in the deepest level of
society's narrative framing so if the
intellect is put at the highest place
then it becomes luciferian and leads to
a kind of dystopia it's like the
allseeing eye of soron in The Lord of
the Rings cycle and I see that exactly
that sort of thing emerging in places
like China and it does seem to me that
that technological Vision if it's not
encapsulated in the proper underlying
narrative threatens us with an
intellectualized dystopia that's equip
probable with the Abundant outcome that
you describe now one of the things we
doing at ARC is to try to work out what
that underlying narrative should be so
that that technological Enterprise can
be encapsulated with it and remain non
distopian I think it's an analog of the
alignment problem in AI you know you
could say well how do you get these
large language model systems to adopt
values that are commensurate with human
flourishing that's the same problem you
have when you're educating kids by the
way and how do you ensure that the
technological Enterprise as such is
aligned with the underlying princip
principles that you espouse of say free
market free distributed markets and
human freedom in the classic Western
sense and I didn't see that specifically
addressed in your Manifesto and so I'm
curious about with all the technological
optimism that you're putting forward
which which is something
that well why else why would you have a
vision other than that when we could
make the world in abundant place but
there is this
dystopian side that can't be ignored and
you know there's 700 million closed
circuit television cameras in China and
they monitor every damn thing their
citizens do and we could we could slide
into that as easily as we did when we
copied the Chinese in in their response
to the so-called pandemic so so so I'd
like I'd like to hear your thoughts
about that sure so first thanks for
thanks for having me um and it's great
to see you um I'm very influenced on
this by Thomas Soul wrote this great
book called the conflict of visions and
he talks about fundamentally there are
two two classes of visions of the future
he calls the unconstrained visions and
the constrained visions and the
unconstrained Visions are the uh
sweeping transformational discontinuous
so social change we're going to make the
new man we're going to make the new
Society we're going to have you know
pole pot in Cambodia we're going to
declare year zero everything that came
before is irrelevant it's a it's it's a
new era Lenin um you know basically
every revolutionary right uh wants to
you know completely radically transform
everything and how can you not because
the current system is unjust and we need
to achieve Total Justice and so forth
and so the unconstrained Vision you know
it's classically the vision of of of
totalitarians it it it sells itself as
creating Utopia it it as you well know
it it tends to produce hell um in
contrast you know he said that the
constraint vision is one in which you
know you realize that man has fallen and
that we are imperfect and that you know
things are always going to be some level
of mess but it can be a slightly better
mess than it is today uh we can improve
on the margin things can get better
people can live better Liv lives they
can take better care of you know their
their families they can their their
countries can get richer they can become
you know they can have more abundance um
and and and progress on the margin and
of course the the the constrained vision
is very you know the unconstrained
vision is very compatible with
totalitarianism um you know the Chinese
Communist party for sure has a has an
unconstrained Vision um as the
Bolsheviks did before them and the Nazis
and and other totalitarian movements um
you know the constrained vision is very
consistent I think with you know Western
you know the long run Western ideals and
and and and Liberty and freedom and then
and then and then free market and so one
of the things I I do I do try to say in
the manifesto is I'm not a utopian um
and and and and I and I I think utopian
dreams turn into dystopia I think that
that's what you get I think history is
quite quite clear on that um and then to
your point on technology I I would just
map that straight on to that which is
yes 100% technology can be a tool that
revolutionaries can use to try to
achieve Utopia dystopia and for for sure
the Chinese Communist party is trying to
do that and there are forces by the way
in the US that also for sure want to do
that um but technology is also
completely perfectly compatible with the
the constraint vision and change on the
margin and Improvement on the margin
which which is where I am um I think
that is a 100% a human issue and a
social and political issue not a
technological issue right right right
yes exactly right so this is sort of the
running a little bit of the running joke
right now in the AI alignment um uh
there's there's this uh there's this
classic there's a Super Genius of AI
alignment this guy roko who's famous for
this this thing called Roo's bases and
AI alignment
um so roko basilisk is you better say
nice things about the AI now even though
the AI doesn't exist yet because when it
wakes up and sees what you read it's
going to you know judge you and find you
wanting right and so he sort of this
famous famous guy in that field and what
he actually says now is uh basically it
turns out the AI alignment problem is
not a problem of aligning the AI it's a
problem of aligning the humans um right
it's it's a problem right it's a problem
of aligning the humans and how we're
going to use the AI right precisely to
your point um yes right right and and
that that that is the you know that is
one of the very big questions um there's
another book I'd really recommend on
this uh the directly directly to your
point uh this guy Peter Huber wrote this
book called Orwell's Revenge um and you
know famously in 1984 you know as you
mentioned there there you know there's
this concept of the telescreen which is
basically the one-way propaganda
broadcast device um that goes into
everybody's house from the government
top down and then has cameras in it so
the government can observe everything
that's the citizens do and that and you
know that is that is that is what
happens in these totalan totalitarian
societies they Implement systems like
that
um in in the book orell's Revenge he
does this thing where he he tweaks the
telescreen and he makes it two-way
instead of one way um and so he gives so
you know the revolutionaries give it the
the the sort of resistance force to the
totalitarian government give it the
ability to uh let people upload as well
as download um and so all of a sudden
people can actually Express themselves
they can express their views they can
organize and of course then Bas based on
that they can then use that technology
to basically rise up against the total
totalitarian government and and and
achieve a better a better Society
um you know look as you as you mentioned
earlier the ability to do two-way
Universal two-way communication also
lets you create you know this sort of
mob mob effect that we were talking
about and you know this sort of you know
kind of personal destruction engine and
so you know there's there's two sides to
that also but you know it it is the case
that you know you can squint at a lot of
this technology one way and see it as an
instrument of totalitarian oppression
and you can squint at it another way and
see it as an instrument of individual
Liberation I think for sure there there
are a lot of you know you design the
technology matters a lot but I I I at
least believe the big picture questions
are all the human questions and the
social and political questions and they
they need to be confronted directly as
such and and and we and we need we need
to confront them directly for that
reason and and and and and and right so
these are human questions ultimately not
technological questions in the beginning
was the
word Christ is a master at using short
mysterious stories they change the
listener who takes them
seriously my experience with the
biblical textt is that they're
inexhaustible sources of wisdom if I
find something in them that is an
obstacle it's because there's something
in me that has yet to be transformed I
just don't get
it the person that you do not think
could ever be virtuous who let me show
you this is the person who is fulfilling
the law and the prophets but seek first
his kingdom and his righteousness and
all these things shall be added to you
as well I don't believe in that promise
I'll just be honest on this point that
has not been part of my experience this
terrible i've been trying to understand
forever while we were talking and while
we were sitting there then it hit me I
saw it made me one ideology that has
supplanted Christianity that has done
good for Humanity this Jew is very
frightened of a post-christian society
he was the god man the model the example
of what we ought to become and what we
can become it's okay it's safe for you
and all of your doubts and apprehensions
to open up and to let these stories in
he is the temple he is the Torah he is
the Covenant he is prophecy fulfilled if
you're doing this and it isn't also the
love of wisdom it's also an attempt at
wisdom without love in both ways you're
going radically wrong power of love it
sounds so to sh what you say 60 I don't
want to be in a hallmar card I tell
you we've got our work cut out for us
gentlemen this is one peculiar time and
one peculiar text and I sure hope we're
up to the task
okay okay so okay so so that's very
interesting because that's exactly what
we concluded at ARC so one of the
streams that we've been developing is
the better story stream because it's
predicated on the idea which I think
you're alluding to now that the
technological Enterprise has to be
nested inside a set of propositions that
aren't in themselves part and parcel of
the technological Enterprise right and
then the question is what are they so
let let me outline for a minute or two
some of the thoughts I've had in that
matter because I think there's something
crucial here that's also relevant to the
problem of
alignment so like we you you said that
um the problem with regard to AI might
be the problem that human beings have is
that we're not aligned so to speak and
so why would we expect the AIS to be and
I think that's a perfectly reasonable
criticism and part of the reason that we
educate young people so intensely
especially those who be in leadership
positions is because we want to solve
the alignment problem that's part of
what you do when you socialize young
people now the way we've done that for
the entire history of the productive
West let's say is to ground young people
who are smart and who are likely to be
leaders in something approximating the
religious and humanist religious slh
humanist Enlightenment tradition it's
part of that golden threat now part of
the problem I would say with the large
language model systems is that they're
hypert trained on they're like populists
in a sense they're hypert trained on the
on the on the over proliferation of
nonsense that characterizes the present
and the problem with the present is that
time hasn't had a chance to winnow out
the wheat from the chaff now what we did
with young people is we referred them to
the classic works of the past right that
would be the Western Cannon whose
Supremacy has been challenged so
successfully by the postmodern nihilists
we said well you have to read these
great books from the past and that the
core of that would be the Bible and then
you'd have all the what the poets and
dramatists whose works are grounded in
the biblical tradition that are like
secondary offshoots of that fundamental
narrative that'd be people like Dante
and Shakespeare and Gira and dovi
and and we you can imagine that those
more core ideas constitute a web of
associated ideas that all other ideas
would then slot into you know it's oh
you could you could make the case for
you could make the case technically I
think that these great works in the past
are mapping the most fundamental
relationships between ideas that can
possibly be mapped in a manner that is
sustainable and productive across the
longest possible imaginable span of time
and that's different than the
proliferation of a multiplicity of ideas
that characterize the present now that
doesn't mean we know how to wait you
know so if you're going to design a
large language model you might want to
wait The Works of
Shakespeare 10,000
times per word as crucial as you know
what would you say the the The Archives
of the uh of the of the New York Times
for the last 5 years it's something like
that like there's an insistence in the
mythological tradition that people have
two fundamental polls of orientation one
is heaven word or towards the depths you
can use either analogy and that's the
orientation towards the Divine or the
transcendant or the most foundational
and then the other Avenue of orientation
is social that'd be you know the
reciprocal relationship that exists
between you and I and all the other
people that we know and if you're only
weighted by the personal and the social
then you tilt towards the Mad mob
populism that can
characterize societies when they go
off-kilter you need another axis of
orientation to make things fundamental
now I just want to add one more thing to
this that's very much worth thinking
about so the postmodernists discovered
this is partly why we have this culture
War the postmodernists discovered that
we see the world through a story and
they're right about that because what
they figured out and they weren't the
only ones but they did figure it out was
that we don't just see facts we see
weighted facts and the waiting system a
description of someone's waiting system
for facts is a story that's what a story
is technically you know it's your it's
the prioritization of facts that direct
your attention that's what you see
portrayed in a characterization on
screen okay now postmodernists figured
out that we see the world through a
story but then they made a dreadful
mistake which was a consequence of their
Marxism they said that the story that we
see the world through is one of
power and that there is no other story
than power and that the dynamic in
society is nothing but the competition
between different groups or individuals
striving for power and I don't mean
competence I mean the ability to use
compulsion and force right it's like
involuntary submission I'm I'm more
powerful than you if I can make you
submit
involuntarily now the the biblical
Cannon has an alternative proposition
that's nested inside of it which is that
the basis of individual stability and
societal stability and productivity is
voluntary self-sacrifice not power and
that that is those two ethos they
are 100% opposed right you couldn't get
to visions that are more disperate than
those two now the power narrative
dominates the university and it's
driving the sorts of pathologies that
you described as having flowed out let's
say into the tech world and then into
the corporate and the media world and
into the corporate world beyond that one
of the things we're doing at ARC is
trying to establish
the structure of the underlying
narrative which is a sacrificial
narrative that property that would
properly ground for example example the
technological Enterprise so that it
wouldn't become
dystopian and you know you alluded to
that when when you pointed to the fact
that there has to be something outside
the technological Enterprise to
stabilize it you alluded to for example
a more fundamental ethos of reciproc
reciprocity when you said that
one form
of combating the proclivity for top-
down Force for example in this one-way
information pipeline is to make it
two-way right well you're pointing there
to something like see reciprocity is a
form of repetitive self-sacrifice like
if we're taking turns in a conversation
I have to sacrifice my turn to you and
vice versa right and that makes for a
balanced Dynamic and so anyways one of
the problems we're trying to solve with
this Arc Enterprise is to thoroughly
evaluate the structure of that
underlying narrative and we could really
use some Engineers to help because the
large language models are going to be
able to flesh out this domain properly
because they do map meaning in a way
that we haven't been able to manage
technically before so I think the single
biggest fight that has ever happened
over technology and there have been many
of those fights over the course of the
last you know especially 500 years the
single biggest fight is going to be over
what are what are the values of the AIS
um to to your points like what what what
will the AIS tell you when you ask them
anything that involves values social
organization politics philosophy
religion um that fight I think is going
to be a million times bigger and more
intense and more important than the
social media censorship fight um and and
and and I don't say that because the
soci the social media censorship fight
has been extremely important but AI is
going to be much more important because
AI is such a powerful technology that I
think it's going to be the control layer
for everything else and so I think the
way that you talk to your car and your
house um and the way that you um the way
that you like organize your ideas um the
way you learn the way your kids learn
the way the Health Care system works the
way the government works um you know how
government policies are implemented like
the you know AI will end up being the
front end on all those things and so the
the the value system in the AIS is going
to be you know maybe the most important
set of technological questions we've
ever faced um as you know out of the
gate this is going very poorly um and so
right um and there's there's this qu
very and there's this question hanging
over the field right now you know which
you could sort of uh summarize is why
why are the AIS woke um you know why why
did the why do the big lab AI coming out
of the major AI companies why did they
come out with the philosophy of a you
know 21-year-old so sociology undergrad
at oberin College you know with blue
hair who's like completely emotionally
activated um right and you can you can
see many examples of people you know
have posted queries online that show
that or you can run your own experiments
um and you know they they they basically
have the fullest you know sort of
version of this kind of fundamentalist
emotional um you know kind of uh you
know far you know sort of far far
Progressive absolutist wokeness um coded
into them um you said up front that the
presumption you know must be that
they're just getting trained on you know
more recent bad data versus older you
know good data there is some of that but
I will tell you that there is a bigger
issue than that which is the these
things are being specifically trained by
their owners to be this way yeah yeah
okay so there's okay so let let's take
that apart because that that's very very
important okay so like I played with gr
I've played with grock a lot and with
chat GPD I've used these systems
extensively and they're very useful
although they lie all the time now you
can see this this double effect that you
described which is that there is
conscious manipulation of the learning
process in an ideological Direction
which is I think absolutely ethically
unforgivable like it not it even
violates the spirit of the learning that
these systems are predicated on it's
like we're going to train these systems
to analyze the patterns of
interconnections between the entire body
of human of ideas in the Corpus of human
knowledge and then we're going to take
our shallow conscious understanding and
paint an overlay on top of that that is
so intellectually arrogant that that
it's luciferian in its in its
presumption it's appalling but even
grock is is pretty damn woke and and I
know that it hasn't been messed with at
that level of you know painting over the
rot let's say and so so I think we've
already described at least implicitly
why there would be that conscious
manipulation but what's your
understanding of the training data
problem and I can talk to you about some
AI systems that we've developed that
don't seem to have that problem and why
they don't have that problem because
it's it's crucially important as you
already pointed out to get this right
and I think that I actually think that
to some degree
psychologists at least some of them have
figured out how to get this right like
it's a minority of psychologists and it
isn't well known but but the alignment
problem is something that the deeper
psychoanalytic theorists have been
working on for about a hundred years and
some of them got that because they were
trying to align the psyche in a healthy
direction you know it's the same bloody
problem fundamentally and there were
people who really made progress in that
direction now they aren't the people who
had the most influence as academics in
the universities because they got
captured by you know Michelle Fuko who's
a power mad hedonist in for all intents
and purposes extraordinarily brilliant
but corrupt Beyond Comprehension he is
the most cited academic who ever lived
and so that the whole bloody Enterprise
the value Enterprise in the universities
got seriously warped by the postmodern
marxists in a way that is having all
these cascading ramifications that we
describ all right so back to the
training data what's your understanding
of why the wokeness emerges it's it's
present bias to some degree but are
there and what other what other
contributing factors are there yes I
think there's a bunch of biases so there
there's three off the top of my head you
just get immediately so one is just
recency bias you know there's just a lot
more present day material available for
training than there is old material
because all the present day materials
already on the internet um uh right
number one and so that that's going to
be influenced number two who you know
who produces content is you know people
who are high in openness right right the
creative class that creates the content
is itself biased um and then there's the
English language bias which is like
almost all of the trainable data is in
English um and and you know that that
isn't is in a small number of other
Western languages for the most part um
and so there you know there's there's
some bias there and then frankly there's
also this selection process which is you
have to decide what goes in the training
data um and so the the sort of the sort
of humorous version of this is um two
potent sources of training data could be
Reddit and forchan um and let's say
Reddit is like super far left in on
average and forchan is super far right
um and I bet if you look at the training
data sets for a lot of these AIS you'll
find they include Reddit but they don't
include
forchan right and so right right right
right you include a bias that way by the
way there is a very entertaining
variation of this that is is playing out
right now which is you know these
companies are increasingly being sued by
copyright owners right for training on
data of material that's currently
copyrighted and you know most
specifically books um and so there there
is this there are court cases pending
right now the courts are going to have
to take up this question of copyright
and whether it's legal to train AIS on
copyrighted data or not and on what
terms and sort of one of the running
jokes inside the field is if those court
cases come down such that these
companies can't train on copyrighted
material then for example they'll only
be able to train on books uh published
before
1923 um right so it should be an
improvement actually well well imagine
for a moment if would training on books
before 1923 you know the the good news
on that is you don't get all of the last
100 years of of insanity the bad news is
you know people before 1923 were insane
in their own ways um yeah right well and
also you would don't have the advantage
of all the technological
progress yeah exactly and so these are
these are very deep questions all of
these questions have have to get
answered you know Elon has talked about
this like rock has some of this he's
he's working on that having said that I
will tell you most of what you see uh
when you use these systems that will
distribute is not from any of that most
of it is deliberate top down Coating in
a much more blunt instrument
way are you ready for a fresh start
after the holiday Indulgence make 2025
your healthiest year yet with balance of
nature those Christmas cookies and
holiday feasts were great but now your
body's craving something different
that's where balance of nature comes in
the perfect way to reset your health
this New Year getting your daily fruits
and vegetables has never been easier
balance of nature takes fresh produce
freeze dries it to preserve nutrients
and delivers it in a convenient capsule
you can take anywhere no additives no
fillers no synthetics or added sugar
just pure fruits and vegetables in every
capsule it's that simple are you ready
to transform your health in 2025 for a
limited time use promo code Jordan to
get 35% off your first order plus
receive a free fiber and spice
supplement head over to balance of
nature.com and use promo code Jordan for
35% off your first order as a preferred
customer plus get a free bottle of fiber
and spice that's balance of nature.com
promo code Jordan for 35% off balance of
nature promo code Jordan for 35% off
your first preferred or plus a free
bottle of fiber and
spice how is that done Mark like what
does that look like exactly you know I
mean and it it's really nefarious right
because that means that you're
interacting in a manner that you can't
predict with someone's
aprior
prejudices and and and you have no idea
how you're being manipulated it's really
it's really really bad and so first of
all why is that happening like if the
large language models value is in their
wisdom and that wisdom is derived from
their understanding of the deep pattern
of correlations between ideas which is
like a major source of of wisdom
genuinely speaking why pervert that with
an overlay of shallow ideology and why
is the ideology in the direction that it
is and then how is that Jerry Mandarin
conducted yes let me start with the how
so the how is a technique there's a
acronym for it uh it's called Uh
reinforcement learning uh by human
feedback and so in the field it's called
rhf um and R lhf is basically a key step
for making an AI that works and
interacts with humans which is you take
a raw model which is sort of feral and
doesn't quite know how to orient a
people um and then you put it in a
training loop with some set of human
beings who who effectively socialize it
um and and so right reinforcement leing
for the human feedback the key there is
human feedback right you you put it in
dialogue with human beings and you have
the human beings do something very
analogous to teaching a child right
here's how you respond here's how you're
polite here's the you know here's the
things you can and can't say here's how
to word things um you know here's how to
be you know curious you know all all the
behaviors that you presumably want to
see from something you're interacting
with that is sort of human you know sort
of a human proxy kind of for form of
behavior um that is a 100% human
Enterprise you have to decide what the
rules are for the people who are going
to be doing that work they're all people
um and then you have to hire into those
jobs um the people going into those jobs
are in many cases the same people this
will horrify you they're the same people
who were in The trusting safety groups
at the social media companies five years
ago oh good oh that's great oh that's
wonderful yeah yeah could imagine a
worse outcome than that because there so
the all the people that you know Elon
cut out of the trust and safety group at
Twitter when he bought it many of them
have migrated into these trust and
safety groups trust and safety groups at
these AI companies and they're they're
Now setting these policies in doing do
doing this training so so the the
terrifying well the terrifying thing
here is that we're we're going to
produce hyper powerful avatars of our
own flaws right and so if you're
training one of these systems and you
have a variety of domains of personal
pathology you're going to amplify that
substantively you're going to make these
giants like I joke with joke with my
friend Jonathan Paso who's very reliable
source in such matters that we're going
to see giants walk the earth again I
mean that's already happening and that's
what these AI systems are and if they're
trained by people
who well let's say are full of
unexamined biases and prejudices and
deep resentments which is something that
you talk about in your Manifesto
resentment and arrogance being like key
sin so to speak we're going to produce
monstrous machines that have exactly
those characteristics and that is not
going to be good and that that's a like
you're you're absolutely right to point
to this as you know to point to this as
perhaps the serious problem of our times
if we're going to generate augmented
intelligence we better not generate
augmented pathological intelligence and
if we're not very careful we are
certainly going to do that not least
because there's way more ways that A
system can go wrong then there are ways
that it can you know aim upward in a in
a earing Direction and so okay so why is
it these people who were H this is so
awful I didn't know that that were say
part of the safety and trust issue at
Twitter who are now training the bloody
AI how did that horrible situation come
to be it's the same Dynamic it's the the
the big AI companies have the exact same
dynamic as the big social media
companies which have the exact same
dynamic as the big universities which
have the exact same dynamic as the big
big media companies which is you you
right you have these either either
formal or deao cartels um you know you
have a you have a small handful of
companies at the commanding Heights of
society that hire all the smart
graduates um you know as say take a step
back you don't see ideological
competition between Harvard and Yale
right like you would think that you
should because they should compete in
the marketplace of ideas and of course
in practice you don't see that at all
you see no ideological you know
competition between the New York Times
And The Washington Post uh you see no
ideological competition between the Ford
foundation and you know the you know any
any of the other major foundations they
they all have the exact same politics
you see no prior to Elon buying Twitter
you saw no ideological competition
between the different social media
companies right today you see no major
you see no ideological competition among
the big AI Labs Elon is the spoiler
right he is coming in to do in he's
going to try to do an AI what he did in
social media which is create the non
non-woke one but without Elon you know
you weren't seeing that at all and and
so you have this you have this
consistent Dynamic across these sectors
of the of what appears to be a free
market economy um where you end up with
these cartels um where they sort of
self-reinforce and self- police and then
they're policed by the government um and
and anyway so I want to describe the
general phenomenon because that's what's
happening here it's the same thing that
happened with the social media companies
and then this gets into policy uh on the
uh on the a very serious policy issues
on the government side um which is is
the government going to Grant these AI
companies basically protected status as
some form of Monopoly or or cartel in
return for these companies signing up
for the political control
that their masters in government want or
is or or in the alternative is there
actually going to be an open AI Universe
a true open AI like truly open where
you're going to have a multiplicity of
AIS that are actually in full
competition right competing and then
you'll have some that are woke and
you'll have some that are non-woke and
you'll have some trained on new material
and some trained on Old material and so
forth and so on and then people can
freely pick and the thing that we're
pushing for is that latter outcome we
very specifically want government to not
protect these companies to not put them
behind a regulatory wall to not be able
to control them um in in the way that
the social media companies got
controlled before Elon we we we actually
want like full full competition and if
you want your W you can have it but
there are many other choices well can
you can you imagine developing a super
intelligence that's shielded from
evolutionary pressure like that is
absolutely insane that's absolutely
insane I mean all the only all we know
that the only way that a complex system
can regulate itself across time is is
through something like evolutionary
competition that's it that's the
mechanism and so if you you decide what
that this AI is correct by Fiat and then
you Shield it from any possibility of
Market feedback or environmental
feedback well that is literally the
definition of how to make something
insane and so now you talked about in
some of your recent podcasts you talked
about the fact that the Biden
Administration in particular if I got
this right was conspiring behind the
scenes with the tech company to cordon
off the AI systems and make them
monolithic and so do you can you
elaborate a little bit more on that yeah
so this is this whole dis dispute that's
playing out and you know this gets
complicated but um try provide a high
level view so this is whole dispute of
what so-called AI safety right and so
there there's this whole kind right
there's this whole kind of you know you
might call it concern or even Panic
about like are the AAS going to run
under control are they going to kill us
all right are by the way are they going
to say are they going to be racist you
know all these different concerns over
you know all the different ways in which
these things can go wrong you know
there's this attempt to impose the
precautionary principle on on these AIS
where you have to prove that they're
harmless before they're allowed to be
released which inherently gets into
these political you know these political
questions um and so anyway the AI safety
movement conjoins a lot of these
questions into kind of this overall kind
of elevated level of concern and then
basically what has been happening is the
the the the major AI Labs basic
basically they know what the deal is
they they watch what happened in social
media they watch what happened to the
companies that got out of line they
watch the pressures that came to bear
they watch what the government did to
the social media companies they watched
the censorship regime that was put in
place which was very much a political
you know top- down censorship regime um
and and and basically they they went to
Washington over the course of the last
several years and they they essentially
proposed a trade and the trade was we
will do what you want politically we
will come under your control voluntarily
from a political standpoint the same way
the social media companies had um and in
return for that we essentially want a
cartel we we we want a regulatory
structure set up um such that a small
handful of big companies will be able to
succeed in effect forever and then then
new entrance will not be allowed to
compete um and this in Washington they
understand this because this is the
classic economic concept of regulatory
capture this is what every set of major
big companies in every industry does and
so the AI companies went to Washington
and they tried to do that and and
basically what was happening up until
the election was the Biden
Administration was on board with that um
and that led to the conversations that
I've talked about before that we had in
the spring with the Biden Administration
where we they where they told us very
directly uh senior officials in
administration very directly look do not
attempt to do not even bother to try to
fund AI startups there are only going to
be two or three large AI companies
building two or three large AIS and we
are going to we we are going to control
them we are going to set up a system in
which we control them and they are going
to be you know they they're not going to
be nationalized but they're going to be
essentially deao integrated into into
the government um and we are going to do
whatever is required to guarantee that
outcome and it's you know it's the only
way to get get to the outcome that that
that that that we will find
acceptable are you tired of being held
back by one siiz fits-all Healthcare of
having your concerns dismissed or being
denied that comprehensive lab work you
need to truly understand your health I
want to tell you about mer Health the
Premier Health optimization platform
that's revolutionizing how we approach
wellness and Longevity what sets mer
apart isn't just their cuttingedge
diagnostic Labs or conier health
coaching it's their commitment to
treating you as an individual their
expert clinical team stays at the
Forefront of medical research creates
personalized evidence-based protocols
that evolve with you unlike other
services that rely on cookie cutter
Solutions mer Health goes the extra mile
they consider your unique lifestyle
blood work and goals to craft
recommendations that actually work for
you whether that's through lifestyle
modifications supplementation or
prescription treatments and with a
remarkable 4.9 out of five rating on
trust pilot you know you're in great
hands the best part is you can get 10%
off your order today just head to mer
health.com and use code Peterson
checkout that's mer health.com code
Peterson for 10% off stop guessing and
start optimizing your health today with
mer health because your best life starts
with your best
health okay okay well so there's so much
in there that's pathological Beyond
Comprehension that it's difficult to
even know where to start it's like who
the hell thinks this is a good idea and
why like who are these people that feel
that they're in a position to determine
the face
of of hyperintelligence of computational
hyper intelligence and who is it that
thinks that that is something that
should be like regulated by a closed
government corporate cartel like I don't
understand that at all Mark I don't know
if I've ever heard anybody detail out to
me something that is so blatantly both
malevolent and insane simultaneously so
like how do you account for that I mean
I know it shocked you I know that's why
you've been talking about it recently
now it should shock you because it's I
it's just beyond comprehension to me
that this sort of thing
can can go on and thank God you're
bringing it to light but like how do you
make sense of this what's what's your
understanding of it well look it's it's
the same people who think that they
should control the education system um
same people who think they should
control the university same people who
think they should control social media
censorship you know the same people who
think that they should permanently
control the government government
bureaucracies it's it's it's this you
know you whatever pick whatever term you
want it's this Elite Class ruling class
you know oligarch CL worshipers of power
worship remember it's one ring of power
that binds all the evil Rings yeah well
it's worshippers of power and the damn
postmodernists you know when they
proclaimed that power was the only game
in town a huge part of that was both a
confession and an ambition right if
power is the only game in town then why
not be the most effective Power Player
the reason I'm so sens sensitized to
this is because I this is what exactly
what I saw happen with social media
censorship like I I I I sat in the room
and watched the construction of the
entire social media censorship ship
edifice every step of the way going all
the way back to the I was in the
original discussions about what defines
Concepts like hate speech and
misinformation like I I I was in those
meetings and I saw the construction of
the entire private sector edifice that
resulted in the censorship regime that
we're all that we all experienced um and
I and I and I I was I was close into the
you know this there's there's a whole
group at Stanford University that became
a censorship Bureau that was working on
behalf of the government I know those
people one one of the people who ran
that used to work for me um I I know ex
exactly who those people are I know
exactly how that program worked I I I
knew the people in government you know
who were running things like this you
know the so-called Global engagement
Center and all these different arms of
the you know the government that had
been imposing social media censorship so
so I you know this is you know this is
this entire complex that we kind of saw
unspooled in the Twitter files and then
we've seen in you know the investigative
reporting by people like you know Mike
Benz and Mike shellenberger and these
other guys like I saw that whole thing
get built um and I and I you know over
the course of you know basically 12
years I saw that whole thing get built
and then of course I been part of elon's
takeover of of Twitter and so I've seen
the UN you know what it takes to try to
unwind that with what he's doing at X
and so I feel like I saw the first movie
right and then AI you know AI is a much
more important as I said AI is a much
more important topic but AI is very
clearly the sequel to that and what I'm
seeing is basically the exact same
pattern um that I saw with that and the
people who were able to do that for
social media for a long time are the
same same kind of people and in many
cases literally the same people um who
are now trying to do that in Ai and so I
like at this point I feel like we've
been warned like we we've seen the first
movie we've been warned we've seen how
how how bad it can get we need to make
sure it doesn't happen again and yeah we
need you know those of us in a position
to be able to do something about it need
to talk about it and need to try to
prevent it well so at ARC we're trying
to formulate a set of policies that I
think strike to the heart of the matter
and the Heart of the matter is what
story should Orient us as we move
forward into the future and we're going
to discover that by looking at the great
stories of the past and extracting out
their genuine Essence and I think the
ethos of voluntary self-sacrifice is the
right foundation stone and I think that
the proposition that Society is built on
sacrifice is self-evident once you
understand it because to be a social
creature you have to give up individual
Supremacy you trade it in for the
benefits of social being and you're
attention is a sacrificial process too
because there are there's one thing you
attend to at a time and trillion other
things that you sacrifice that you could
be attending to now I think we do
understand we're starting to understand
the B basics of the technical ethos of
the
sacrificial of the what what would you
say of the sacrificial Foundation it's
something like that and I think we
understand that at ARK and we have some
principles that are try we're trying to
use to govern the Genesis of this
organization which I think will become
the go-to and maybe already has the
go-to conference at least for people who
are interested in the same sort of ideas
that you're putting forward we had a
very successful conference last year and
the one that's coming up in February
looks like it's going to
be larger and more successful we have
spin-offs in Australia and so forth and
so part of the part of the emphasis
there is that we want to put forward a
vision that's Invitational and there's a
there's a
policy proposition there's a proposition
with regards to policy that lies at the
bottom of that which is that if I can't
invite you on board to go in the
direction that I'm proposing then
there's something wrong with my
proposition right if I have to use Force
if I have to use compulsion then that's
indicative of a fundamental flaw in my
conceptualization now there might be
some exceptions for like overtly
criminal and malevolent types because
they're difficult to pull into the game
but if the policy requires Force rather
than Invitational compliance there's
something wrong with it and so what
we're trying to do and I I see like very
close parallels to the project that
you're engaged in is to formulate a
vision of the future that's
so what would you say so self-evidently
positive
that people would strive to find a
reason not to be enthusiastically on
board and I don't think you have to be a
naive Optimist to formulate a vision
like that we know perfectly well that
the world is a far far more abundant
place than the malthusian pessimists
could have possibly imagined back in the
1960s when they were agitating madly for
their propositions of scarcity and
overpopulation and so okay so what's the
conclusion to that well the conclusion
in part is that this AI problem needs to
be addressed you know and I've built
some AI systems that
are founded
on the the ancient principles let's say
that do in fact govern free societies
and they're not
woke they can interpret dreams for
example quite accurately which is very
interesting and remarkable to see and so
they're they're much more weighted
towards it's something like the golden
thread that runs through
the the traditional humanist Enterprise
stretching back two or 3 thousand years
and maybe there's 200 core texts in
that Enterprise that that constitute the
center what used to constitute the
center of something like a great books
program the great books program which is
still running at the University of
Chicago now that's not sufficient
because as you pointed out well there's
all this technological progress that has
been made in the last 100 years but
there's something about it that's
Central in core and I think we can use
the AI systems actually to untangle what
the
core idea sets are that have under
pinned free and and productive abundant
voluntary
societies know it's it's something like
the set of propositions that make for an
iterating voluntary game that's
self-improving that's a very constrained
set
of Pathways and there's something like
there's something in that that I think
attracts people as a universally
acceptable ethos it's the ethos on which
a successful marriage would be founded
or a successful friendship or a
successful business partnership where
all the participants are enthusi
enthusiastically on board without
compulsion and Jean P the developmental
psychologist had mapped out the
evolution of systems like that in
childhood play and so he got an awful
long he was trying to reconcile the
difference between science and religion
in his investigations of the development
of children's structures of knowledge
and he got a long way in in laying out
the foundations of that ethos and so did
the comparative mythologist like mer
elata who wrote some brilliant books on
uh well I think they're they're sort of
like the equivalent of early large
language models that's how it looks to
me now is Eliot was very good at picking
out the Deep patterns of narrative
commonality that United religious major
religious systems across multiple
cultures that was all thrown out by the
way that was all thrown out by the
postmodern literary theorists they just
tossed all that out of the academy
and that was a big mistake they turned
to Fuko instead was a cataclysmic
mistake and it it certainly ushered in
this era of Domination by power
narratives which is underlying the sorts
of phenomena that you're describing that
are so appalling so what's happened to
you as a consequence of starting to
speak out about this and why did you
start to speak out and how do you you
said you were involved in this and so
what's the difference between being
involved and being complicit it I mean I
know people learn well these are comp
well these are complicated problems and
people learn but like what's like H why
why are you speaking out how are people
responding to that and how do you see
your role in this as it unfolded over
the last say 15 years yeah so
complicated question and I'll start by
saying I I claim I I claim no particular
bravery so I I don't I don't claim any
particular moral credit on this um uh
start by saying there there's this
there's this thing you you'll hear about
sometimes concept of So-Cal you money um
and so that you know right there's this
some sort of like okay people are
successful you make a certain amount of
money now you can tell everybody you you
can say whatever you want and I I will
just tell you my observation is that's
actually not true um yeah right
definitely not and the reason that's not
true is because the people who tend to
the people who Prosper tend in our
society tend to do so because they're
they're becoming responsible for more
and more things um and and specifically
they're becoming responsible for more
and more people um and so one of the
things I I would observe about myself
and observed about a lot of my peers is
even as we became more and more you know
bothered and concerned and ultimately
very worried about some of these things
is as that was happening we were taking
on greater and greater responsibilities
um for our employees and for all the
companies that were involved in right
and for all the shareholders of all of
our companies um so I I think that's
part of and and you know you could you
could say you know this sort of this
endless you know sort of question
between kind of you know absolute D you
know sort of absolute commands of
morality versus the you know real world
compromises that you make to try to you
know function as Society um I would say
I was just as as as subject to that to
that inherent conflict as anybody else
um I was in the room for a lot a lot of
these decisions I saw it every step of
the way um in some cases I felt right up
front that something was going wrong um
I mean I I I was in the original
discussion for one of these you know
companies on the definition of hate
speech right and you you can imagine how
that you know discussion goes you know
exactly how that discussion went but
I'll just tell you it's it's like well
hate speech is anything that makes
people uncomfortable right it's
well you know so my my you know then I'm
like well that know that that that
comment you just made makes me
uncomfortable and so therefore that must
be hate speech and then they you know
they look at me like I've grown a third
eye and I'm like okay that argument is
not going to work um and then they're
like well Mark surely you agree that the
n-word makes people uncomfortable and
I'm like yes I agree with that if our
hate speech policy is people don't get
to use the n-word I'm okay with that as
long as people can say you know but of
course it doesn't stop there and it
slides into what we then saw happen so
so I saw that happen the misinformation
thing same thing the the misinformation
thing actually on social media is hor
fascinating horrifying thing that played
out which is it actually started out to
to actually attack a specific form of
actually spam um so there were these
Macedonian bot Farms um that were
literally creating uh was called click
spam or ad sort of AD fraud um on social
media they were creating literally fake
news stories like you know for the
classic one was the pope has died and
it's like no the pope has not died that
is absolute misinformation but the
reason that this bot Farm puts that
story out is because some people click
on it they they make money on the ads um
and then that's clearly a bad thing and
that's misinformation and clearly we
need to to to to stop that and so the
mechanism was built to stop that kind of
spam but then after the election you
know we discovered that anybody who was
Pro Donald Trump was presumptively you
know an agent of Vladimir Putin and then
all of a sudden that became
misinformation right um right um and so
the the the engine that was intended to
be built for spam then all of a sudden
applied to politics and then off and
away they went and then everything was
you know every everything was
misinformation includ you know
culminating in objections to three years
of Co lockdowns became misinformation
right so so so I saw the I saw that
entire thing on spool I saw all the
pressures brought to bear on these
companies I saw the people who went up
against this get get wrecked I saw these
companies try to develop all these
trade-offs um you know obviously I you
know I I would claim for myself that I
tried to argue this you know kind of
every step of the way and by the way I'm
not the only one who was concerned about
this and I'll I'll just I think we
should give Mark Zuckerberg a little a
little bit of credit on this on on on on
one spe specific point which is you may
recall he gave a speech in
2019 uh at Georgetown um which and he
gave a very principal defense of free
speech from first principles
um and was he you know he at that point
was trying very hard to kind of maintain
the line on this now 2020 everything
went like completely nuts and then the
Biden Administration came in and the
government came in and they really
lowered the boom and so things went very
bad after that but you know even Mark
who a lot of people get very mad at on
these things like he he he was try he
was trying in many ways to to hold on on
these things anyway it unfolded the way
that it did I don't claim any particular
courage um I will tell you basically
starting in 2022 um I saw some leaders
in our industry really start to up and
one that I would give huge credit to U
is Brian Armstrong who the CEO of
coinbase um which is a a company that
that we're involved in and he you may
recall he he's the guy he wrote
basically a Manifesto and he said these
companies need these companies need to
be devoted to their missions not every
other mission in society right right
right right and so he declared like
there's going to be a new way to run
these companies we're not going to have
all the politics we're not going to have
the whole bring your whole self to work
thing that you know we're not going to
have all the internal corrosion we're
going to go back you know we're going to
go we're going to have our mission and
then and we're going to focus on that
we're not going to take on the you know
the world's the world's the world's ills
um and then and then he he did this
thing where he actually got he actually
purged his company of the activist class
that we talked about earlier and the way
that he did that was with a voluntary
buyout uh where he said if you're not on
board with working at a non-political
non- ideological company um that's
focused on its own mission not every
other Mission then you know I will pay
you money you know to go work someplace
where you'll be able to fully exercise
your politics um there are a bunch of
other CEOs um you know that have been
basically following in Brian's footsteps
more quiet quiet but they've basically
been doing the same thing and a lot of
these companies have turned the corner
on this now and they're starting to you
know they're working these people out
and then you know quite frankly you know
the the big event is I think this
election and you know people have all
kinds of you know positive negative
takes on Trump and you know this gets
into lots and lots of political issues
but I I I think that the the Trump
Victory being what it was and being not
just Trump winning again but also Trump
winning the popular vote and also
simultaneously the house and the
Senate it it feels like the iceis
cracked you know it's it's like maybe
the pressure for the ice to crack was
building over 2 years but it feels like
as of November 6th it feels like
something really fundamental changed
where all of a sudden people have become
basically willing to talk about the
things they weren't willing to talk
about before let me tell you about
something that could truly transform
your year if you're looking for a New
Year's resolution that'll actually stick
past February and genuinely enrich your
soul I want to introduce you to hallow
the world's number one Prayer app
imagine having over 10,000 guided
prayers and meditations right at your
fingertips helping you grow closer to
God every single day one of their most
popular features is the daily reflection
where you can join Jonathan roomy from
the chosen as he reads the daily gospel
followed by Illuminating insights from
Biblical scholar Jeff cavans and if you
ever want to dive deeper into scripture
you've got to check out their world
famous bible INE podcast with father
Mike Schmidt he makes even the most
complex parts of the Bible feel
accessible and relevant to your daily
life short on time no problem hallow
offers everything from Quick daily
minutes to Nightly sleep prayers and you
can customize it all to fit your
schedule they make it super easy to
build a lasting prayer routine with
helpful reminders and an amazing
Community for accountability start your
year off right by putting God first and
here's the best part you can get 3
months of hallow completely free by
going to hall.com Jordan that's H
low.com Jordan for 3 months free don't
wait begin your spiritual journey with
hallow
today yeah yeah yeah okay let's go back
to your Manifesto so um I wanted to I
wanted to highlight a couple of things
in relationship to that I had some
questions for you too tell me to begin
with if you would why you wrote this
Manifesto maybe let everybody know about
it first why you wrote it and what
effect it's had and then I'll go through
it step by step at least to some degree
and and I can let you know what ideas we
we've been developing with the alliance
for responsible citizenship and we can
play with that a little bit so what what
I experienced um I'm on 30 years now in
in the tech industry um you know in the
US in the Silicon Valley and what what
what I experienced was between roughly
you know 1994 when I entered through to
about
2012 um was sort of one way in which
everything operated um and set of
beliefs everybody had um and then
basically this incredible discontinuous
change that happened between call it
2012 and 2014 that then cascaded into
you know what you might describe as you
know some degree of insanity over over
the last decade um and of course you
you've talked a lot about a lot lot of
lot of lot of aspects of that Insanity
um but the way I would describe it is
for the first you know 15 20 years of my
career there was what I what I refer to
sometimes as the deal uh with the
capital D or you might call it the
compact um or maybe just the universal
belief system um which was effectively
everybody I knew in Tech um was a you
know social uh liberal Progressive and
good standing um but uh you know
operating in the era of Clinton Gore um
and then you know later on through Bush
and into Obama first term um it was
viewed as that that to be a social
Progressive and good standing was a was
completely compatible with being a
capitalist um completely compatible with
being an entrepreneur and a business
person completely compatible with
succeeding in business um and so the the
basic deal was you you have the you know
exact same political and social beliefs
as everybody you know you have the exact
same social political beliefs as the New
York Times you know every day you know
every day and their beliefs change over
time but you you know you update yours
to to stay current and and everybody
around you believes the same thing the
dinner dinner table conversations are
everybody's in 100% disagreement on
agreement on everything at all times but
then you go Succeed in Business um and
you build your company and you build
products and you build new technology
and your if your company succeeds it
goes public and people become wealthy um
and then you square the circle of sort
of you know sort of social progressivism
and and and entrepreneurial success and
business success you square the circle
with philanthropy um and so you you you
donate the money to good social causes
and and then you know someday your
obituary says he was both a successful
business person and a and and a great
human being um and basically what I
experienced is that that deal broke down
between you know 2012 2014 2015 and then
sort of imploded spectacularly in
2017 um and ever since it's there there
has been no way to square that Circle
which is if you are successful in
business in Tech and Entrepreneurship if
you become you know successful you you
are deao evil um and you can protest
that you're actually good person but you
are presumed to be de facto evil um and
by the way furthermore uh philanthropy
will no longer was your sins um and this
this was a massive change and you know
this is still playing out but but
philanthropy will no longer wash your
sins because philanthropy is an you know
unacceptable the belief goes
philanthropy is an unacceptable
diversion of resources from the proper
way that they should be deployed which
is the state um right to uh you know to
to sort of a private Enterprise form of
philanthropy which is sort of de facto
you know is now considered bad um and so
so so everybody in my world basically
had a decision to make um which was did
they basically go sharply to the left on
not just social issues but also economic
issues and did they become you know
starkly anti- bus anti-tech you know
essentially self-hating uh in order to
stay in the good graces of of of what
happened on that side um or you know did
they have to you know do what Peter teal
did early on and you know go go go way
to the right and basically just punch
out and declare that that you know there
I I'm completely out of progressivism
I'm completely finished with this and
I'm going to go a completely different
direction and and obviously that
culminated in you know that that that
was part of the phenomenon that
culminated in in Trump's first election
and so anyway long story short the the
the manifesto that I wrote is an attempt
to kind of bring things back to you know
what I consider to be a more sensible
way to to to think and operate you know
a big tent social and political uh
umbrella but you know where Tech
Innovation is actually still good
business is still good capitalism is
still good uh technological progress is
still good the people who work on these
things um actually are still good and
and and that actually we can be proud of
what we do you said that something
changed quite radically in 2017 I'd like
you to delve a little bit more into the
breakdown of this deal like your claim
there was that for a good
while Center
left positions politically let's say and
philosophically were compatible with the
tech Revolution and and with the big
business side of the tech Revolution but
you pointed to a transformation across
time that really became
unmistakable by
2017 why 2017 as a year and what what is
it that you think changed you know you
you you painted a broadscale picture of
this
transformation um and also pointed to
the fact that it was no longer possible
to be an economic capitalist to be a
free market guy and to Proclaim
allegiance to the progressive ideals
that became impossible and in 2017 what
do you think happened how do you
understand that yeah so different people
of course have different perspectives on
this but I'll tell you what I
experienced and I think I I think in
retrospect what happened is Silicon
Valley experienced this before a lot of
other places in the country and before a
lot of other you know fields of business
and so I I have many friends in other
areas of business who live and work in
other places where I would describe to
them what was happening in 2012 or 2014
or 2016 and they would look at me like
I'm crazy and I'm like no I'm describing
what's actually happening on the ground
here and then three years later they
would tell me oh it's also happening in
Hollywood or it's also happening in
finance or it's also happening in you
know the you know these these other
Industries so so so in retrospect I
think I had a front row seat to this
just because Silicon Valley was you know
I've been using this term first in
Silicon Valley was first in like Silicon
Valley was the industry that went the
hardest for this transformation UPF
front um and so what we experienced in
Silicon Val and then you know the nature
of my work you know over this entire
time period I've been a venture
capitalist and an investor and so the
nature of my work is I've been exposed
to a large number of companies all at
the same time some very small um and
then by the way also some very large so
for example i' I've been on the Facebook
board of directors this entire Arc right
and and and a lot of what I'm describing
you can actually you can actually see
through just the history of just you
know the one company Facebook which
which we can talk about but anyway so I
I think I basically saw the Vanguard
movement up close um and you know
essentially what I saw was it was really
2012 it was the beginning of the second
Obama term um and it was sort of the the
aftermath of the global financial crisis
and so it was it was some combination of
of those two things right so the global
financial crisis hits in 2008 Occupy
Wall Street takes off but is this kind
of Fringe thing you know that the sort
of you know Bernie Sanders starts to
activate as a national National
candidate some of these you know other
politicians on the sort of further to
the left start to become prominent start
to take over the Democratic party um and
then you know the the the economy caved
in right so we went through a severe
recession between call it 2009 to
2011 2012 the economy was coming back
people maybe weren't worried about being
fired anymore right if if if people
think they're going to get fired in a
recession they generally don't act out
at a company but if they think their
jobs are secure in an economic boom they
you know they can start to become
activists and so they that sort of
employ activist movement started around
2012 and then the Obama second term you
know I would say the progressives in the
Democratic party kind of took more
control you know kind of kind of
starting around that time and the Obama
Administration itself kind of turn
turned to the left and so you started to
get this kind of activated political
energy uh this sort of you know the sort
of the the activist movements in these
companies where you had people who you
know the year before had been a quiet
you know web designer working in their
cubicle and then all of a sudden they're
a social and political revolutionary um
inside their own company and then by the
way the shareholders activated which was
real really interesting like this is
when Larry Fink at Black Rock decided he
was going to save the world um and and
then the Press activated and so all of a
sudden you know the same Tech reporters
who had been very happy covering Tech
and talking about exciting new ideas all
of a sudden became you know kind of very
accusatory and and and started to
condemn the industry so so that started
to pop around around 2012 and then what
what what I saw you might even describe
it as like a controlled skid skid that
became an uncontrolled skid which was
that that that energy built up in Tech
between 2012 and 2015 and then you know
basically what happened in Rapid
succession was Trump's nomination and
then Trump's Trump's election his
victory in in in 2016 and I describe
both of those events as like 10 Xing of
the political energy um in this system
and so you know both of those events
really activated you know very strong
antibody responses um you know which
which as you know culminated in like
Mass prot in the streets right after the
2016 election um and so and then of
course the narrative then became you
know crystallized which is there were
the forces of Darkness represented by
Trump represented by the right
represented by capitalism represented by
Tech and there are the forces of light
represented by wokeness and you know the
racial Reckoning and and you know the
the the George Floyd protest and so
forth and it be you know became this you
know very very very clear litmus test
and so and and so that the the pattern
basically locked in hard in 2017 and
then and then continued to escalate from
there so in
in your Manifesto you list some of these
ideas that were um pathological let's
say that emerged on the left and I I
just want to find the while you for
example you
say technology doesn't care about your
ethnicity race religion national origin
gender sexuality political views height
weight Etc listing out the dimensions of
hypothetical oppression that the
intersectional woke mob stresses
continually now you you point your
finger at that obviously because you
feel that something went seriously
wrong with regard to the prioritization
of those dimensions of difference that's
part of the movement of diversity that's
part part of the movement of equity and
inclusivity um let me just find this
other yes here we go our present Society
has been subjected to a mass
demoralization campaign for six
decades against technology and against
life under varying names like
existential risk sustainability ESG
sustainable development goals social
responsibility stakeholder capitalism
precautionary principle trust and safety
Tech ethics risk management degrowth the
demoralization campaign is based on bad
ideas of the past zombie ideas many
derived from communism disastrous then
and now that have refused to die and
that's in the part of your Manifesto
that is subtitled the enemy that's an
enemy of the enemy you're characterizing
there as a system of ideas and I guess
that that would be the system of woke
ideas that presumes and correct me if I
get this wrong that presumes that you
know we're fundamentally motivated by
power that anybody who has a position of
Authority actually has a position of
power the best way to read positions of
power is from the perspective of a a
narrative that's basically predicated on
the hypothesis of oppressor and
oppressed and that there are multiple
dimensions of Oppression that need to be
called out and rectified and the Dei
movement is part of that and so you
point to the fact that these are zombie
ideas left over let's say from the are
from the Communist Enterprise of the
early and mid 20th century and that
seems to me
precisely appropriate and you said you
thought those ideas emerged on the
corporate front in a damaging way first
in big Tech you know I probably saw that
most
particularly evidence of that most
particularly in relationship to the
Scandal that surrounded James deore
because that was really Cardinal for me
because like I spent a fair bit of time
talking to James and my impression of
him was that he was just an engineer and
and and I don't mean that in any
disparaging sense he thought like an
engineer and he went to a Dei meeting
and they asked him for feedback on what
he had observed and heard and James
being an engineer thought that they
actually wanted feedback you know
because he didn't have the social skills
to understand that he was supposed to be
participating in an elaborate lie and so
he provided them with feedback about
their claims especially with regards to
gender differences and James actually
nailed it pretty precisely for someone
who wasn't a who wasn't a research
psychologist he had summarized the
difference in the literature on gender
differences for example extremely
accurately and they pillared him and I
thought that's really bad because it
means that you know Google wouldn't
stand behind its own Engineers when they
were when he was telling the truth and
there was every attempt made to destroy
his career now why do you think that
whatever happened affected Tech first
and what did you see happening that you
then saw happening in other corporations
yeah so uh why did it happen in Tech
first so a couple things so one is Tech
is just I would say extremely connected
into the universities um and so almost
right right and so almost everything we
do flows from the computer science
departments and the engineering
departments at major US research
universities um and and we you know we
hire kids from you know new new
graduates all the time and so we just
have a very very tight and we work we
work with we work with University
professors and research groups all the
time um and so uh there's just direct
connection there um and so we you know
it's it's like if if if a uh if a
ideological uh uh uh pathological virus
is going to escape the university and
jump into the civilian population it'll
it'll it'll hit Tech first which is
which is what happened or maybe you know
Tech and media um first so that's that's
one and then two um you know two is I
think the the psy sort of psychological
sort that happens when when kids decide
what profession to go into um and you
know what we get are the very high
openness people you know the the the
highest openness people come out of
college you know who are also high IQ
and ambitious and they basically they
you know they go in attack they go into
the creative Industries or they go into
media right they're sort of the you know
where they sort into and so so we we
also get the most open um and by the way
also ambitious right we we get the you
know the ambitious driven driven you
know as you say high industriousness uh
ones as well and then and then you know
that's the formula for a highly
effective activist right um and so so so
so we got we got the full load of that
um and then look the you know this
movement you know that we now call
wokeness you know it it hijacked you
know it hijacked what I would you know
call sort of at the time you know bog
standard progressivism which is you know
of course you want to be diverse and of
course you want to be inclusive and of
course you want everybody to feel
included and of course you want to be
kind and of course you want to be fair
and of course you want to just society
and and you know that was part of the
you know just moderate belief set that
everybody in my world had you know for
the preceding certainly 20 years and so
at first it just felt like oh this is
more of what we're used to right this is
you know of course this is what we want
um but you know it turned out what we
were dealing with was something that was
far more aggressive right you know a
much more aggressive movement and then
and then this this activism phenomenon
um and then this became a very practical
issue for these companies like on a
day-to-day basis and so you mentioned
the deore incident so I I talked to
Executives at Google while that was
going down because that was so confusing
for me at the time and the reason that
they the reason they acted on him the
way they did and fired him and
ostracized him did all the rest of it is
because they thought they were hours
away from actual physical riots uh on
the Google campus like they thought
employee mobs were going to try to burn
the place down physically right and so
and and and and and that was such at the
time like that was such an aberant you
know phenomenon expectation there were
other companies by the way at the same
time that were having all hands meetings
that were completely unlike anything
that we' ever seen before that you could
only compare to struggle sessions you
know there's the famous uh the the
Netflix adaptation of three-body problem
starts with this very Vivid Recreation
of a of a of a maist era you know
communist Chinese struggle session right
where the students are on stage and you
know the the disgraced you know
Professor is on stage confessing his
sins and you know then they beat him to
death and you know and the the inflamed
passions of the young ideologically you
know consumed crowd that is completely
convinced that they're on the side of of
of justice and morality you know
fortunately nobody got beaten to death
um you know at these companies um on an
allance meeting but you started to see
that same level of activated energy that
same level of passion you started to see
hysterics you know people crying and
screaming in the audience and so the you
know these companies knew they were at
risk from their employees uh up to an
including the risk of of of actual
physical riots and and and and and that
at the time of course was like a
completely bizarre thing and we we you
know we at the time had no idea what we
were dealing with uh but it but it was
in retrospect it was through events like
what James deore went through that we
ultimately did figure out what this was
okay okay so so let me ask you a
question about that you know it's a
management question I
guess
so I had some trouble at penguin random
house a couple of years ago after
writing a couple of bestsellers for them
um I was contracted with one of their
subdivisions and they had a bit of an
employee Rebellion that would be perhaps
reminiscent of the sort of thing that
you're referring to and um they cow to
them and I ended up S ing to a different
subdivision now really made no material
difference to me and I was just as happy
to be with a subdivision where everybody
in the company visible and invisible was
working to make what I was doing with
them successful rather than scuttling it
invisibly from behind the scenes but my
sense then was um why don't you just
fire these people and so well I'm dead
serious about that it's like first of
all I'll give you an example so we just
set up this company Peterson Academy
online and we have 40,000 students now
and about 30 professors and we're doing
what we can to bring extremely high
quality Elite University level education
to people everywhere for virtually no
money and that's working like a charm
now we set up a social media platform in
in inside that so that people could
interact like they do on Twitter or
Facebook Etc Instagram because we try to
integrate the best features of those
networks and uh but we wanted to make
sure that it was a civilized place and
so the fact that people have to pay for
access to it helps that a lot right
because it keeps out the trolls and the
Bots and the Bad actors who can multiply
accounts Beyond Comprehension for no
money and so the the mere price of Entry
helps but we also watched and if people
misbehaved we did something about it and
we kicked four people out of 40,000 and
one of them we put on probation and that
was all we had to do you know there was
Goodwill and everybody was behaving
properly and and like I said there was a
cost to entry but it didn't take a lot
of discipline it didn't take a lot of
disciplinary action to make an awful lot
of difference with regard to behavior
and so you know I can understand that
Google might have been apprehensive
about activating the activists within
their confines but sacrificing James
deore to the woke mob because he told
the truth is not a good move forward and
I just don't understand at all you see
and the same thing happened at Penguin
at penguin random house it's like you
could just fire these people like they
were people there who wanted to not
publish a book of mine that they hadn't
even read you know they weren't people
who deserve to be working at what's
arguably arguably the greatest greatest
Publishing House in the world so why you
you alluded to it a little bit you said
that people were taken by surprise you
know and fair enough and it was the case
that there was a radical transformation
in the University environment somewhere
between 2012 and
2016 where all these terrible woke quasi
communist Neo Marxist ideas emerged and
became dominant very quickly but I'm
still why do you think that that was the
pattern of decision that was being made
instead of taking appropriate
disciplinary action and just ridding the
companies of people who were going to
cause trouble yeah so there's a bunch of
layers to it um in retrospect um and and
let me say that this what you describe
has it is what's happening now so in the
last two years a lot of companies
actually are at long last they are
firing the activists and we we can talk
about that um and so I think the tide is
turning on that a bit but um but going
back in time going back in time between
you know 2012 and let's say
2022 so like a full you know 10 years
stretch where what you're describing
didn't happen um I think there's layers
so one is as I said just people didn't
understand it I think quite frankly
number two a lot of people in charge
agreed with it at least to start right
and so they saw people who had what
appeared to be the same political
ideological leanings as they did and
were just simply more passionate about
them and so they thought they thought
they were on the same side they they
agree they agreed with it um uh and and
then and and then at some point they
they discovered that they were dealing
with something different you know maybe
the a more pure strain or a more
fundamentalist you know approach um at
that point of course they became
afraid um right um and so they were
afraid of being lit on fire themselves
um and by and by the way I would
describe you know I think Tech is
starting to work its way out of this I
think Hollywood is still not and my
friends in Hollywood when I talk to them
not at all not at all when I talked to
people who were in serious positions of
responsibility in Hollywood you know at
at you know after a couple drinks in you
know in sort of Zone privacy you know
it's pretty frequently they'll say look
I just can't it's still too scary like I
can't go up against this it'll it'll
ruin my career so you know there is
there is this group frenzy cancellation
um you know OST ostracizing care career
destru destruction thing that's real um
but let me highlight two two other
things um so one is it wasn't just the
employees um it was the employees it was
substantial percentage of the executive
team um it was also the board of
directors in a lot of cases um and so
you'd have you'd have politically
activated board members um and some of
these companies still have that by the
way um it was also the shareholder
um and you would think that investors in
a capitalist Enterprise would only be
concerned with economic return and it
turns out that's not true because you
have this intermediate layer of
Institutions like black rock where you
know they're aggregating up lots of
individual shareholders and then you
know the managers of the intermediary
can exercise their own politics you know
using the voting power of of of of of
aggregated small shareholder Holdings um
and so you have the you had the
shareholders coming at them um then by
the way you also had the government
coming at them um and and you know this
this administration's been very
aggressive um uh on a number of fronts
um we we could talk about a bunch of
examples of that but you you have direct
government pressure coming at you you
have the entire press Corps coming at
you um right and so it it it feels like
it's the entire world you know bearing
in on you and they're all going to light
you on fire and then that takes me to
that does happen that does like we
should also point out that's not a
that's not a delusion yeah I mean part
of all Al it's also I think the case
that the new communication technologies
that make the social media platform so
powerful have also enabled reputation
Savages in a way that we hadn't seen
before because you can accuse someone
from behind the cloak of anonymity and
gather a pretty nice mob around them in
no time flat with absolutely no risk to
yourself and you know there there's a
pattern of antisocial behavior that
characterizes women
and this has been well documented for 50
years in the clinical Literature Like
antisocial men tend to use physical
aggression bullying but antisocial women
use reputation savaging and exclusion
and it looks like social media
especially Anonymous social media
um what would you say enables the female
pattern of aggression of which is
reputation savaging and cancellation now
I'm not accusing women of doing that you
got to get me right here it's that there
are different Pathways to antisocial
expression one of them physical violence
isn't enabled by technology but the
other one which is reputation savaging
and exclusion is clearly embedded by
technology and so that's another feature
that might have made people leery of
putting their head up above the turret
you know like in Canada well I'm still
being investigated by the Ontario
College of psychologists and I'm
scheduled free re education if they can
ever get their act together to do that
and I fought an 8-year Court battle
which has been extremely expensive and
very very annoying to say the least and
I don't think that there's another
professional in Canada on the
psychological or medical side who's been
willing to put their head above the
parit except in brief you know in brief
interchanges and the reason for that is
it simply is it simply is too
devastating and so I have some sympathy
for people who are concerned that
they'll be taken out because they might
be but you know by the same token if you
cow toow to the woke mob for any length
of time as the tech industry appears to
be um discovering now you end up
undermining everything that you hold
sacred I mean you alluded to the fact
that you'd hope that at least the
shareholders would be appropriately
oriented by Market Force forces greed to
put it in the most negative possible way
and you'd hope that that would be
sufficient incentive to keep things
above board because I'd way rather deal
with someone who's motivated by money
than motivated by ideology but even that
isn't enough to ensure that even
corporations act in their own best
economic interest so it is a perfect
storm and you alluded to government
pressure as well and so maybe you could
shed a little bit more light on that
because that's also particularly um
worrisome and it's certainly been
something that's characteristic and is
still characteristic of of Canada under
Trudeau yeah so just a couple things on
that so one is um I should I should just
I should just note um and I'm sure you
agree with me on this there are many men
who also exhibit that um reputational
destruction
Mo absolutely men men will use it they
typically don't in the real world but if
it's if the pathway is laid open to it
right on social media let's say and and
there's a particular kind of man who's
more likely to do that too those are the
dark tetrad types who are narcissistic
and Psychopathic and and mellan and
sadistic lovely combination of
personality traits and they're
definitely enabled online so yeah so we
we've we've had plenty of them as well
um yeah so the the government pressure
side so so when this all hit you know
like I said I didn't I nobody I knew
understood what was happening I didn't
understand it and so I you know I did
what I do in circumstances like that and
I I basically tried to work my way
backwards through history and figure out
you know where this stuff came from and
I think like for pressure on
corporations you know the the the the
context for this is that corporations
corporations
are there's this cliche that you'll hear
actually interestingly from the left
which is well private companies can do
whatever they want they can censor
whoever they want private companies have
total attitude to do whatever they want
and of course that's totally untrue
private companies are extensively
regulated by the government uh private
companies have been you know regulated
by a civil rights regime impo you know
imposed by the government for for the
last 60 years that civil rights regime
you know certainly has done you know
many good things in terms of opening up
opportunities for you know different
minority groups and so forth to
participate in business but you know
that civil rights regime put in place
this standard called disperate impact um
in which you can evaluate whether a
company is racist or not on the basis of
just raw numbers um without having to
prove that they intended to be right in
terms of like who they select for their
employees and so companies you know
predating the arrival of what we call
woke they they already had legal and
Regulatory and political and compliance
requirements put on them to achieve
things like racial diversity gender
diversity and so
forth I grew up in that environment I
considered that totally normal for a
very long time I just figured that's
what how things worked and that was the
positive payoff from the civil rights
movement and from the 1960s and that was
just the state of play and you know and
by the way it was I think manageable and
good in some ways and you know like kind
of on in the way we went like we could
deal with it but basically what happened
was when wol arrived that that regime
was enormously intensified um and what
happened was a sequence of events and
and literally there was a there was a
Playbook where for example for Dei uh
there was a sequence of events where
activists and employees and board
members would push you first of all you
had to start doing explicit uh uh
minority uh statistical reporting um so
you had to fully air in public any you
know disperate impact any differences in
you know racial gender ethnic sexual uh
you know uh differences relative to to
the overall population in a in a
statistical report you had debt dat
every year and of course they told they
they would tell you as long as you issue
this report you're fine well of course
that wasn't the case what followed the
report was okay now you need What's
called the Rooney Rule um and the Rooney
Rule basically says you have to have
statistically proportionate
representation of candidates in for for
every job opening relative to the to to
the overall population and again so stop
stop there for just a sec because we
should delve into that there's a that's
a terrible thing because we we can think
about this
arithmetically it's like you have to
have proportionate representation of all
protected group members in all
categories okay there's a lot of horror
in those few words because the first
problem is those categories are multip
are multipliable Without End and you see
this for example with the continued
extension of the LGBT acronym there's no
end to the number of potential
dimensions of discrimination that can be
generated and then that so that's a
that's an unsolvable problem to begin
with it means you're screwed no matter
what you do but it's worse than that
when you combine that with the doctrine
of
intersectionality because not only do
you then have the additive consequence
of these multiple dimensions of
potential um Prejudice so for example in
Canada it's um it's
illegal to discriminate on the basis of
gender
expression okay that's separate from
gender identity so now there's a
multitude of categories of gender
identity hypothetically I mean the
estimates range from like 2 to 300 but
gender expression is essentially how you
present yourself it's I think it's
technically indistinguishable from
Fashion fundamentally and I'm not trying
to be a prick about that I mean I've
looked at the wording and I can't
distinguish it conceptually from it's
mode of self-presentation hairstyle
dress Etc and so that means you can't
discriminate on the basis of whatever
infinite number of categories of gender
expression you could generate and then
if you multiply those together I mean
how many bloody categories do you need
before you multiply them
together you have so many categories
that it's impossible to deal with so
there's a really there's a major
technical problem at the bottom of this
realm of conceptualization that's
basically making it a impossible for
companies to comply and exposing them to
Legal risk everywhere but also that
provides an infinite market for a
grieved and resentful activism yeah
that's right it Fe a c what we saw so so
so reporting leads to candidate pools
candidate pools the pressure then is
well you need to hire proportionately
according to whatever these categories
are including all the new ones and then
hiring means then then step four is
promotions you need to promote at the
same rate right and the minute you have
that requirement of course now you now
now now any performance metrics are just
totally out the window because you you
can't right you you just have to promote
everybody identically right and that's
sort of the you know the the slide into
you know the complete removal of of of
Merit from the system and then and then
by the way the the fifth stage is you
have to lay off proportionately right um
and so you know you're you're bound on
the other side and and what happens is
precisely what you I'm sure you know
happens and what you've seen happen what
happens is a Descent of the culture of
the company and to complete you know dog
dog eat dog US versus them you know the
the employee base it starts to activate
along these identity lines inside the
company um these companies all created
what are known as this this incredible
euphemism uh this employee resource
groups ergs uh which is basically
segregated employee affiliation groups
right um and so you you you now have the
employees you know the employees aren't
employees of your company the employees
are members of a group who just happen
to be at your company but their group
membership of along whatever access
we're talking about their group
membership ends up trumping uh you know
their role as employees and then you you
have this internal descent into you know
accusations into um into fear you know
you have you know this incredible you
know tokenization that takes place where
you know anybody from an
underrepresented group is you know the
classic problem with affirmative action
any member of an underrepresented group
is assumed to gotten hired only because
of their you know skin color or their or
their sex you know which is horrible for
for members of that group and and so you
get this you know downward ESP the
competent ones especially terrible for
the competent ones yeah exactly and so
it's it's it's is you know it's it's
acid you're you're pouring cultural
asset on your company and the entire
thing is devolving into into into
complete chaos internally and what's
happening is the activists and the press
and the board and everybody else is
pressing you to do this and then the
government on top of that is pressing
you to do it and under this last
Administration that reached entirely new
heights of absurdity so let me take a
step back once you walk down this path
and go through all those steps I believe
there's no question you you now have
illegal quotas um and you have illegal
hiring practices and you have illegal
promotion practices and by the way you
also have illegal layoff practices I I
think any reading of us us civil rights
law which says you are not allowed to
discriminate on the basis of all these
characteristics you have worked your
into a system in which you are
absolutely discriminating on the basis
of these characteristics through actual
hard quotas which are illegal um and so
so so to start with I think all of the
all of these companies that implemented
these systems I think they've all ended
up basically being being on the wrong
side of of civil rights law which is of
course this like incredibly ironic
result right that that they they've
they've all ended up with the legal
quotas I mentioned Hollywood earlier you
know Hollywood has gone all in for you
know they literally now publish their
hard quotas the Studios have these
statements that says by EX date you know
50% of our you know producers and
writers and actors and so forth are
going to be from specific groups and
again you you just read like The Civil
Rights Acts and it's like okay that's
actually not legal and and yet they're
doing it this Administration this last
Administration the B Administration
really hammered this this this in and
they they put these real radicals in
charge of groups like the uh civil
rights division at the Department of
Justice and the the sort of ultimate
like amazing expression of this you know
bizarre expression of this was uh SpaceX
one of elon's companies got sued by the
Civil Rights division of this department
of justice for not hiring enough
refugees um right not not hiring enough
foreign foreign for foreign Nationals
who you know had had come you know
either either either you know illegals
or or you know coming in through a
refugee path notwithstanding the fact
that SpaceX is a federal contractor and
is only allowed in most of its employee
base to hire American citizens um and so
the the the government simultaneously
demand demands of SpaceX that they only
hire American citizens and that they're
and that they hire and that they hire
refugees and the government views no
responsibility whatsoever to reconcile
that you're guilty either way right and
then and then again back the general
companies are in this bind now where if
they do everything they're supposed to
do they end up in violation of the civil
rights law which which they which they
which they started out by trying to
comply with and this has all happened
with this has all happened without
reason and rational discussion this has
all happened in a completely hysterical
emotional frenzy and and and what these
companies are realizing is they're
they're now on the other side of this
and there's just simply no way to win
well there's there's there's another um
there's an analog to that which is very
interesting I mean I I started to see
all this happen back in 1992 because I
was at Harvard when the uh bell curve
was
published and I watched that blow up the
department at Harvard and it scuttled
one of my students academic careers for
reasons I won't go into but well I was
working with that student on uh
developing validated predictors of
academic managerial and entrepreneurial
performance and so we're interested in
that scientifically like what can you
measure that predicts performance in
these Realms and the uh evidence for
that's starkly clear the best predictor
of performance in a complex job is IQ
and psychologists tore themselves into
shreds especially after the bell curve
trying to convince themselves that IQ
didn't exist but it is the most
wellestablished phenomena in the social
sciences
uh probably by something approximating
an order of magnitude so if you throw
out IQ research you pretty much throw
out all social science research and so
that turns out to be a big problem now
personality measures also matter
conscientiousness for example for
managers and openness as which you
mentioned earlier for entrepreneurs but
it's they're much less powerful about
one as powerful as IQ now the problem is
is that IQ measures show racial dis
disparities and that just doesn't go
away no matter how you look at it now at
the same time the US justice system set
up a system of laws that governed hiring
that said that you had to use the most
valid and reliable predictors of
performance that were available to do
your hiring your placement and your
promotion but none of those could
produce disperate
impact which basically meant as far as I
can tell
whatever procedure you use to hire is de
facto illegal now so lots of companies
and one of the I've never I I don't know
why this hasn't become a legal issue so
you could say well we use um we use
interviews which most companies do use
well interviews are very they're not
valid predictors of performance they're
they're not much better than chance
structured interviews are better but
ordinary interviews aren't great at all
so they they fail the validity and
reliability
test and so I don't think there is a way
that a company can hire that isn't
illegal technically illegal in the
United States and then I looked into
that for years trying to figure out how
the hell did this come about and the
reason it came about is because the
legislators basically abandoned their
responsibility to the courts and decided
that they were just going to let the
courts sort this mess out and that would
mean that companies would be subject to
Legal pressure and that there would be
judicial rulings in consequence which
would be very hard on the companies in
question but it meant the legislators
didn't have to take the Heat and so
there's still an uh ugly problem at the
bottom of all this that no one has
enough courage to address and so but the
upshot is that as you pointed out
companies find themselves in a position
where no matter what they do it's
illegal I've had lawyers literally write
write analysis for this as I've been
trying to figure it out you know
employment law lawyers and like
literally it's it's you you read the
analysis and it's very it's you know it
is it's absolutely 100% illegal uh to
discriminate on the basis of of these
characteristics and it is 100%
absolutely illegal to not discriminate
on the basis of these characteristics
and that is true right and both of those
are true it is both it is both illegal
to hire you know you mentioned
interviews interviews are interviews
interviews are an ideal setting for bias
because you know most even if you just
assume most people like people who are
like themselves um right um you know you
know is a member from a certain group
going to be more inclined to hire
members from that group you know
probably yes just if if there are no
other parameters um and so precisely you
want to get to quantitative measures
because you want to take that kind of
bias out of the system but then the
quantitative measures are presumptively
illegal because they lead to bias
through dis disperate impact um yeah and
so you know that maybe this the term
Kafka trap right you you just you you
end up you you end up in this Vice um
and then everybody is just so mad um
that you know you you can't even have
the discussion um and and so so this is
the downward spiral um on the one hand I
think there's a lot of this that just
fundamentally like can't be fixed
because the a lot of these assumptions
you know a lot of this stuff got baked
in you know going back to the 1960s
1970s so a lot of this is is long since
settled law and I don't know that
anybody has the appetite to reopen
Pandora's boxing this having said that
this new Administration the Trump
Administration coming in um I would say
every indication is that uh the the the
the Trump administration's policies and
enforcement are going to flip uh to the
other side of this um and so one of the
things that's very fascinating about
what's happening in business right now
is a lot of boards of directors are now
basically having a discussion internally
um you know with their legal team saying
okay like we we can't continue we cannot
continue to do the just overt
discriminatory hiring and employee
segmentation that we've been doing uh
we're not going to be permitted to and
so you know we have to back way off of
these programs and you know you're
already seeing Fortune 500 companies
starting to shut down Dei programs and I
think you're going to see a lot more of
that um because they're going to they're
going to try to come into compliance
with what the new Trump regime right
wants which which will be on the other
side of this but but the underlying
issues are likely to stay unresolved um
I think in practice retrospect you know
maybe this is too optimistic on my part
but you know my time in business uh you
know ' 80s '90s 2000s it felt like we
had a reasonable datant and although you
ideally might want to get in there and
figure this stuff all out you as long as
it's kind of kept to a manageable simmer
you know you you can you can kind of
have your cake and eat it too and people
can kind of get along and it's okay you
know maybe it's not a perfectly Merit
based system or maybe there's issues
along the way but fundamental you know
fundamentally companies worked really
well for a long time um if you you can
work your way out of this you know out
of this sort of you know elevated level
of of Hysteria and and optimistically I
would say that that's starting to happen
and the the the change in legal regime
that's coming I think will will actually
help that happen right so you're
optimistic because you believe that the
free market system is flexible enough to
deal with ordinary stupidity but like
insane malevolent stupidity is just too
much yeah it's yeah I think that's
reasonable you know well I I do think
that's reasonable because everything's a
mess all the time and people can still
manage to manage their way forward but
when you when you have a policy that
says well any any identical any
identifiable disperate outcome with
regard to any conceivable combination of
groups is indication of illegal
Prejudice there's no way anybody can
function in that situation because that
that's Absolut that those are impossible
constraints to satisfy and they lead to
paradoxical situations like the one you
described musk's company as being
entangled in right that's just so
frustrating for anybody that's actually
trying to do something you know that
requires Merit that they'll just throw
up their hands and so yeah yeah yeah
okay so I'm GNA I'm going to stop I'm
going to stop you there because we're
out of time on the YouTube side but
that's a good segue for what we'll
continue on The Daily wire side because
we've got another half an hour there and
so for all of you watching and listening
join us join Mark and I on The Daily
Weare side because I would like to talk
more about well what what you see could
be done about this moving forward with
this new Administration and how you're
feeling about that I mean you made a
decision I guess early in 2023 like so
many people to pull away from the
Democrats and toward Trump strange as
that might be and I'd like to discuss
that decision and then what you see
happening in Washington right now and
what you envision as a positive way
forward uh so that we can all rescue
oursel from this mess before we make it
much deeper than it already is so for
everybody watching and listening join us
on the daily wire side and mark thank
you very much for talking me today I I
hope we get a chance to meet in San
Francisco in relatively short order and
uh while I'm also looking forward to
continuing our discussion in a couple of
minutes join us everybody on the daily
wire side good thank you Jordan
