life is something interesting life has
to use self-organizing processes to
generate its order this is the way that
that work like heat can generate order
it forces things to become regularized
it constrains the movement of molecules
it constrains the chemistry of molecules
life has to depend upon self-organizing
processes or what I call morphodynamic
processes but it also has to
stabilize promote those self-organizing
processes and keep them from running to
their end so I'm I'm a process I'm
continually actively doing stuff dumping
energy in in the form of oxygen and food
and doing work chemical work to keep
things going I've gota I've got to keep
it going but in fact um I can now adjust
to how much food how much oxygen how
much work I'm doing all kinds of ways
because system um has found ways to
stabilize this the question is how do
you stabilize these self destructive
processes and the answer is you have to
pit them against each
other Terrence thanks for joining me
it's such a great privilege to have you
with me I've been reading watching you
for over decades at this point and my
first question to you is what is your
conceptual understanding of the mindbody
problem how do you how do you think of
this from a historic perspective when
you think of the mindbody problem what
comes to your mind over time um well
well first of all it's it's a deep
confusion and it's deep confusion that
goes all the way back to
Plato uh and that has to do with the
fact that we think about the material
world and the formal or abstract world
is like they're separate things um um
Aristotle like think initially tried to
resolve this by this concept called
hylomorphism Hyo um referring at the
time to you know just subst substrate or
substance it really means effectively
it's a word word for wood um but Hil
morphism basically for Aristotle was
that there there's no such thing as form
without matter and there's no such thing
with matter that has no form that is
they're always one and the same thing um
and and I've seen that as as ultimately
the problem that re re raises his head
with dayart uh and then follows us into
the present and I think we're still
living deeply in what I call deeply the
shadow of decart in this respect and
that we we can't even seem to think
outside of that box um but I think
Aristotle's hint is the right hint and
that is there is nothing like
information or mind or representation or
semiosis um without a substrate it's
something that's always substrate but
there is no substrate no electricity no
neural activity uh that is not somehow
formed has not formed I think one of the
problems is that we have this sense of
form um that is um you know it's based
upon our our instincts about things like
triangles and circles and things that
are these abstract
relationships uh when in fact form is
really just you know a little bit less
than cha itic uh so any chaotic process
that has a little repetitiveness to it a
little bit of redundancy a little bit of
regularity is formed to some extent it's
it's constrained so that not all of its
possibilities are taken into account uh
and so I would say that also about um
mental processes living processes and so
on but I think the real challenge is
this um and this is something that
Aristotle does not have which is
necessary for understanding both life
and mind I think and that
is that the formal activity that a
living process or a mental process is
generating um is about its
substrate about its necessary substrate
and the substrate um is such that it
makes possible the constraint of the
future form of that substrate um and so
that it's What doug host would call a
strange Loop um but here what I mean is
a different kind it's not just a strange
Loop like feedback is it's a strange
Loop in which the form or the constraint
um determines the substrate and the
substrate determines the form in this
complicated relationship and so that
everything I think is ultimately about
my substance and about how my substance
is part of the world it's part of the
physical world
as is the constraint but the issue is
that the constraint is not
something there in the sense that an
atom is there um it's there in the
absence to some extent that's why a
constraint is important a constraint is
just simply those things which are
prevented that don't tend to happen um
and as a result it's why we seem to have
this sense that there's a dualistic
aspect to the world because it's the
presence in the absence but the key is
you can't have presence without absence
and you can't have absence without
presence but in life they have this
weird strange Loop causal effect in
which one is determining the other
playing a role in constraining the other
each is constraining the other so it's
it's constraints that make the
themselves possible it's materials that
make the constraints possible uh and
that's the real challenge what that
means is we've got to get out from under
this Shadow uh and I think we
are impressed by this in part because of
the success of the computational
world um in the computational world if
you think about what a computer is it's
it's decart incarnate to some extent um
even though decart himself said that
that computation should not be possible
um in one sense he didn't think of it in
those terms but he basically basically
makes that claim name in in part of his
reasoning but the but the issue is very
simple what we've done with Computing is
of course we've created these devices
we've given them energy um and
embodiment and um we let them run form
but the form has nothing to do with the
embodiment um it plays no role in what
kind of transistors what kind of
material is there um it's there is no
strange Loop we have systematically
created this cartisian SE separation of
the hardware and the software and so we
can now think about thought processes as
software now and we've only become more
and more confused now that we've got
these things like large language models
um that that make it look like the
machine is thinking you know no it's not
alive it's it's cart it's decart and
we're getting conf fooled fooled by
decart again uh
and and so a lot of my work has been an
attempt to s undo
that I I spoke to Keith Frankish about a
week ago he gave me we actually spoke
for the entire Sunday from for about 3
hours in a normal podcast and then he
gave me a lecture for about two and a
half hours so almost six hours of my
entire Sunday worth it but the main
topic of that was escaping decart's
prison so yeah good I don't know his
work so it would be as I'm glad you
mentioned it so ke and and um Daniel
Dennett worked on what is known as
Illusionist and their focus is I Know
Dan Dan knew knew him very well we were
in Boston for 20 years at the same time
interacting and over the years we
continue to interact even though we are
on opposite sides of many of these
questions uh so uh and and Dan of course
was trying to make that escape as well
and yet I think he fell right into it um
and we continue to have this argument
until he passed Terence why do you think
he fell in rest in peace Dan I mean he
he's an that we all miss in love it was
great to have him in this conversation
conversation Consciousness conversation
sorry yes no he's he one of one of
the most fun thinkers that I know of you
know he you know we we parried back and
forth over the years um that he
became
enthralled with daan's notion of memes
at some point um
memes I think are a misunderstanding
of
genes because I think Dawkins
misunderstands genes as well and this is
why it really it requires us to go back
and talk about the nature of life itself
uh but Doan's idea was that things that
just get copied get replicated are
enough to make something alive um but in
fact there is no strange Loop in this
story um there is just patterns that get
copied and so when you translate this
idea to cultural and informational
processes again it has this cartisian
sense so what it does is it tends to
force you to say well that that maybe
that's just
illusionary there's nothing really there
it's just this material stuff that's all
we have to pay attention to and and the
aboutness relationship is not really
something unique it's it's it's just an
illusion I mean the obvious question is
well who's having this illusion uh and
and what would it mean to have an
illusion um in this story um I I think
it's self-contradictory ultimately uh
for for the same reason it's the reason
that we've followed in this
reductionistic trend we've said well
well maybe if dualism is a problem let's
just get rid of half of the story let's
just ignore the constraints let's just
ignore the form let's just ignore the
aboutness relationship because aboutness
of course is this relationship between
something present and something absent
uh and a and that can't be real from
this perspective because absences
disappear so in any case
I the good news is that Dan and I agreed
and yet disagreed and it was great for
that reason he's not the only person I
mean you've studied under Nome Chomsky
and have had major disagrees with him
disagreements
how's that been like over the years well
so my interaction with him is of course
when I was a young graduate student um I
was in the Boston area of Harvard and
took a course with him and interacted
with him on and off um over that time
um we never really spent a lot of time
working quote together um so I want to
be clear that that you know yes I I took
a course or two with him um and and in
fact I took this one course with he and
um it was an advanced graduate course
with he and Jerry Fodor the philosopher
um at the time to me that sounds like
the most amazing leure to be a part of
oh it it it wasn't crazy it was crazy
but my but of course I was studying at
the same time I was studying
neuroscience and so so here I am you
know interested in Neuroscience I
actually came to Harvard initially as
the young graduates to to study the work
of Charles Sanders Pur the philosopher
um and found out out that I was having
trouble getting to his work which was
there but was inaccessible to me um and
and and I began to sort of shift over
now what I brought to that conversation
with chsky Fodor of course a a as his
kid you know here I a graduate student
near these famous guys um uh was this
idea that first of all this idea of in
innate Universal grammar capacity this
is just biologically implausible to me
and I knew you know this is not the kind
of thing you can think about you in a
biological sense yes maybe philosophical
yes but you know biologically how could
it possibly come to be um and of course
chonky had this view that that it
couldn't have evolved that it was just
sort of this this magic bullet that you
know a mutation that changed the brain
and gave us this this computational
device well first of all I don't think
the brains compute so I think that
there's a problem a deep problem there
but but it's
it's compacted with this view that Jerry
had at the time that you can't even
evolve this stuff that is you can't you
can't derive a more complex system from
a simpler system well of course
evolution is all about differentiating
from less complex to more complex uh so
these views to me were just so weird uh
and so I I was constantly in this battle
and we finally had a conversation I had
a conversation with with with noome
which which I said let's talk about
purse at least maybe we can talk about
this together and I said isn't isn't the
problem of acquiring language a little
bit like Abduction for purse abduction
is this Theory so abduction is
contrasted with deduction and induction
we can talk about that
distinction at some point um but but but
I said isn't isn't there a logic can we
don't talk about this sort of process
logic of how we might be you know in
each generation quiring language uh
without having to have some special
computational device and he said oh sure
but but you know P's idea of abduction
that's just Instinct um and I said no no
it's a totally different story and we
couldn't get it we couldn't come to an
agreement about this so over the years
it's gone back and forth um in my book
in the mid90s symbolic species I sort of
argued against the in the the innate
grammar device kind of argument um in a
I called chomsky's handstand uh he hated
that obviously um but uh and his
response to my work has always been it's
in
incomprehensible you know it doesn't
make any sense at all um and my response
in return is of course that his idea is
is biologically implausible uh so where
do you go from there interestingly
enough
um now decades and decades
later um I've come to believe that there
is universal
grammar although I argued against
Universal grammar at the time and and I
still argue against the way n chsky
would think about it that is that
Universal grammar is somehow
biologically built in um I don't think
so at all in fact I think it should have
a capital u at the front of it Universal
grammar and the sense that um that we
think of mathematics as
universal um that is uh we would expect
that if sometime in the Far Far distant
future in a galaxy far far away there's
a set of creatures that develop
mathematics they will eventually if they
keep working at it discover something
like prime numbers um even though prime
numbers are the exception to a rule you
know they're not they're not the rule
they're the exception to this notion of
re recursive subtraction division
um they'll discover it not because not
because it's in the universe not because
it's in their biology not because it is
uh something that a culture could come
up with but because it's necessitated by
the Semitic nature of of
quantity of working with quantity it's
it's there so my argument about grammar
is that there's a there's Universal
features that we share that all
languages share um
but it's neither nature nor
nurture so one of the problems we've had
and this is a it's it's got a parallel
with the dualism story that we think
there's only two possibilities you know
well the nature nurture story is the
same one we think there's only two
possibilities either it's there because
of nature or it's there because of
nurture no but there's another third
possibility it's necessitated by the
semiotic structure of the process we're
engaged in um and the semiotic structure
like a mathematical structure has
certain things if you make certain moves
you're required to make other moves If
you eliminate certain things you're
required to required to eliminate and
add certain other things um it's just
you know to be internally consistent
that's what's necessary um I think you
could say that about language there I
think a lot of features of language are
that way so I've tried to basically lay
out some of them and to pursue that
question uh in some detail to to say
look we should be able to see these
features in children as they acquire
language we should be able to see how
they're not easily accessible to other
species like chimpanzees that we're
trying to teach language to um we should
be a this is these are empirical
questions even though um they're not
nature nor nurtured questions Terence
there's something I've got so many
questions prepped for you but while
we're on this topic I asked no I think
twice I asked him this question how does
he feel about the fact that linguistic
capabilities might hinder us from
explaining phenomena that are beyond the
human comprehension for example Le let's
say we're trying to understand a certain
concept we only have a certain amount of
vocabulary Concepts viewpoints how can
we articulate what we believe
Consciousness is do you think this is
something that might hinder us from
understanding the heart problem or the
Mind Body problem no to be very clear I
think I I think that actually symbolic
capacities will allow us to deal with it
um and there's a reason for that and
that is that there in a sense are
symbolic referential systems are
detached in an interesting way they're
kind of ungrounded so that they are not
limited by our capacities now that
doesn't mean that you know we have the
capacity to hold all the details in mind
and one of the reasons we use computers
to a lot of things is they can handle a
lot of the details that we just don't
have enough memory space to hang on to
um but using these kind of protheses the
protheses of of writing of conversation
um of accumulating knowledge of using
tools to expand this access uh to give
us uh you know a vision into areas we
could not see otherwise uh and to uh
hold on to regularities and and
properties and laws that we are unable
to see because they're just too complex
statistically to hold into our heads but
once we have and developed these proces
these things that are progressively
displaced from our own limitations um I
think we have the ability to go there so
uh so it's not like the argument where
we would say that a dog will never
understand the theory of relativity
that's not the claim I'm making it's and
and and it's it's that once we have this
this mode of
cognition and this mode of shared
cognition and that's the important thing
this is not just limited to my head you
and I have to share this in order for it
to work I add my Computing devices have
to have an interface that allows us to
sort of work together even though the
Computing device is not a m it's not
it's just a machine it's not a not a
being in that sense nevertheless it's a
process prosthetic you know like like
we're using right now uh to to interact
with each other and it expands this
capacity but that means that I don't
think it's
impossible even more interestingly I
don't think it's impossible for us to
actually build
it um now I don't think we're anywhere
near that and I think Computing as I
said is lost in De cart's shadow um so
we we're not going to do it by by
expanding our Computing capacities but
the fact that you and I have these
experiences that you and I are able to
Express these ideas I mean ideas you
know about about the Paradox of a
strange Loop about Infinities you know
about Universal grammar that kind of
stuff the fact that we can do that is
just such a remarkable capacity
precisely because it's not in anybody's
head it's between us uh and as a
result there's Endless Possibilities
here
now here's the here's the problem
um we do get
stuck you know the cartisian story is a
is a story about being stuck for
hundreds and hundreds of years in fact
if we carry it back to to Plato
thousands of years um It's A Hard One to
think you know the reality of the world
is is very counterintuitive in many
respects uh and and we just get stuck on
parts of
it um but if we can keep doing this kind
of thing for another few centuries
that's it's exciting it is I I often
feel like we're living in this new age
of Consciousness research it's like a
revolution at this point so many Minds
getting together this this community
online is allowing people to discuss
Concepts that they were otherwise very
separate entities someone would be
sitting in one lab in the middle of
Boston while the other person in the
middle of cap toown where I am doing
their own former research but now we're
able to talk about this I'm able to
bring work from Mark s from Cape Town to
Michael
Le and these types of people who are
bringing up different work get very
similar in so many different aspects and
that's by the way one of the questions I
I came across quite often online is it
would be epic to see teren Deacon speak
with Michael Len do you are you familiar
with Michael Len's work Terence Michael
Lan and I actually were at a conference
together he was online I was in in
person um in Notre Dame uh this last
fall
um and actually it was last February I
guess um he and I come from in some
respects very similar backgrounds uh in
that you know I as a neuroscientist and
evolutionary biologist um and someone
who as I said it has this strong sort of
peran angle driving my thinking um
although I don't consider myself a
percan either um Michael of course comes
from a a background of of evolutionary
biology as well I mean I spent um all
the 1990s pretty much doing cross
species fetal neurot transplantation to
ask the question you know how do
developmental processes in the nervous
system sort of build nervous systems
that are different in different species
um and and he of course is working at a
different kind of Developmental range
particularly his early work with with
with plaria flatworms uh in which he was
looking at how you know the structure of
the of the of the body gets built um and
yet we look at these two processes from
to some extent very different angles uh
and I find it just remarkable that
that's the case we have never actually
directly the two of us sort of tried to
sort out these differences um uh I
suspect that he has a bias towards what
I call
preformationism um pre-formation says
that there's somehow a sort of a map
there for how bodies or brains should be
built and that map gets generated I I am
much more of a self- organizer
organizing thinker that I think that
these things emerge uh that is that they
have to do with the particular kinds of
interactions and there's not really um a
sort of advanced plan behind this um but
I'm probably caricaturing his work and I
want to be
careful calls it Tio Dynamics at this
point sorry know you call it teody
Dynamics he call it he calls it tonomy
and yeah your work's very similar and by
the way he's been he's one of the few
guests who've been on the show more than
three times it would be great I wish if
I could get the both of you on together
it would be great to hear your views in
one room one it'll be a real challenge
so yeah I think it'd be fun I think I
think that's exactly what the people
want yeah and and of course he worked
with Dan for for a long period of time
at Huts um and so they have a lot in
common and I'm sure that he at least
knows a little of my work as I know a
little of his but but that's another
feature of this we you know as all of
this there's so much to know um you know
he should be reading a lot of my work I
should be reading a lot of his work
before we ever know the same room
together he's such a he's such a
wonderful person I I swear to you he
probably has read your work and has a
great deal of respect for it that that's
the type of person he is that's terrific
well similarly I think you know his work
is is so creative I I love the
creativity of it I I interpret it
differently um but that doesn't mean I I
don't really respect the creativity of
it because it's very out of the box so
to speak that is he's taking a view of
these same kind of processes that are
not mainstream and that's a problem with
the way people perceive these
conversations nowadays is is that if two
philosophers or scientists disagree with
one topic it means that they just don't
like each other and that's not the case
this is these are two people who have
firmly dense beliefs in certain
scientific views that they've
accumulated over time it's not that they
just read a one paper and decided to
make a a firm fixed false belief on this
is that you've spent a vast majority of
your life working on a specific project
and and and this is why you've come to
believe what you believe not it's not to
say you're wrong or right but it's quite
cool to see you disagree or agree with
someone who's also quite accomplished
and
exactly no and I think I think that's
you know why the interaction between n
chonky and myself has been an
interesting one um but again there's
also this this this sort of intellectual
hierarchy you know I I came to interact
with him as this as this graduate
student uh from another background you
know and so that will never
change do you think that might happen
when you speak to not at all not at all
we both we're both roughly of the same
range I'm a little older than him but
not by that much I mean when when it
come to intellectual history to us I
mean in terms of intellectual history
you you you're a lot higher in the
intellectual history of hierarchy so I
appreciate you thought it's a lot harder
for us to from a very from that
objective standpoint it's quite tough to
see you as equals even though Michael
amazing is he's wonderful amazing guy
yeah no I agree with you um and I should
say in this in this conference we were
in it was actually a conference about
iology um and um I'm quite a Critic of
what what people have called
tonomy um my logic of teody Dynamics as
I call it um is an attempt um as I
should say there's a recent paper that
just came out with another philosopher
that just came out in synthes um that
basically I can send it to you if you'd
like that's basically an argument that
says um now it's time to get tileology
back into biology to recognize that it's
real thology uh that thology is not
unrelated to and necessarily related to
um
representationalism that is thology is
about accomplishing a represented future
um but a represented future is doesn't
exist yet so the question is you have to
have a theory of representation you have
to have a semiotic theory to have a teic
theory and to have a semiotic theory you
need a theological Theory um they're
necessarily because they're both about
this relationship of presence to absence
uh and and and so tonomy was an attempt
to sort of Escape that aspect of
tileology that you know developed in the
the 1940s and 50s um that basically said
let's let's look at this stuff just like
thermostats thermostats look like they
have an end you know they're organized
so that that they'll achieve some sort
of end stage it's as though
they're they've got a a tendency to go
there
um I think that's radically different
than the fact that you and I had planned
and thought about having this
conversation um and and eventually made
it happen um this
conversation that we're having now
didn't determine what happened in the
past it's not the future causing the
past you know it's not backwards
causation it's something else it's
representation causing something to come
into being but a representation is is
not exactly something
present uh and that's the challenge so
that what was really necessary I think
is this is why why why I begin from
purse even though I say I disagree with
purse in many respects that in effect
this is a really basic question how is
it that representation relationships
come into the world um and they they
don't exist without life as far as I can
tell um I think you need something like
life precisely because it has this
strange Loop epistemological
ontological entanglement um that
allows not just allows but forces the
future to be an issue I haven't I
haven't even touched on the questions i'
prepped for this but while you're on
that topic Teran
when you looked at people when you
looked up to people like Dan um Douglas
hoffstead when they were writing their
book strange Loops um gabak what were
your thoughts were you looking at this
bacteria tobac and back versus girdle a
shabak thinking okay these two are on
different parts but one person's more
right than the other what is your
thoughts on that well I think that want
to be clear uh I don't think that Doug
hofstead um and I don't know him
personally at all and so I I what I'm
about to say you can take with a grain
of salt in that respect um but he's
thinking of it in the purely formal
sense um I like to make a distinction
between what I like to call um gelian
logic and aerian Logic for mcer now he
puts mcer and girdle together right um
girdle's logic is a logic that's within
logic that is there's no materiality to
girdle's story
okay he shows that self-referential
relationships ultimately what what you
what what would have been called in
those days um logical type relationships
can't fully be separated uh that you
always get this sort of self-referential
problem and what goodle said proved that
that Russell tried to escape in the
early part of the 20th century was that
you you can't actually ever rule out
this possibility in any formal system
that's welldeveloped you can't rule out
this sort of self-referential um Liars
Paradox like logic uh that undermines
consistency uh or completeness uh as as
we'll probably get to when we talk about
incompleteness uh in the incomplete
nature sense uh but that's a that's a
logical argument that says that in a
formal system just a formal system
you're stuck with this problem um mcer
played with these kinds of relationships
as well and and of course Doug hoset
plays with him as well but mcer has only
one piece of artwork that actually
captures what I would call the asherian
Paradox it's not a gallian paradox it's
more Troublesome than a gelian paradox
um so mcer has this one image and and
you may know of it and if not I'll
consent it to you so you can notice it
where this guy is standing looking at a
window um at a scene um and I think it's
in maybe Barcelona or something like
that um looking at a scene um and if you
look at the way the picture is organized
is twisted around so that he's actually
looking at the scene in which He's a
Part now that's that's what we're doing
right
um and that's this this this
entanglement of the epistemological what
I know what I see what I experience
with the ontological what I am um
they're entangled in a way that can't be
disentangled um that's what I call an
aerian Paradox it's one step more
complex than the gelian story it's more
complex because it involves the very
medium itself that the formal
relationships are laid out in
um Kur girdle didn't have to worry about
that he's just worried about
mathematics but we living creatures
are in this aerian
world um it's an aeran Paradox it's this
Paradox that decart tried to separate
off because Paradox is so Troublesome
you know it it undermines itself it
forces
incompleteness so that that's in a sense
the difference and so what I would say
is I think the both Doug uh even in his
discussions of this in in his later
works and certainly in this stuff that
he did with Dan early on it was all at
this level of logic um and as a result I
think still under the shadow of
deart yeah it's it's it's quite
difficult to escape decart's prison as
Keith calls it um Terence I've got so
many questions prep for you just to
briefly outline the first three one's
about absence as causal power the other
one is about thermodynamics and self
organization and the other is about
teody Dynamics and normativity let's
start with the first one how do you
conceptualize the causal power of
absenti features in the emergence of
mind and Consciousness and how does this
differ from traditional
materialistic
causation well so the issue is that
representational relationships no matter
how we think about them are about
something present in relation to
something that's not present um
um but in a deeper sense that is what's
present to my thoughts in our
conversation um are not part of the
materiality they're not
directly embodied in any of
it and if my words have affected your
thinking they're also not embodied in
the neurological
activity the meaning is not in the
neurological activity the neurological
activity is just another physical
process like my sound like the electrons
that are connecting us through the
through the web through the worldwide
web here um it's it's not what it's
about either the meaning is not in my
head not in your head and it's not
necessarily between us but it's in all
the things that are constrained from
happening in all the absent features um
so
that think about uh my my I begin I
think the second chapter it's actually
chapter one in incomplete nature with
this
um
little bit of the doubted shame the
number 11 in this in the Standard
Version and I tried to translate it in a
number of ways looking at lots of people
I'm not a anyone that knows Chinese but
I just simply looked at lots of Chinese
examples and came up with my own
translation but it basically runs this
way he says you know it begins with he
says 30 spokes converge to the wheels
Hub but it's the emptiness that allows
the wheel to turn um
we
carve no we
shape
vessels what's that the absence has a
causal power in itself yeah but but
notice it's a special kind of causal
power and this is why I think it's
important see so we we we shape vessels
um out of clay but it's the empty
space that they surround that is why we
create these um we carve doors and
windows into our buildings in order to
gain access to the emptiness that they
protect um and he ends with this really
interesting statement he says um we
profit from what is there but we gain
use from what is not
there um now so the point of this is use
is not something that's
there the function of my car is not in
my
engine it's not even in the movement of
the car it's it's the use of the car and
the engine and all that together to
accomplish something else there none of
the none of those things um the essence
of the use is something that's absent
but it's that precisely that absence
which has shaped the design of cars is
precisely the absence that has shaped
the structure of a wheel with a empty
space in its hub
and the point there is that the
constraints the things that are not
there are the way we talk about the
shape or the form of what is there um
but it's the what is not there that
determines what is there in an
interesting way but we have but what is
there has to be made somehow and this is
again where where teody dnamic where
thermodynamics is going to come into the
role because to make something
physically happen to constrain something
from happening takes work takes effort
um ter sorry to interrupt you but my
next question literally is can you
elaborate on how the you linked
thermodynamic process
to emerg of Life Mind through Concepts
like morphodynamics and tnics so I think
this would be for huge concept but so
let's talk about it I mean first of all
that one of the insights behind this um
and we all know this even though we've
never put it into words Stu Kaufman one
of my friends Stu Kaufman came up with
this this phrase in a a piece that he
wrote with a bunch of friends a number
of years ago he said that you know um to
do work we need need to constrain the uh
release of
energy but to produce constraints we
need to do
work um what's what's really this is a
thermodynamic assessment of the concept
of work um the constraints um to keep
something from happening takes work you
got to resist something um and but it's
precisely because you're resisting
something that work can make something
else happen so the fact that the the
Pistons in your internal combustion
engine don't allow the expansion of
gases to go in any direction Just One
Direction you can use that
constraint to move something else
against the second law of Thermodynamics
to drive your car uphill for example um
you can use the the thermodynamics in
one level to reverse the thermodynamics
in another system that we use the in a
sense the increase of entropy in one
system to decrease the entropy in
another system oftentimes this is what
we call thermodynamic work um but to
decrease the entropy to add form to
regularize or to push something against
this tendency um takes
work and so what this says is that if it
takes constraints on the release of
energy to do work and it takes work to
generate constraints
those constraints can now be used to do
other
work the point I want to make here is
this is this relationship between
constraint and energy and the release of
energy and what work is um that if you
can generate constraints with work since
work takes constraints to do something
the new constraints that are generated
might be able to do a new kind of
work so the key to Evolution to life to
think
to all of this is just this very trivial
idea that if you can generate if you can
generate work to produce some kinds of
constraints if those are slightly
different or have some other features
than the constraints that were
originally necessary you can now do use
those constraints to do work in each
step there's a loss of capacity to do
work uh we know that that you
know continual you know on loss motion
is impossible so that this you know
there's always some loss in the capacity
to do work but think about driving your
car up the hill now uh you know I can
attach it uh
to you know a stump that I want to
remove and use the weight of my car
rolling downhill to to pull the stump
out of the ground you know I can do work
on one system to create constraints this
potential energy that the car has now to
do work on another system and so on and
so forth and so forth
but what that means is that
constraints can not only be created one
after the other after the other by doing
work um but they can produce new kinds
of work continuously produce new kinds
of work new kinds of work can come from
all previous work uh and and if we
recognize that information is always
contained in
constraint in the
form um then we realize that this is the
key to information too when I talk about
Evolution and how how genes pass on
something into the future what are they
passing on not chemistry not work but
they're passing on
constraints certain things that can't
happen Life Works by virtue of the
things that are not allowed so I
me this guy Mich once I once I heard you
mentioned the fact that you don't you
mentioned Dawkin earlier but you don't
see it as the selfish Gene but rather
you see it as the lazy Gene
this is yes that's that's a great way to
conceptualize this whole process of this
absence of constraint this constraint
absence is important to prop in fact my
current work is all about that in a
totally different domain I'm I'm
interested in what amounts to the
complement to Natural
SEL natural selection is a subtractive
process it removes things you got to add
things now it was thought for a long
time all you're adding is new variation
the problem that was captured in what we
were just talking about is variations
are always variations of something
something has to be generated those
variations are constraints or loss of
constraints um uh that are passed on as
work is done so there's a whole side of
natural selection that we tend to ignore
we only think about it again in
cartisian sense blind variation and
retent and and and retention of
something
um you eliminate things uh that you've
created blindly no yes blindly to their
form but work had to be done you know
this is a thermodynamic process natural
selection is ultimately a thermodynamic
process um it we life has to generate
excess in order to be able to eliminate
something
um we tend to think of natural selection
without actually paying attention to the
work and what's the work doing it's
generating
constraints I'm an organism that's far
from equilibrium very unstable situation
in the natural world um precisely
because all these systems that make me
up are constraining the possible
chemistry that can go on so that a vast
vast majority of the things that could
happen with the chemical features of my
body don't happen they're kept from
interacting with each other in certain
ways or certain things are made very
probable that would have been improbable
otherwise um the work of staying alive
is the work of constraining things of
keeping things from
happening when I stop living when my
organism ceases to do all of this stuff
all those constraints are being released
lots of chemistry can now happen that
couldn't have happened when I was alive
or in which my body is preventing from
happening um in some respects um it's
not that I've um lost
life but that the chemistry has gained
Freedom that it didn't
have my life is this this is this
process of generating constraints and
maintaining
constraints yeah sorry sorry for
interrupting you there Terrence no no
that's all right one of my questions
further down the line was the role of
constraints it was could you elaborate
how constraints which are inherently
absences can lead to Creation of complex
go directed systems and how this differs
from more reductionist explanations of
life and Consciousness I thought i' just
bring that up now since you've already
sort of touched on that all right well
and interesting if you think about
constraint and
reductionism there's an interesting
problem if there's
stuff if something is made up of
multiple things that are stunk together
stuck together you can now say okay now
let me go down to look at the parts now
look at the parts to those parts look at
the parts to those parts okay so stuff
you know has Parts constraints don't
have
Parts things that are absent um don't
have smaller absences that they're made
of those constraints are always at a
particular
level and so when you go down a step a
reductionistic step you basically throw
away those constraints at the upper
level and you say okay IR respective
those constraints what's going on down
here oh wait I can go down one more let
me throw those constraints away and go
down One More Level now I've got you
know atoms interacting now I've got
particles interacting now I've got
quarks and gluons interacting um what's
missing from all of that well all the
constraints on all those levels up
above um those constraints aren't doing
something to change what's going on down
below they're not acting in an efficient
sense to say okay I got constraints on
top and they're making the things down
on the bottom do what they need to do no
no no they just emerge at that level um
by virtue of the fact that some things
stop happening some things become less
and less likely at a lower level and as
a result at this next level up things
are
constrained um
so I'm not an advocate of what people
call top down causality um I don't think
there's such a thing as top down
causality but but I also don't think
there's an easy way to think about
bottomup causality um I think causality
happens at levels differently because
different kinds of constraints different
kinds of
absences become available become
possible at different levels and they
cannot be reduced to each other so
emergence is not about the bottom
producing something above it um it's
about again this this idea that that
this stuff just falls into place I think
at this point it's it's important to
recognize the fact that emerging
properties in physicalism in general
your framework is slightly different in
the sense that you talk about what is
called causal emergence do you want to
perhaps Define what that is and how it
differentiates from everyone's
day-to-day understanding what emergence
is as a
phenomenon well so first of all um my
view of
emergence is like the term
characterizes it's a
process you've got to do something and
doing something is important it's not
just that Consciousness is this higher
order
thing no it's done it's produced there's
work involved so my story is all about
work in fact in in my book incomplete
nature I think the most important
chapter and the least welldeveloped from
my perspective is the chapter I call
work
um because we take it for
granted and we don't recognize how
absolutely crucial it is when I want to
talk about causality I'm almost always
talking about
work okay um and what that means is if
I'm talking about semiotic causality
causality by
representation work has to be
involved it's it's not something that
lacks work this is why it escapes the
cartisian problem
if you bring work into the story you
have to bring constraint into the
story and if representations are always
captured by
constraints by the form that's
determined by what's by the degrees of
freedom that are not evident that are
absent um then that's why a
representation can be causal because it
constrains work it's a constraint on
work work um if a representation is
constraint it's the transfer of
constraint from from one substrate to
another substrate to another substrate
um is what
information about something actually is
then of course it can do work to to have
an effect in the world because it's in
the world it's the absence side of
what's in the world but it's in the
world presence and absence are necessary
parts of each other I
think give you my favorite example of
this I was just going to say I think the
best way to do this is actually for you
to give one of those examples because I
know you have quite a few that so
beautifully so so what this is one that
that you know working in the laboratory
has been the case for for my work for
years which has to do with genetic
information um we now have tools where
we can analyze the structure of a gene
so I analyze the structure of a
particular Gene for a particular
substrate one that I've been very much
interested in is the gene that produces
the the enzyme that converts glucose to
scorc acid uh in a lot of creatures um
that was originally sequenced by a group
in Japan in the mid90s um they published
this
sequence in a in a in a bunch of
research papers and it's been of course
copied in other research papers and
how's it been copied well the sequence
of of nucleotides is captured in A's G's
C's and T's in a long list of A's G C's
and T's in a particular order and it's
been published in other words this thing
that was originally um nucleotides
actual molecules in um some animal's
body in some cells DNA um is now in
print as A's G's C's and T's um and one
article produces it another guy looks at
it picks it up and says I going to put
that into my paper and all trans so 10
years goes by it's passed from paper to
paper um I pick it up and I say oh here
here's a nice sequence this is really
interesting and you know we've learned a
lot about why it's not there in humans
why it's messed up in humans um but I
can now take this sequence and use now
my genan sequencer my machine and I can
take the A's G's C's and T's that were
in typographics ink on paper you know
and eventually transmitted by Electronic
media that I picked it up by downloading
the paper um and now put it into my
sequencer produce the Gene and stick the
gene in an
organism by now now what's happened here
um what have I
transferred have I transferred A's G C's
and T's have I transferred
actual molecules
no just constraint the key is that
constraint so long as I can encode and
decode it um back to where it was
reground it um so long as those
constraints are passed on without error
um I've produced the same gene and the
gene will produce ascorbic acid in this
animal's body that I've inserted it
into now it's not been done nobody could
do that at this point in time but it
it's it's it's feasible with the tools
we have now and we've now done this with
many many genes uh in many organisms
oftentimes just single celled organisms
but but we we're really good at taking
genes from one place now um getting the
sequence and
then using that sequence to reproduce a
molecule and put that molecule somewhere
else and let it do its work so this
shows you that the
information the information is in the
constraints the only thing that's been
maintained across here are those
constraints and the interpretation of
those constraints so we're using in a
sense um it's this idea of of you might
say encryption you've got to have the
right decryption system uh to to get it
back literally but that's what these two
machines are doing encryption and
decryption so to speak um but that tells
us that information that aboutness what
its aboutness is and therefore what its
causality is it's captured in the
constraints it's it's also similar to
the you have you have one where you talk
about for example ape species in our
brains the evolution of our brains and
then you also talk about different
species um how all the information's
there they've got all the access to all
the data that's needed to have these
experiences however it's what we don't
do that make us different from what they
don't do which is pretty cool when you
think about it yeah yeah yeah and and of
course my my early work in in comparing
brains anatomy of brains was to was to
recognize early on in the 1980s in my
PhD work I I couldn't actually we didn't
have the tools to find this out but I
couldn't actually identify except for
how big things were um what's different
about the connectivity in a monkey's
brain and a human brain in precisely the
areas that we thought we were fairly
sure at the time were involved in
producing language you know these these
areas in the left hemisphere named for
their discoverers brokas broka and
verica um I was looking at the
connections between them we finally had
the ability to use Tracer molecules to
find the connections and was sure I was
going to be able to find the anatomical
reasons why humans could do what they
could do and and monkeys couldn't do
this well no no I didn't find that and
in fact it wasn't until now 15 years
later 20 years later that you know i'
done this work in monkeys that people
finally had the tools using um what we
call tractography using fmri um in which
you could actually get a rough idea of
what the connections actually were in
the human brain and by golly the monkey
brain predicted it
um so it was a conundrum you know yeah
why the human brain was not was able to
do this and the monkey brain wasn't they
had the same Connections in fact the
genetics are almost identical um so
genetics won't help us out here either
in fact
um yeah it's one of these things where
there's new information emerging somehow
in this process but it's not any trivial
sense as you say it has more to do with
what's not there than what is there
exactly so for like anyone listening
who's not completely understanding what
we're what we're saying or what teren is
talking about it's is that all the
information is there but it's what we're
holding back on or what we're stopping
and putting constraints on that is
making us as smart as we are because
otherwise the neurochemistry the
neurobiology it's all very similar
there's not it's not like you can look
at a chimp's brain and think okay a
human's brain has this much more that's
going to predict better Behavior or
thought processes it's actually know
that we have a more we have a better
system that constrains our variables
that allow us to have these experiences
which is which is very different from
what we often think about when we think
complexity complexity to us is give more
therefore you have more whereas here
we're saying actually control more and
you have more right and control is of
course constraining
yes it's it and and that so that's
that's the challenge in all this and
it's a it's a kind of interesting sort
of reversal that you have to do it's not
easy very counterintuitive and so we we
often and I would say that you
know I've mostly in my career not been
able to think this it takes a lot of
effort to say now wait a minute let me
look at the other side of this before I
jump to conclusions
um and this is one of the reasons why I
said why I said a few minutes ago that
that I think we've had this problem with
the theory of evolution
itself um we have not been able to look
at the absenti side of it
um or rather in terms of natural
selection we've only seen the
subtractive side of it um and not
actually understood that you know know
there's there's this emergent side
something needs to be generated and once
you have it generated how do it
generated the interesting thing is
variation it's just an expression of the
second law of
Thermodynamics things that are not
preserved um by natural selection uh
just tend
to degenerate they tend to but it turns
out that the degenerative process is
what's driving complexity it's almost
like complexity is merely the
constraints of
Simplicity
okay is does that does that fit fit what
you're talking about in a sense well
well yeah I'm not sure I have to think
about what you just said okay but
nevertheless Teo Dynamics and
normativity your theory the your overall
research posits that teody Dynamics give
rise to normative Pro properties like
purpose and function so so how do we
reconcile this with the fact that such
very good question are traditionally
seen as beyond the scope of physical
science so so what I tried to do in my
book incomplete nature and it's really
right in the middle of the book it's
where I tried to get to and then from
the middle I tried to say what are the
implications of this in the last half of
the book The Middle the book is about
how do you generate um life
um I think we've been distracted by a
number of things but one of the things
that's distracted us a lot has to do
with the fact that that life seems to
reverse what we think is the necessary
structure of the universe the second law
of Thermodynamics things tend to get
more mixed up over time and constraints
tend to get lost over time they get
eliminated um just it's just a Spong
anous tendency of the
universe so when we look at Living
processes that are not only in our own
lives but certainly across the whole
history of evolution been generating new
constraint new complexity new
organization it seems to be going
against the second law of
Thermodynamics so this was a conundrum
and in fact it's I think really brought
out intensely in the early 1940s by the
um the quantum theorist Irving schinger
in his what is life uh pointing out that
well you know living things do something
weird they produce what he used the term
neg entropy I've never liked the term
there's no entropy is just a measure of
something you can't have a negative
measure of something but but anyway it's
the idea of something that's the
opposite of the sort of tendency to go
towards mess
um as a result when we began to get
excited and some of the work was a lot
of this work was done by a guy named
Ilia PRI um about non-equilibrium
thermodynamics seeing that there are
some processes that actually can produce
more and more order over time um my
favorite example actually since I was a
Youngster were snow crystals snow
crystals grow spontaneously and they
have incredibly symmetric hexagonal form
um and they have an almost infinite
variety of these it's not infite not
infinite not every snow crystal is at
absolutely different than every other
one but there you know there are themes
and variations in snow crystals but in
any case these are processes that
spontaneously generate order and how do
they generate order well of course
they're causing um water molecules that
are sort of in brownie in Motion in the
air uh to attach to this this lattice
form and to grow uh and they growing by
virtue of giving up heat you know these
when these molecules attach the growing
crystal lattice they spread their heat
into the system they lose their heat uh
and it gets radiated into the world it's
a second law of Thermodynamics process
but because of the changes in pressure
humidity uh and and
temperature um you get slightly
different patterns of crystall in
attachment um but of course this the
snow crystal disperses the heat evenly
in all directions that's number one and
so it's radially symmetric um it it's
got a number of other features and that
is at certain temperatures and
humidities and pressures um you'll grow
sheets or spires or or or prisms uh in
the system and so that as the snow
crystal falls through different
temperature humidity and pressure zones
um it
accumulates new molecules in a different
pattern um so it's basically a a memory
of how it was formed um this is a this
is a process that's far from equilibrium
what's happening is it's far from
equilibrium becoming regularized because
um it's dumping it its heat of AC
acquiring molecules as fast as possible
the most efficient way it can dump the
heat is the most direct rout out uh and
so whenever you see something organizing
itself um it's doing so in order to dump
thermod Dynamics to dump the Heat or you
know produce the entropy out into the
world as fast as possible and the way to
do that is to take the straightest
possible roote the most direct possible
roote well if you're a crystal that root
may be you know following branches or it
may be following sheets or something
like that if you're a whal pool uh its
molecules not bumping into each other
molecules that are moving in lamin or
flow so if you're emptying your bath tub
um and you see a Whirlpool forming if
you reach your hand down there and you
Stir It Up and you mess it up um you
never allow it to form the bathtub will
drain slower because the whirlpool is
the most efficient way the most
straightforward way for water molecules
to leave the bathtub following the the
draw of gravity um self-organizing
processes like this are processes that
are always in the process of dissipating
energy uh in the most direct way
possible typically they form almost
exclusively in very
high gradient conditions in which tend
there a tendency for things to flow very
rapidly um uh my other favorite example
are what we call Berard convection cells
these little hexagonal um convection
cells that develop in thin oil typically
if heated From Below um if you heat oil
um a little bit the heat gets dissipated
into the air by what we call conduction
that is molecules bumping into each
other uh and of course heat is is is a
reflection of the velocity of molecular
movement um but at some point if you
really heat it up to a high heat um
bumping into each other sort of at
random is just not a an easy way to dump
that heat out the heat is going to
accumulate faster than you're getting
rid of it it so what happens is that the
hotter molecules that are bumping into
each other laterally um don't move much
so heat stays there those that are
moving vertically um move the heat out
of the system more rapidly more
efficiently so that as the the gradient
of heat builds up what you get is
convection cells that form these
hexagonal cells of upward dwelling um
hot molecules and downward flow
cool cooler molecules downward flowing
because they're heavier because they're
more dense than the ones that are going
up um and you get this regularization
incredible regularization it's getting
rid of the heat as fast as possible to
keep it going you need to continually
heat it because it's dumping the heat as
fast as possible like the the the
bathtub is dumping the water as fast as
possible um under those
constraints now what's interesting is
that each of those processes say because
they generate order have been looked at
to say well life generates order life is
like this maybe we can say self life is
just
self-organization the problem is maybe
in part the word self-organization
because there's no self
there there's no self that's saying do
it this way we're using the term to say
it's just not externally imposed was
very yeah
so uh so so I I I said let's let's
change the term let's call it
morphodynamic it's a dynamical process
that tends towards form but to tend
towards form it's got to be
thermodynamically
unstable and how do you make a
thermodynamically unstable system well
the the convection cell story that I
just told is a good one you've got to
have something flowing in and something
flowing out um whether it's water in
your bathtub or the heat uh in these
systems something coming in something
going out and in fact um once it's
pushed Beyond a certain level to move
what's coming in out as fast as possible
you need to regularize the
flow um regularizing it means taking the
straightest possible path the simplest
possible path the most direct possible
path and that turns to be regular that's
orderly we consider it orderly so when
we see something that spontaneously
generates order we go wow that's unusual
that's a surprise um
that's something exciting and we look at
life and we say well life is all about
that so life must just be
self-organization here's the
problem self-organizing processes
destroy the very conditions that produce
them as fast as
possible as soon as the water is drained
from the tub the it's gone you know as
soon as the snow Crystal Falls to the
ground or can't go any further or goes
into a warm area it it it it no longer
continues it's these are processes that
dispose of their boundary conditions as
fast as
possible that's precisely why they
become
ordered but it's precisely the problem
with life These are processes that like
the second law of Thermodynamics I like
to call terminal processes they run
until they've maximized some value yes
okay you call that maximum entropy
production
yes that in fact that this has been the
the standard way they call the maximum
produ entropy production principle it's
not about just increasing and producing
entropy it's about producing it as fast
as possible it's a
sln because what's actually happening is
you got to generate an offload entropy
as fast as you're
unloading um a reduction of entropy so
reduction and you know calling it
entropy is confusing gets people
confusing think about it as heat so
we're dumping heat into the system
pumping heat into the system and the
system is offloading heat as fast as it
can okay the key is that it will not go
faster than a certain level once the
amount of input and the amount of output
are equalized it's stable it will
continually look that way so long as
you're dumping heat into the system and
dumping heat out into the environment
it'll be organized as much as it can to
sort of e equalize the input output
relationship um it's not closed it's a
completely open system in this respect
both both open to input and open to
Output
um but that's what gets it regularized
the problem is as soon as the heat is
gone or as soon as it uses up the heat
um the process will
stop
um life is something interesting life
has to use self-organizing processes to
generate
its order this is the way that that work
like heat can generate order it forces
things to become regularizes it
constrains the movement of molecules it
constrains the chemistry of
molecules as a result you've life has to
depend upon self-organizing processes or
what I call morphodynamic
processes but it also has to stabilize
promote those self-organizing processes
and keep them from running to their
end so I'm I'm a process I'm continually
actively doing stuff dumping energy in
in the form of oxygen and food and doing
work chemical work to keep things going
I've gotta I've got to keep it going but
in fact um I can now adjust to how much
food how much oxygen how much work I'm
doing all kinds of ways because the
system um has found ways to stabilize
this the question is how do you
stabilize these
self-destructive
processes and the answer is you have to
pit them against each
other the answer is the only way to do
that is to have one self-organizing
process that creates the constraints
that make the other self-organizing
process possible but also keep it
from running to the
end so one of things I tried to do is to
is to say okay what that means is no if
morphodynamics is the result of two
competing thermodynamic processes Heat
going in Heat going
out
then
maybe life is like pitting two or more
morphodynamic processes against each
other so how would that
look so I came up with a fairly simple
model system and I've elaborated it over
the years since I wrote incomplete
nature into a much more complicated
story but basically I said let's let's
just take the two most common chemical
processes in living
systems one is called catalysis how
molecules can make other chemical
processes more probable these are
processes that could have happened but
they're very improbable how do we make
them more probable well catalysts do
this molecules that themselves don't get
modified but they aid the others in
happening
um number of decades ago Stuart cofman
um sort of pioneered this idea that you
can have what what were considered
autocatalytic sets catalysts that
catalyze each other and produce each
other um I like to call this reciprocal
catalysis um that is catalysts that
reciprocate to produce other catalysts
um they all need substrates but they're
all in a sense that that a produces B
which produces a which produces B and so
on and so forth the problem that's a
self-organizing process it's a
self-organizing process because by doing
that um you'll use up the substrates
faster and faster and faster until
they're all gone and no catalysis can
take place and so all the catalysts will
diffuse away from each other all the
potential substrates will diffuse away
from each other it's a self-organizing
process the other self-organizing
process that we find throughout life is
what sometimes called self assembly self
assembly is basically just
crystallization molecules that have
particular shape and electrostatic
affinities with each other uh typically
hydrogen bond affinities um tend to form
stick together and they stick together
in clusters crystals are like that they
form lates but you can also form sheets
snow crystals are nice sheets in this
respect um uh so crystals can form into
sheets and of course to some extent all
cells are sheets um but I became
interested in a much simpler kind of
structure the the shell of a virus
shells of viruses are mostly made up of
proteins and proteins have interesting
three-dimensional shapes that are
semi-regular and the regularity of it
means that you can stick a bunch of them
together and they form sheets that we
call tessellations it's like taking a
bunch of hexagons and sticking them next
to each other you can fill space with it
well it turns out that the vast majority
of viruses are made up of proteins that
stick together it to form polyhedrons
basically
containers um now it turns out that all
you need to do to produce those is of
course produce lots of these molecules
we call these molecules capsids proteins
are capsids they form these little
capsules um so when a virus invades a
cell it does two things it takes its DNA
or RNA and it uses it to produce more
DNA and more RNA and it uses it uses
some of it to produce more of the capsid
molecules now the capsids tend to form
into these enclosures and if you produce
lots of RNA and DNA molecules that are
viral molecules the capsules will tend
to capture these and the cell will break
open and spit out these capsules full of
their DNA and RNA and they'll go and
find another
cell what I realized is that you could
replace the DNA RNA which makes V
viruses parasites on
cells with autocatalytic processes with
reciprocal
catalysis and the reciprocal catalysis
um which makes more catalytic molecules
if it has a side product if it produces
yet one of the molecules it produces is
not just a catalyst but is a capsid
molecule then capsules will form where
there's the most rapid catalysis
happening
and will tend to capture en close the
catalysts that make the capsule possible
but which also make the catalysts
possible of making each
other what that means is the catalytic
process creates the permissive
conditions for crystal growth to happen
what are those permissive conditions as
crystals growth grow or as capsids form
capsules form they use up the molecules
as a crystal grows will grow to the
point where the concentration of
molecules in the surrounding fluid um is
such that it's as likely that they'll
attach to the structure as will
detach and so it'll stop growing it
reaches an equilibrium point that's in a
sense the termination process of this
self-organizing process of any crystal
growth it goes to a point where the
concentration has been reduced every
time you suck a molecule away sticking
into the polyhedral shell the the
concentration decreases but if you got a
catalytic process going on that's
generating new molecules to replace the
ones that are taken up that process will
continue to grow until the capsid closes
till the capsule is now a fully enclosed
structure at that point in time there's
no new catalysis that's going to go on
because it'll now use up all of the
substrates but all the catalyst that are
necessary to interact with each other
will be trapped
together similarly if you have an
autocatalytic process like this a
recipro reciprocal catalytic process if
it's not enclosed as I mentioned before
it'll eventually use up all of its local
substrates and all the all the catalysts
that need each other that depend on each
other will diffuse away and you'll no
longer have this process to
run but by enclosing them in a container
now you've also produced the both
permissive conditions and the
termination blocking conditions the
constraints on ending so to
speak that are necessary to keep the
Catalyst together but now if you break
open one of these structures if it you
know for whatever reason for heat or for
Collision breaks open um if it breaks
open in a context where there's new
substrates catalysis will pick up again
and capsid formation will pick up again
and it'll repair itself
now you have a system that is in itself
in a sense
self-repairing it's got a it will change
molecules it'll take in new molecules
but it'll have the same capacity what's
maintained over cycle upon cycle getting
broken open reforming broken up and
reforming is new molecules will be taken
in and old molecules will be
dispersed after a few cycles of this
there's no molecules in common and yet
the same structure which I call an
autogenic or self-reproducing virus is
still there the only thing that's in
common is the
constraints that's all that's been
passed on no molecules no energy is in
common but this is a system that in a
sense creates constraints that balance
each other constraints or boundary
conditions on these two processes to
morphodynamic processes two processes
that by themselves would terminate
themselves what they created now is a
system that is in a sense got
termination prevention it keeps itself
from being terminated by keeping its
component processes from being
terminated but to say that is to say
that there's now a
Target it represents itself so to speak
in these constraints and therefore it
can reproduce those constraints in new
substrates what this says is that
replication is not at base
what's base at base is self
repair it's capable of Innocence to some
extent remembering what it was before it
was damaged even while it's damaged has
a memory of it but that memory is not in
any individual
molecules it's in the system of
constraints that holds the whole system
together so now I realize in effect when
we see that thing being passed on
repaired and broken repaired and broken
um passing on constraints that's
effectively like passing on DNA that a
molecule could now have actually carried
that same information in subsequent work
I've shown actually how you can go from
a a system as simple as this it's a
simple thought experiment interestingly
enough it's a an empirical thought
experiment we could do this in the lab
nobody has done this I don't have the
facility to do it
not only that I think we'll probably
find these eventually I think there's
going to be places on Earth and
certainly possibly on other planets
where we're going to find what I call
autogenic viral structures they're not
viruses they're not parasitic um because
they don't use RNA or
DNA um but they're like viruses because
they have the structure of a
virus I think we'll find them for
example deep in the Earth where they're
not competing against life
we'll find them I think we're going to
find them in petroleum deposits where
there's lots of organic molecules lots
of heat
um we don't know what to look for yet so
at the at the lowest level almost on the
planet as deep down as you can
get yeah when you talk about this
concept of autogenesis it evolves
self-catalyzing systems that give rise
to life so what are these what are the
implications on on theories of life in
general
when you think about this process and
what we all discuss every day regarding
the
orig so I think we've been hoodwinked um
by the darwinian story here Darwin uh
recognized the last line of the Origin
of Species Darwin recognizes that
natural selection the theory of natural
selection cannot explain the origins of
life he begins he begins this last line
by saying um probably won't get it right
here but um there's
um oh shoot there's Majesty or something
I I'll not get it right in this this
theory of life with its several Powers
being breathed into one form into many
and after which the the earth goes
circling around the Sun and N natural
selection produces everything most most
beautiful and most wonderful have been
and will be evolved you know that kind
of thing but he begins that by saying
you know you know these special
powers these special powers are the
powers of
self-repair and ultimately
self-replication but the story that I've
just told is one that says that
self-replication is
secondary things that just copy
themselves um eventually get noisy the
second law of Thermodynamics
wins catastrophe happens and they stop
repair just copying is not enough you've
got to make repairs you've got to
remember
something and so you have to have a
system that um even when damaged even
when challenged in a sense has some kind
of a representation the key is that this
is a system in which the representation
is in the form of constraint it's a
constraint of the relationships between
these constraint generating processes
it's a it's a system of constraints but
this is why you need this third step why
it's why life is not just
self-organization life is
self-organization organized such that
it keeps itself from
terminating you might say it's
termination
prevention um self-organization is
termination life is termination
prevention I'm spending my whole life
doing that so to speak um but what that
says is that this story that we have
today this the common story um that we
think that life begins with replicating
molecules like DNA or RNA um can't be
the whole
story because replication is first of
all not about
anything it's it's not about the new
ones that are going to be created the
new ones are not about the old ones
they're just copies of it like a
molecule in a chemical reaction is like
the last molecule produced in that
chemical reaction um eventually even
though it uses a kind of a template
copying mechanism um that template
process will accumulate noise and
eventually will not be able to
copy um you've got to have this kind of
termination prevention you've got to
have constraint maintenance and
constraint regeneration as a possibility
here um what this says is that RNA and
DNA are
late processes are late accumulations in
the evolution of Life they're not what
begins it you've got to begin it in this
systematic constraint relationship it's
a thermodynamic question the
thermodynamics comes
first because there's work
involved the thermodynamics is the first
part of the story then if thermodynamics
is organized in the right way
constraints result and those constraints
can be passed from substrate to
substrate to substrate if you got a
system that protects and reconstitutes
constraints a memory system
effectively before we take this back to
the mind so do you then think that this
thermodynamic process occurs throughout
the Universe and is not just isolated to
Earth absolutely but here's the
interesting thing
um to do this you need pretty
complicated
molecules small molecules probably can't
do it so well I I don't know how small
would be a problem but I would say that
you know we know that viruses on Earth
um are all done with proteins now part
of it is probably because proteins are
made by cells and and you need DNA or
RNA and ribosomes and so on to do this
whole process um it may be that it's
possible with much simpler molecules but
not too simple they have to have the
geometry to form um capsules they have
to have the geometry to form catalytic
processes um the question is um to take
this perspective I'm not starting with
any anything complicated like a DNA or
an RNA molecule this long string of very
unstable
nucleotides how do you generate
nucleotides is another problem but
uh the the key is that this is a process
that's
generic any fairly complex
three-dimensional kind of molecule that
tends to interact in these ways with
other molecules um should be able to do
this um the question is where do large
complicated molecules like this show up
polymers how do they get generated well
we know on Earth most polymers are
generated by organic processes um but
are there polymers elsewhere in the
solar system yes but it turns out that
in water polymers break down pretty fast
water is a bad place to start with
polymers um where where are polymers
being produced then well it turns out
that we think that probably there's lots
of polymers being produced in the outer
solar
system um uh where well think about
Titan with its um methane
Seas methane is a great solvent an
organic solvent and one of the kind of
things that can be dissolved in it is um
hydrogen
cyanide but hydrogen cyanide can form
interesting
polymers um complicated structures in
which
hcn stacks on hcn stacks on hcn we get
this sort of CCN CCN CCN backbone of a
molecule um with side chains that are
also hydrogen cyanide like but it it
will now have the possibility of folding
into an interesting and complicated
structure that could have I don't know
that it has this catalytic uh and uh
self assembling capacities but what this
says is that in contexts where there's
no
water um it may be possible to generate
fairly complicated polymers
interestingly enough um these very cold
conditions water is like like like rock
effectively um
and nevertheless when it gets captured
on
comets um that have grabbed some of the
materials from these outer planets and
flying into the inner solar system and
they dump their features their ice and
their molecules on the inner rocky
planets that are warmer um what happens
is well the the rock the ice turns to
liquid um containing lots of these
complicated polymers I actually think
that the process has to start in the
outer solar system but that means that
throughout the Universe I think the raw
materials for autogenic viral like
structures which I think are the
earliest you might call them protolife
structures are probably pretty
widespread in the cosmos because I think
there's going to be lots of ways to do
it lots of kind of organic molecules
that can do this um but only when they
come into inner rocky planets that are
much warmer where chemical reactions can
go much faster are they going to have
the possibility to get much more
complicated so I think there's going to
be lots of protolife in the
cosmos and a little bit of life you know
it's one of these these probability
issues there's going to be you know
hundreds of thousands of times more
protolife out there and once in a while
in some solar systems uh there's going
to be life now the life will be a little
different in each case um I think
there's a lot of constraints on why it
can't be too different um and we can go
into that a little later but but
basically my argument here is that we're
not so much seeded by life we're seed by
this sort of protolife that then can
begin this process of complexifying it
complexifies because it remembers itself
and that when things change things get
modified it still remembers where it was
with now this little modification
remembers that modification
now it's an it's an creative process
information constraints can be accreted
if you got a system that
remembers when you think of this so the
genetic hierarchy going upward or
downward depending on how you perceive
this do you think that still this comes
down to one
fundamental let's say adom um molecular
group of structures that have come to
together or you think this is just
happening at multiple layers different
parts of the cosmos continuously so
there is no one single ancestor there's
just various different ones that will
give so I so I think clearly on Earth
we're gonna find that that at least at
some point we can go back to Luca a last
Universal common ancestor interestingly
enough Luca um we conceive of today as a
cell yeah that does all the things that
cells do today has his has you know RNA
molecules uh has DNA molecules has um
ribosomes uh has TRNA messenger RNA you
know all this stuff no there had to be a
lot of evolution before that ever
happened um however all the other
Alternative forms uh got
replaced you know they they didn't do so
well and Luca a particular way of doing
this um took over because it's the most
efficient way is very very effective um
I've been spending a lot of time on what
I call the the pruca evolution Pro
problem um that is how did you get this
complicated system where you got you
know so for example to to produce 20
amino acids in sequence to produce a
protein um you got to have corresponding
Transfer RNA molecules for each one of
them you've got to have a molecule that
um attaches the amino acid to a
particular TRNA molecule by virtue of
its of its anti-sense end um these are
called
Amino ail TRNA synthetases so each one
of these has to have a synthetase that's
relevant to it it has to recognize it
and attach a protein to it the ribosome
itself is made up of large number of
proteins and a backbone an internal
backbone of RNA molecules that are
specifically organized to organize the
proteins of the ribosome so that they
can accept tRNA molecules in sequence uh
that have been charged with these amino
acid TRNA synthetases with incredibly
complicated process um how did this come
about and so I've spent a lot of time
struggling with this if the RNA World
story is not a good start starting point
how do you get there how do you get to
how do you get to Luca um and I think
one of the stories is you have to give
up the cell story you have to go back to
something simpler like a virus the
problem is we think of viruses not as
alive but they
evolve um we think of viruses as
parasites yes my argument is that you
don't have to think of it in those terms
they're they don't have to be parasites
they've become parasites because Luca
this Luca form was really great at
producing stuff so take advantage of it
and so now the only place we're going to
find these autogenic viruses is places
where there's you know no no the
daughters no Daughters of Luka so
where's that going to be well as I say
deep in the earth somewhere maybe or on
Mars
um possibly in the atmospheres of
Jupiter who knows as a personality trait
there are parasites but but inherently
they were never considered parasites to
begin with that's right that's right
that's right so the issue is that that
we've get we' we've treated viruses
poorly yeah um I mean even even us as a
do as doctors when we when we when I'm
treating patients and we're talking
about viruses we still defined it as we
don't know is this L we're not sure and
there's probably there's probably vastly
more viruses in the world types of
viruses in the world than there is any
kind of cellular
creature we know that just by the
statistics when we look down the
bacteria just outnumber us so vastly and
viruses almost certainly that parasitize
bacteria outnumber bacteria vastly but
they're so hard to detect what are your
thoughts on on fungi um Terren fungi
whatever whatever people call it fungi
fungi fun yeah that's fine yeah yeah
we're all Fung guys um but the the issue
is of course fun fungi are are one of
the three major classes of M of of
multicellular eukaryotic organisms um
so I mean there's a lot of interesting
stories to be told here but but
so one of my favorite books from the
1980s was by a guy named Leo bus I don't
know if you know this he called it it
was the evolution
individuality and he was interested in
why is it that there are only sort of
three major groups of what I would call
um addicted multicellular
organisms Now by addicted what do I mean
that they can't any longer be
unicellular now it turns out that there
are unicellular fungi they're
unicellular animals they're unicellular
Plants algae for example or or not not
Hydra but um paramia that that sort of
thing you know animals and plants are
single cell but multicell creatures
multicellularity has evolved multiple
times but it's but it mostly is what I
call facultative
multicellularity that is in some part of
the life cycle they're a complex like a
volvox um Al alga and then in other
parts of the life cycle a single cell
could be on its own swimming around
until it finds others um or until it
reproduces into a ball
um but animals like you and I um we
can't do that any longer although we
have single cell phases of our life
cycle you know fertilized OVA um and
plants have fertilized OVA uh and fungi
have fertilized OVA um in this process
um we do it differently but the reason
but the question is why do we come why
do we become addicted to have we have to
have a multicellular part in fact you
can say that our single cellular life
cycle is always parasitic on the
multicellular part part of the life
cycle um that's not true for Volvo for
example so in effect we got stuck we got
kind of ratcheted into this situation
where we can't go back
um what Leo bus conjectured in the mid
80s well that maybe there's sort of a do
you know this story um about the theory
of Justice by John
RS no he he called it the the veil of
ignorance problem and he said if you
want to create a just
Society um create it so that when people
come into the world they don't have
knowledge about where they're going to
show
up that is what if you know that you're
going to be part of the royalty you know
then you've got a bias you can always
take advantage of that bias but if you
come into the world and you have to be
self-
um then in a sense everybody's got an
equal
chance so to produce an egalitarian
world you need a veil of ignorance he
says you know it's it's an abstract idea
but the key is there's a kind of veil of
ignorance story to explain how these
groups got
stuck so first of all the key is that
where is the self-interest in in each of
these cells well it's that's of course
in the constraint maintaining part the
DNA and RNA of these systems it says
okay here's where I've got this is what
I'm going to be how I'm going to adapt
to the world and so on all of my
information is here the key is how do
you keep it from being selfish so that
one individual cell in the population
can take advantage of the
others you got to have a veil of
ignorance so how does this work and he
said well there's there's S three ways
that it can work and they seem to be
displayed in animals plants and fungi
um so let's look at plants
first so now I've got one cell and it
begins to produce other
cells the problem is how can that cell
determine that my DNA mine alone and not
any that's been varied in this process
of generating other cells will become
the DNA that gets passed on to the next
Generation Well for a
plant a vascular plant like a tree or a
bush um the only cells that can
reproduce are going to be the ends of
branches the
meems um but in a plant cells can't
move they have a they have a cell
membrane that has a cell wall around it
that gets stuck to neighboring cells so
that cell that starts the process can't
decide I'm going to move out to the A
marem and become the one that
reproduces so wherever a cell is
produced it's stuck it can't determine
that its DNA are going to be the stuff
that gets passed on so now you're
required to
cooperate you have to Beal there's an
egalitarianism here um we can take
advantage of that by grafting some
plants on top of other plants for
example because we know that the the
root stock won't be able to take
advantage of the fruit that's produced U
that sort of thing so we can take
advantage of we can you know undermine
what the plant has got stuck here this
why the plant stuck this way why it is
now forced to be cooperative with with
each other all the cells have to
cooperate to produce a larger integrated
organism um but now let's let's go to
fungi what's the story with fungi fungi
have very leaky cell membranes and some
some don't even have cell membranes so
the only real serious membranes are the
membranes around the
nuclei but that means that nuclei can
move around often times in this sort of
larger pseudo
um as a result um what you see in fungi
is very little tissue
differentiation take a mushroom um if I
eat the veins of a mushroom eat the stem
of a mushroom each eat the cap of the
mushroom the cells are effectively the
same cells they all taste the same
although there's some differentiation
for the most part fungi don't have this
capacity to differentiate their cells
very much and as a result they're
they're fair Fairly morphologically
contiguous you know that each cell is
like each other cell um but this process
means that no set of genes because the
gene products get now dispersed among
everybody else I can't determine that
locally my little group are going to
maintain be the ones that make it so
that when I produce a fruiting body like
a mushroom that pops up out of the
ground um it's whoever was there at the
time it's like the maristan story but in
this case it's because nobody can
determine the local environment you know
it's all messed up so he said that's
another way to produce it so what's the
story with animals well the story with
animals is you do it a third way and
that is um the mother produces this
big cell called an
ovam and in the ovam she has its genes
producing and her genes producing a lot
of the RNA and protein in that system
it's already there it's already doing
its work um now the sperm comes in and
fertilizes this
egg um now you've got two sets of genes
its individuality is now this
combination of
genes but that combination is going to
take a time to produce its own proteins
its own ribosomes its own RNA so that
actually for the first many cell
divisions of an animal EMB
it's Mother's DNA that has determined
what's
happening so now the the individual
cells it can't determine it Mom's
determined it so in effect mom has said
now you're gonna you know I'm going to
determine who's going to be a heart cell
who's going to be a nerve cell who's
going to be a a gamet cell that can
reproduce into the future that's going
to be determined simply by where you are
when all the cells divide is
iCal um let's say is there a pro to this
is there some sort of advantageous theme
to this occurring or does it not matter
because when you look at bacteria and
viruses they still propagate as much if
not more than us yeah that's right
that's right what I would say is that
this is just a kind of uh addiction a
kind of Ratchet problem once we moved in
this direction uh you can't go
back okay once your single cell phase um
becomes always parasitic on on the
multicell phase you basically can't go
back and this is actually the theme to
the book I'm working on now which is
called Falling Up um but basically the
theme is this that um once you become
dependent on somebody else um you tend
to degrade your own capacities to be
autonomous once you've got something to
rely on that's reliably out there well I
do it myself you know it's it's it's the
lazy Gene story um that if there's no
selection to maintain it let it go but
if you let it go you become
dependent uh it's a ratchet it's a
one-way Street and it's the result of
degradation loss of
autonomy loss of autonomy nevertheless
forces you to be more
complex because now you've got to rely
on something else and they will that
that will then rely on you so the
multi-cell part relies on the single
cell part to reproduce if you think
about it for for us I can't reproduce
without sperm and
eggs is there a subheading to Falling Up
have you thought of what is it the
subtitle is um how inverse
Darwinism catalyzes Evolution okay I
like that just making a note yeah so
obviously I'd have to explain inverse
Darwinism yes go ahead the the the idea
here is as I've
described um and it's a recognition uh
that we talked about at the be of a
problem we talked about at the beginning
which is that you have to produce
something that life always has to
produce excess in order to stay ahead of
the second law of Thermodynamics but in
producing excess you're producing
duplicates of
things but what we've learned from
information theory is that duplicates or
redundancy is a way to deal with noise
so if you're having trouble
understanding what I'm saying I could
repeat it again or I could give you
another example of it or something like
that um or if we're talking to each
other across a noisy room I have to
repeat myself many times or you know
wave my hands or whatever um redundancy
we know um is a way to deal with
noise so that's that's great so noise is
happening of course all the time but
there's another side to redundancy here
and particularly in life if you always
have to produce more of things you have
to redundantly produce genes maybe um
then one of the things that happens is
that they that allows you to also
tolerate
noise so if you have a redundant system
already you can tolerate noise so if
I've got a system in which like in the
English language there's a lot of
redundancy in what letters can show up
next to each other a lot of redundancy
and constraint become part of each other
here in the story redundancy is about
the same constraint
about the possible variety being
constrainted so in a signal that's got
redundancy there's a lot of constraint
not a lot of things can happen um it
holds less possible information with
more redundancy but with redundancy we
can tolerate noise so with living
systems if you produce redundant Parts
um you now have sort of a
backup we learned this initially all the
way back in 1970 and it's only really
been brought to the four in the last two
decades um and I think only very
recently have we begun to realize how
important it is in
1970 a Japanese geneticist named susumu
Ono wrote a book called um evolution by
Gene
duplication and what he was talking
about was not
reproduction but how when you looked in
the genome we're just beginning to get
sense to look in the genome in 1970 um
what you see is that sometimes the same
gene gets copied right next to
itself these things called transposons
there's various ways this can happen can
grab a chunk of DNA and stick it on next
to itself or stick it somewhere else in
the system or retrotransposons can take
an RNA molecule and transpose it back
into a DNA sequence and stick it
somewhere else well it turns out that
the human genome is full of transposants
full of duplicate genes they're just
copies of each other all over the place
now the question is what's going on
under these circumstances well a couple
of interesting things is that if you
have copies of it a couple of things
possible so one of the one of the set of
genes that we have lots of copies for
are for example TRNA Transfer RNA
molecules we have over 500 genes that
are really good copies of the the the 20
different tRNA molecules
they're dispersed all over the
genome the reason for this is we have um
in each cell tens of thousands of
ribosomes constantly at work producing
proteins using TRNA we've got to produce
a lot of
TRNA um so best to have a lot of them to
do it um but the problem with a lot of
molecules a lot of genes um is that the
body is set up so that you got to have
just the right number just the right
concentrations of of proteins a good bad
example of this one um is what we get
with triom 21 Down syndrome the what the
the smallest one of the smallest except
for the Y chromosome simplest chromosome
simplest autosomes the 21st chromosome
um in triom just simply doesn't get
separated off U during meiosis and so
you get three of them but that means you
get um not twice as much protein
produced but two and a half times as
much protein produced get bit more
protein produced but it turns out that
having extra amounts of protein produce
produces all kinds of problems it's a
dosage problem you're just producing too
much protein and so all the effects we
see in Down syndrome are the result of
this including early onet Alzheimer's
and things like that um so not
everything can work by just producing
lots more genes but what happens is
often times when you have multiple genes
produced um you now have a
backup so if something goes wrong with
one of the
copies the function is still there and
so that copy can degenerate degenerate
and degenerate and we have a lot of what
we call pseudogenes that are the result
of this um one of my that two of my
favorite examples one is is three-c
color vision in primates it's the result
of the gene that produces the the color
receptor molecule that we call an opson
or ropson um that we see in the cones of
the retina it turns out that um a
gene we have three genes for producing
three different options one for the blue
one for the green one for the red and
receptors well it turns out that most
mammals only have two one for the blue
and one for the green and they're called
dichromats as a result um we're TR
chromates and about somewhere around 50
to 60 million years ago um primates
as they came into sunlight interestingly
enough developed a third copy and they
did so by take by the the green opson
Gene was copied right next to itself so
we got two of them they're redundant of
each other so one of things that
happened is one of the Redundant ones um
began to
degrade because well you've got the
function you're producing color vision
you're producing light reception just
let it degrade you got one already there
how did it degrade well it great and
that it couldn't take on as much high
frequency light became redder and redder
and redder in its
sensitivity but now we have the
possibility of something that is picking
up the low end of the greenish Spectrum
now the green one doesn't have to pick
up as much red it can be more shifted in
the Bluer Direction so now we have three
not quite evenly spaced re ropson
proteins that produced and luckily each
cone gets a different ropin a different
Gene gets expressed in each cone so now
we have a cone for red green and blue
and they're sending us information back
to the nervous system now getting
different information and their
combinatory interactions produce this
capacity we have to see in color so here
you see Gene duplication and
degeneration because of
redundancy because of error you might
say error
protection the loss of function was not
a problem it was it was tolerated but
this tolerance allowed it to degrade but
degrade into a likely potentially
usefully synergistically interacting
molecule with the one that was already
there why because it already had the
function of taking on light just
degraded a little bit um and now its
function is slightly different but the
probability of interacting with the
other one synergistically producing
something novel um is much much higher
precisely because they came from a
common background well this turns out to
be the case all over the place in the
genome this why I call it falling
up that is the new function the more
complex function was the result of
actually redundancy
duplication and
degradation but what that degradation
did is it produced the opportunity for
interesting
interactions and those interaction C if
they become useful now natural selection
can maintain them it won't just degrade
into nothing now it turns out that a
similar thing happened with us and
vitamin C with us and vitamin C um as I
said way back I've mentioned this before
way back in the mid90s a group of
Japanese researchers went to the rat
genome and they looked for a gene that
might be associated with a protein that
converted
uh glucose to ascorbic acid vitamin C it
does so endogenously rats don't need to
eat
fruit um in fact very few animals need
to eat fruit a few birds do a few bats
do um um and monkeys and apes all
do that's
because we have the gene a fossil of the
gene that produces this last enzyme that
produces vitamin C
endogenously but ours is full of
noise it's accumulated so much damage
that it's become a
pseudogene it looks like a gene it's got
some of the same features but it's got
all kinds of problems in it's got stock
codons in it it's got a frame shift
which makes it all nonsense and so on
and it's slightly different in each
primate lineage but they've all had this
one degraded it's degraded because of
somewhere between 50 and 60 million
years ago primat stopped mostly eating
insects and
started eating
fruit and to eat fruit you better look
at it and discern you know whether it's
edible or not well fruit has always been
had its seeds dispersed by birds which
always could see in in three colors
birds are always TR Tri chromat some
more more more so in fact than even
primates um but
how did fruit advertise to birds that
now is a good time to eat me well
there's a couple of things the fruit had
to produce something that birds want
gota have sugar right so sugar is a
great thing for an animal that has a
high metabolism needs to fly around but
having them flying around is a great way
to disperse seeds so take advantage of
birds um but now the key is
um my seeds are not going to be
ready and my the food that I've got for
the birds is not going to be ready for a
while it's got to mature a bit um how do
I advertise to the birds that now is a
good time to eat me and to take my my
seeds and poop them out somewhere else
the answer is color
change undergo color change St green to
be like leaves indistinguishable and
then suddenly change to blue or orange
or red that
contrasts but if you're a DI chromat you
can't see
this now why does this link to the
Vitamin C story if you ever cut open an
apple and leave it out um on the table
it turns brown
right yeah that's because the sugar gets
oxidized the way to keep sugar from
becoming oxidized is to have ascorbic
acid so fruiting plants had to dump
ascorbic acid in with their sugar
have lots of ascorbic acid but now as
primates begin eating fruit they're
getting lots of ascorbic acid which is
redundant with the ability to produce it
themselves and so it masked natural
selection and allowed this Gene to
degrade but now we're addicted to fruit
we get scurvy if we don't eat it you
know mellan lost half of his crew
sailing around the world because of
scurvy because they W weren't eating
fruit um we addicted yeah but but now we
have a bunch of other things I like
sweet I like sour I can see in three
colors I have a transporter molecule in
my blood that carries ascorbic acid from
cell to cell to cell more effectively I
have other antioxidant capacities as
well so this changes in a sense now
there's this higher order relationship
between us and fruit but this is the
same kind of relationship that produces
addiction to other things this is the
kind of addiction I talked about the
addiction of of single cell organisms to
their multi-celled life cycle it's an
addiction of the same sort you've lost
some capacity and now you're stuck with
this other capacity so I call this
inverse
Darwinism because what's happening is
these results are the result of relaxing
natural selection of tolerating noise
dup ation processes make this more
likely and make synergies more likely to
show up complexity more likely to
develop it's it's a totally different
kind of logic it's inverse Darwinism not
because there's not reproduction not
because there's not variation those are
all there duplication is like
reproduction variation is degeneration
it's a second law of Thermodynamics it's
just that this happens in a context of
error
tolerance no longer competing for
resources resources are always there two
genes okay they're both there doesn't
take a lot of extra work that's not a
cost not a significant
cost so it's it's the inverse of natural
selection because there's no
selection the third part of the
darwinian story selection competition is
irrelevant it's not about cooperation
though things may end up cooperating
because they're forced to because
they're addicted to each other um it's
not about cooperation but it's simply
about the relaxation of natural
selection there's no
selection under the lack of
selection you overproduce more
combinations are possible possible
synergies can show up possible
interactions and therefore more
degradation can take place and things
can become more codependent more
addicted to each other so to speak
that's a big part of the evolution story
that we've missed it all along from a
theological perspective since that's a
big part of the work where do you see
this sort of heading toward then if you
had to propagate moving
forward where are we heading so so first
of all I see I see these two Logics I
see that we have to think of these two
aspects of the of the evolutionary
process it's the you might say inverse
Darwin Darwinism is the yin of Darwin's
yang selective Yang you need both you
need an additive process a complexifying
process and a simplifying subtracting
process they both have to work together
in the same sense that the two
self-organizing processes I talked about
originally in the autogenic virus story
have to be counters to each other they
have to become both the boundary
conditions for each other and the
limiting conditions for each other
you've got to have both they've got to
have this interaction well this kind of
dynamic is what evolution is about
evolution is not just natural
selection it's this
combination and that means processes
that are EV evolutionary wherever we
find them are going to have this logic
this two-part logic this this Yin Andy
Yang logic that includes the kind of
evolutionary process that thinking
involves that Social Development
involves that the addiction we have to a
shared form of communication language
how it evolved we became addicted to it
my book The symbolic species is about
how we became addicted to this shared
distributed thing that we need each
other for that language can't be
maintained by a single individual it's
not
innate in the sense there's not an
autonomous language device built into us
it's something that self organizes
selectively in a social process it has
its collection we're addicted to it in
the sense that single cells are addicted
to the multi-cell organism that they
need to gestate in we need to gestate in
this social soup that we call a
symbolic world right we're addicted to
it and what I would say is our brains
don't even work normally if we don't get
raised in this environment our brain
brains
expect this this is part of the
condition of normal human development
um but this had to evolve by the same
kind of
mechanism and it has to work
neurologically by the same kind of
mechanism there's so many different
aspects of your work that's so
fascinating it's so it's I wish I wish
we I wish we could literally speak for
hours but because of the fact that we
started with the mind we went into life
I want to before we head towards the
rest of the questions I want to take us
back into the mind what I what I would
do what I would love to do Terren is in
the future obviously take a specific
aspect of your work maybe a paper a
specific part of your book and we can go
into great detail about that specific
component because I think it allows us
to explore and expand on that a lot more
for now I want everyone to understand
your work in a very general perspective
even though that's pretty much
impossible but when you wrote incomplete
um incomplete of nature when you talk
about that
factor can you clarify for everyone
who's watching or listening I'll put a
link to the book in the description it's
a wonderful book I read it a few years
ago and then again recently how does it
relate to your broader argument about
the mind's
emergence uh very good question well so
first of all go back to what we talked
about early on in this process the
hylomorphism that strange Loop between
the constraints the information and the
substrates that that information is
Carri Cared by um that is living
processes create that kind of a strange
Loop so the the question of
Consciousness I think has to do with the
fact that um we are
physical that everything about what
brains evolved to do is to maintain that
physical
relationship but neurologically you can
say that that our neurological processes
are a strange Loop within a strange Loop
that is our bodies are what I call
vegetatively sentient they respond
irrespective of my nervous system um to
the world in a variety of ways um and we
see this even after a person dies you
know their fingernails keep growing
their hair keeps growing and that sort
of thing um
because biology itself has this strange
Loop of information of replication of of
repair of
continuation um but animals have this
interesting problem animals unlike
plants are are not rooted to the ground
they don't have to just respond to
what's immediately around um they can
actually change the context um by moving
from here to there by following
resources by you know all the things
that we do but to do that you've got to
do predictive work you've got to sort of
you've got to represent something that's
not here now and then move towards it um
even if it's as simple as you know an
anticipating what's 50 fet in front of
you um maybe it's just a a smell
gradient that you're going to follow um
you've got to have something that
predicts um and so we have this whole
system that does so um I think that the
nervous system has its own teody
Dynamics so I like to distinguish these
two by saying that there's vegetated
that te Dynamics produces vegetative
sentients sentients meaning simply
self-repair responding to the world
plants do this bacteria do this um
there's this this sense of
that they're responsive to the world
with respect to their needs so to speak
um but in a very simple direct
way animals have added an extra you
might say an extra cycle upon this that
is a self organizing um strange Loop
oamic cycle within the teody dnamic
system because it's got to do this
prediction stuff but it's got to do
prediction with respect to my body needs
so it's doing it's prediction with
respect to what the teio Dynamics of the
rest of my body is doing whether I'm you
know a really simple animal or a complex
animal um and in this process um there's
got to be within the nervous system its
own teody Dynamics the key to teody
dnamic it's about the generation of self
the term self-organization is Mis is a
misnomer but I think a teody dnamic
system has self this is why it can
repair itself it can reproduce itself um
it's not just pattern it's in a sense
it's in own it's its own embodiment well
the key is the nervous system has to be
doing this as well so I have a a body
sentience what I call the vegetative
sentience of my body
and then there's the vegetative
sentience of the nervous system I think
the nervous system itself has a kind of
vegetative sentience it's a kind of a
closure so it has this this process that
involves metabolism uh and so on that's
also physical substrate neurons are
trying to stay alive you know they're
getting perturbed by information coming
from other nervous systems uh from other
neurons uh and they're just trying to
you know to stay alive in this melstrom
of signals coming in and causing their
metabolism to up and down
um but now since the one is inside the
other is part of the other is
maintaining the other we've got a teody
dnamic process about a teody dnamic
process a process that's a strange Loop
about itself as well because the body is
keeping the nervous system as well so
there's a strange Loop linking strange
Loops so to speak in this respect that's
what I think animal nervous systems
provide now what they that means is that
we're not
only aware of our body of the substrate
that we are but it's the very substrate
that is linked to the
world that is
structuring that is the constraint on
the Dynamics of the brain and the
Dynamics of the brain of course are
moving us around in the world changing
the substrates on our body so it's it's
what you might call a strange Loop
between two strange Loop systems it's
that comp complex but that's why we are
in the world physically why I have a
self I have a self precisely because
that self is physically grounded because
all of the constraints are physically
grounded and they're about themselves
and they're about the substrate of
themselves so I've recently become very
much involved in looking at the
metabolism of brain function recognizing
that that I think that emotion that
feeling the dve feeling the feeling of
need the feeling of of something has to
happen or the feeling of resistance that
we feel um the feel of being um is about
this relationship between the
information and the physicality and the
the fact that we're doing work that
everything that a neuron is doing is
work and that work is resisted can be
promoted and resisted and I feel that
we're thinking now forget the thinking
part of it thinking feels like
something um you know this because
there's work involved and work feels
like something because it there's
resistance work is always against
something that's
resisting and what's what's it resisting
there's
constraints and the information itself
is constraints strange Loops about the
relationship between strange Loops um
this is I think the problem of
Consciousness and why it's so difficult
to get to it once we have taken taken
the cartisian pill we drunk the
cartisian Kool-Aid and we think that
that information is somehow this
disembodied separate
stuff um we lose the possibility of even
doing
this if we begin to look for the neural
constraints of Consciousness trying to
find it somewhere it's not going to be
there it's in this complicated
relationship um so so I I have to say
that I think we're still fairly
primitive in asking the question about
what Consciousness is for precisely this
reason we are still in the shadow of
decart we haven't really recognize the
aeran
Paradox
here what a lot of people like to bring
up the apartness of experience when
they're talking about qualia or the
subjective phenomenal experience of
reality and you have two specific um
definitions and words that you use in
your work absenti and intentional now
for all of this listening it's this is
different from intentionality which Al
I'll allow you to Define terance but
you've now spoken about what is called
intentionality so what role does absenti
and intentional properties have when it
comes to understanding the framework of
mind and life perhaps well again the
story of ABS sential is very
straightforward when you think about it
that all representational
relationships are structured by virtue
of something that they're
not but we could say the same thing
about all living processes they're
structured by virtue of something that
they're
not but they're structured in a way that
maintains that relationship to something
that they're
not and they they do so by virtue of the
constru
but the constraints are about what's
prevented that's something that's not
there so the that relationship is the
key to that story and that's what's
going to get us to the strange Loop um
the what I call the iseran eeran um
Paradox the fact that that we're
hylomorphic in a much more complex and
interesting way um so in that respect um
what that said says is why why is there
a feel to things why does it feel like
something you know what does it feel
like to be a bad you know that that that
kind of question it's the qualia
question but it's not the it's not that
qualia are things out there or or this
other
stuff Walia is this the result of
this
entanglement of information with
physicality it can't be disentangled
and because of this um there's always
something incomplete about this why
because there something absent always
involved the structure of things present
are there because of what's not
there um again go back to the DST
statement things are structured by
virtue of use but use is about the
future use is about what's possible
what's potential it's not about what is
alone it's just that what is is now in
some cases going to be constrained by
what's possible what's made
possible so that's that's why I see
these linked and it's it requires us to
rethink how brains work in a fundamental
way um it requires us to to stop
thinking about brains as doing
computation brains are not doing
computation they're doing something more
like life
in fact it's why
living information
processes feel like
something machines don't feel this why
because the information that's coursing
through them has nothing to do with
their
physicality yes it's physically embodied
but it plays no role in the structure of
the
system it plays no role in what it's
made of
or what will happen if it begins to
break
down it's got no skin in the game so to
speak would you would you compare this
to what for kogai call like in activism
would you would this be a similar
Concept in that regard I think it's
similar uh the problem with enactivism
is I think it's still I think it's still
cartisian
you'll notice that yeah we enact things
but to to enact something
gotta do
work um if you leave the work story out
of it and how an
acting comes to be you know you're still
in this cartisian world do you think
it's more of a property dualism at that
point less the completely dualistic but
more kind of assuming a property
dualism I think I'm not sure I would I
would say it that way but but I think
it's leaning in that direction I see and
so what I'm trying to get rid of is this
property dualism
what I want to say is that decart's kajo
is the constraint absent side of
decart's
um res extensa physical
stuff that is dayart simply separated
the absence and the presence that can't
be
separated so it's not dual properties
has to be one yeah how how does your
approach address the traditional Mind
Body problem we started by asking for
your philosophical history of it but
what new insights does your work or what
would it offer regarding the
relationship between mental and physical
States so first of all it would make
that question foolish there is no there
is no diff they are the same thing but
we got to recognize that they're aspects
of the same thing it's not dual
properties it's aspects of the physical
world I always love I always love ask
you that question because the podcast is
called Mind Body Solution because
technically then the is it's it's NFA
there is no Mind Body Solution it's just
a mind that's right not separate
exactly so but another way to to think
of this um is I see this all the time
particularly in more philosophical
writings about the brain they talk about
the the mindbrain
the mindbrain is just a way to say know
I'm not a dualist but I'm a
dualist I'm really not a dualist even
though I'm saying something totally
dualistic yeah I recognize that you got
to have a mind and the Brain you gota
the brain has to have a mind and the
mind has to have a brain um but I'm
still talking about them as though
they're separate stuff Terence have you
seen um um Robert Lawrence Coon's
landscape TA in fact fact
before he produced it I had him give a
talk in h a conference I was running uh
in which he laid out the story okay um
um what I should say the story is just a
list um it's just a list of ways to come
at it um I think it's a great value but
I think the value of it is that that we
can now say let's let's throw away 99%
of it I'm check I'm tomorrow I'm
actually he told me to email him
tomorrow just to remind him we're going
to have a conversation soon what are
your thoughts on the taxonomy in general
no I I think it's it's a great way to do
it um taxonomies drive me crazy um
because they don't explain anything yes
it's just it's really to show you what's
out there yeah yeah and and on the other
hand it's it's great because we know
what's out there um he list me he list
me twice in that one I'm listed twice in
two different topics I think I saw that
and I and I wondered whether that was on
purpose or yeah he did it on purpose
yeah it was not an accident told me he
told me he says I'm doing it on purpose
look at these so no I like it a lot I
think it's great um and I think it
needed to be done we needed to have
something like that where somebody put
it all together said this is the whole
collection
um he beat me to I was I was planning
something similar but slightly different
but he really got there before me but
obviously right right so so so part of
the issue um is what I call sort a meta
analysis
of his meta analysis the question is how
did he come up with the categories yes
what's the logic of the categories I'm
gonna make notes now because this is
going to be my Approach com okay is is
the logic of the categories um simply
created by the the properties that are
out there in each of these categories
but if that's true he's it reifies all
their
properties right so the question is is
there an Ur logic
um that is behind this that's
philosophical um his is a philosophical
one it breaks up in terms of mostly
philosophical taxonomy categories
um I would like to see a more
constructive theory that says Okay um
these are this set of theories are
assumed in that set of theories and this
set of theories are assumed in this
other set of theories and there's a
hierarchic relationship in which they're
nested within each other or contrasted
to each other um by you know inclusion
or exclusion relationships um are there
a set of principles to construct this
taxonomy because he did construct a
taxonomy but like most taxonomies it's
you know it it can sometimes be just as
critics of this have described it in
biology as butterfly collection I got a
lot of different butterflies and I look
at them these are like other these are
like each other these are like each
other these are different I just I just
you know organize them in front of me um
he's done that that has to be done first
so I think his task is one that has to
be done first I think there were a few
people who who dis disagreed with the
placement in the in the oh absolutely
absolutely and you know and and I would
say that you know the reason I'm in more
than one place is that I'm not in any of
those
places yeah and I think that's true for
a number of these theories
um yeah again them overlap in many
different ways and a lot of them are are
way more different than we think they
are you in different ways yes exactly
even though it's in the same category
yes exactly and so so yeah I think this
the first step the next step is to do um
what you might call The Meta taxonomy of
the taxonomies how is the taxonomy
generated it's a project I'm gonna
that's going to be literally I'm going
to work on that good good I think that's
a great one try my best but you as a
materialist when you think about your
view you propose that Consciousness is
is not simply an epip phenomenon of
brain activity but has a unique causal
role so absolutely I because it be
separated yeah how do you substantiate
this with the materialist ontology just
for those who assume that that's
impossible to conceptualize
together because the materialist
ontology is not complete
that's the incompleteness problem here
you got to recognize that the
materialist ontology ignores the absenti
relationships once you get over that
then it's fine so I don't consider
myself a quote materialist or a
physicalist whatever those mean because
we've already defined those in ways that
exclude the
possibility exclude the possibility that
absenti features are structuring what's
there I recently well for the most part
was told that physicalism and
materialism are different this was by
Professor joho mcfaden when he spoke to
me about his electromagnetic Theory Of
Consciousness when he spoke about
semifield Theory and and it didn't
really occur to me until that moment
when he said like if you think about
this electromagnetism waves functioning
he's very much materialist but not
necessarily A physicalist because you
can't think of waves and
electromagnetism as physical entities
and that's when I kind of thought okay
these are actually quite different yeah
similar they are and yet of course as
Einstein showed us that one is the other
yes exactly um it's not that they're
separable they're just different
phases uh of many people consider them
synonyms to just mean the same thing
yeah yeah and they're not of course um
but again these are philosophical
theories that have specific definition
and you'll notice that they that neither
of them have a place for
representation so there's you know
representational perspectives mostly are
thought of as non-materialist
perspectives non- physicalist
perspectives and so the very taxonomy of
these systems has made it
impossible to make sense of it
when you think of the broader
philosophical implications of your teody
dnamic framework particularly in terms
of how we understand intentionality and
Consciousness what what comes to
mind I'm not sure the question I'm
saying so it again the what are the
broader philosophical implications that
that come out of your work on teody
Dynamics and your view on Consciousness
in general and the mind from this teody
dnamic perspective
does that make any sense big question
you know you
know the metaphysical implications to
some extent I actually wrote a paper
some years ago with a colleague called
um steps to a metaphysics of of what's
it called Step of oh shoot but basically
it's about what are the metaphysical
assumptions of the teod dnamic approach
um and one of them is that we have to
embrace paradox
that that this strange Loop that I'm
talking about is the most
basic aspect of what existence is
about and it's effectively paradoxical
because it's
necessarily self-reflective and
self-undermining at the same
time this is the asherian gelian kind of
problem why my book was called
incomplete
nature the gallian story says that
things are incom
completable that reality is necessarily
incomplete and that means
time incomplete means that what is here
now
is incomplete it can't be
enough time is
necessary the problem with with the
metaphysical implications here and this
is the metaphysical implications of
emergence as well the con concept of
emergence emergence is about
incompleteness it's about it's not
enough it can always be more can always
be different um you go have them go all
the way back to the Greeks to find out
that the concept of change itself is
inconceivable and yet it's necessary why
is that the case well because change is
that what is is not what is will become
what is not self under mining the
present um undermines itself to become
the
future that's that's this strange Loop
Paradox but what it means about time is
something very interesting it seems to
me I think of time as incomplet
dimensionality hard to make sense of
that but but think of it this
way I was a real fan of einsteinian the
I still am Einstein just blows my mind
his his thinking um and yet um we deeply
disagree about how he thinks about
time yet time was the ense the essential
idea in his series and this um lorenzian
collapsing of space and time together
into quote space time this
four-dimensional uh manifold that be
comes the real basis of his work
especially in and general relativity um
uh I think is fundamentally wrong and
it's wrong in the following sense um
when somebody initially tried to explain
the einsteinian theory um about time he
said well you know this thing about what
they call light light cones and things
like that um he said now imagine that
the world is a
two-dimensional world and that time is
how one two-dimensional plane becomes
another two-dimensional plane becomes
another two-dimensional plane that time
is the third dimension um in which these
spaces these two-dimensional spaces come
one after the other after the other
after the other um this creates what
some some people have called a block
Universe um that we've got a a
three-dimensional block made up of
two-dimensional
universes and time is following a line
through
this set of this block from two
Dimension from Dimension to Dimension to
Dimension I thought about this and then
I asked myself the following
question
okay I know why we're not
everywhere but I don't know why we're
not every
when um be being a point on one of these
tells me that's why I'm not everywhere
but the
line why am I not everywhere
well this can be answered because the
the real issue is here no I'm only in
this when this point this space at this
time but why how can I explain how I go
from this point to this point to this
point to this point on the timeline in
my block Universe the answer is well I
have to have another
dimension I have to have
time because if I'm if I'm not every
when
at this point in time I have an extra
Dimension that keeps track of why I'm
only here and why I'm only here I need I
need that Dimension to say now I'm there
now I'm there now I'm there to not be
every when I have to have another
dimension but I can now say the same
thing with that
Dimension infinite regress yeah it's an
infinite
regress I think time is incom
completable dimensionality
that is we always have to have to not
explain why I'm not every
when I need to have that
peace
now in that piece I do a
complicated construction of what I think
time is time is about and I think it has
to do with understanding Paradox and
this this strange looplike
relationship um but that means that if
the universe is um incom completable
incom completable not just in time but
incom completable in
dimensionality then emergence
is
given newness is always there you can't
have a world without
newness things emerg things are
different than they were and they will
always be different than they were
because it's incom completable because
even dimensionality even building a more
complicated you know 10 dimensional
SpaceTime continum it's not going to do
it yes like novess is the
norm yeah you can't it's it's because of
incomplete nature nature is
fundamentally incomplete and it's very
root based on based on this work
what do you see as the most promising
directions future research or cognitive
scientists or philosophers of mind can
take this and go with
it I'm mostly in an area I I know
Neuroscience pretty well that's my
training now I know evolutionary biology
and I'm getting better and better at
understanding molecular biology and and
evolutionary theory there's a lot to
learn um so I'm not sure I have a lot to
offer in this respect and yet yet um I
do think this will help us rethink what
we call
computation we know how minds work um
but we know also that they're about
their own
embodiment they're about their own
physicality um we have not we have built
these
devices to be
tools that don't have that
feature and that's why they're Reliable
Tools but this does mean that the
physicality can be brought back into
it in a more and more complete way I'm
not suggesting that's a good
thing but it means that we
can understand the difference between
Computing and
thinking this way but we can ultimately
probably generate
devices that think and feel and know
when you speak you speak of the Mind as
a process and I see it very much
similarly in that regard it's this
Dynamic process rather than a static
entity just existing as thisan vital
type of um phenomenon yeah um how does
this perspective influence cognitive
science or cognitive functions like
memory decision making perception
because I mean it's it's an important
way to conceive of this problem and and
then thereafter apply to
AI well and and I think the two Realms
are very different than where we will go
with the two Realms but it because my my
interest in the nervous system I'm
beginning to pay much more attention
about how metabolism plays a role in
thinking um and how thinking changes
metabolism of the brain um and so a lot
of our recent research has been looking
at um to what extent changes in blood
flow and
oxygenation are changing thinking and
attention when it's actually metabolism
that's the initial
driver um and that neural activity are
secondary um I think this will help us
understand disturbances of the nervous
system particularly things like
schizophrenia uh and depression and so
on um why because these are also
metabolic
problems um and I I think understanding
that is an important issue and to
recognize that um when I change my
attention um it's not just that there's
sort of a a change in information going
on but blood flow is changing all over
the
brain um and to learn how that's
controlled I think gives us a hint as to
why there is such a thing as feeling as
emotion as the sense of doing something
of being something of being here and not
being you know in s in a coma um and
that is because um the feeling is the
resistance that's the distance between
the information that's being processed
and the metabolism that's necessary to
support it and it's being resisted by it
um so we recognize that when I feel
something it's because there's
resistance pushing against something or
something is pushing against me and
there's a kind of in
it's not a surprise that we think of the
term about feeling as we use the term
emotion um it's got inertia attached to
it when I've got a strong emotion it's
got a kind of inertia to it I can't stop
it and in part that's because there's
metabolism behind it there's there's
work being done work requires oxygen and
glucose um we gotta pend spend a lot
more time understanding the nervous
system at that level and understanding
this entanglement uh between the
metabolism and what neurons are doing
but to flip this around to the Computer
World um one of the things that that we
know about you know I I was talking to
people about supercomputers many years
ago um and the one I was interested in
is one they were they're explaining it's
in it's in this big refrigerated room
you know I've got to have the it's it's
got these big massive refrigeration
systems to keep it cool because the
thousands and thousands of CPUs it's
using because it's so so distributed
they heat up um as they flop they run
their flops their their transistors are
turning over they're generating heat the
process of computing is a thermodynamic
process um they need to cool it because
you know they get hot and with as they
get hot they get noisy they don't they
don't do so well
um you you lose signal
um I said well that's interesting see
you've got these these huge
refrigerators running using lots of
energy and you've got these huge
Computing systems using lots of energy
and generating heat um couldn't you just
put a thermost on each of the
CPUs and take that information about
heat about the work it's doing and
sending it back to a central processor
and say this is part of the signal part
of the work of computing is heat and
this is information about the work
you're doing and therefore could you use
this to sort of redistribute the work to
say oh make that one a little quieter
and turn this one up a little bit um uh
instead of just thinking of the heat as
waste the heat is actually information
it's about the physiology of computing
now it's a trivial part of this strange
Loop
but it's a part of recognizing the
non-cartesian nature of this process
that it's a physical process and it's
got physical correlates and those
physical correlates also can be
constraints and can be used to do
work um and can be used to produce new
constraints that are new Computing
features um now to my knowledge I don't
know if anybody's everever use this this
logic but it's the kind of logic that
this would suggest yes once you
recognize the the hylomorphic
nature of all of this that's an obvious
Next
Step It is well are you familiar with
the work done by Mark Psalms um Terence
a little bit he and I communicated back
in the 90s in my my symbolic
species days when he was in New York um
and I I'm not and we have not been I
don't I haven't followed his work since
then and I'm not sure that he's followed
my work what what you're talking about
right now at this point towards the end
of this conversation is very similar to
what the work the work he does he
focuses on homeostasis and affect being
a very important part of feeling being a
a fundamental feature of Consciousness
and reality and the way we perceive the
world um so the focus is fundamentally
on that homeostatic evolutionary on
almost the ancient part of of the way we
got to where we are it's it's less
cortical he's less concerned about this
iCal fallacy is what he calls it but
rather this is this has been happening
for a longer period of a time and I I
agree with that yeah and we've merely
the cortex now and that's because we
think reason and intelligence is the
biggest fundamental aspect of
Consciousness all right brains been
around long before
cortex but but here's the interesting
thing that if we're talking about it in
information terms alone
I don't think there's any such thing as
feeling
there I think it's always about work and
resistance and I love the way you've
managed to make that physical in terms
of a legitimate equation at that point
it's like it's when you when you bring
in math and physics into this it's it's
a lot harder to just dismiss
it yeah exactly
well when you were when I remember
reading your work it it is years ago and
then often read throughout the years
when you were growing up who were the
people you looked up to you mentioned a
few people already in your journey n
Chomsky foda um a lot of people who've
been part of this who well not necessar
they' been mostly the the absenti the
negative part the part that I've worked
against the ones who have formed the
beliefs no I would say
that there are a bunch of early ones um
uh one of the early effects was reading
Arthur Kessler's book The Act of
Creation um he wrote it in
64 Kesler was a was a novelist and a
essayist um became very much interested
in um anti-reductionism later in his
life but his book Act of Creation um was
something he started in in the late 40s
and I guess took him like 10 12 years 15
years to to write um because s sort of
like my problem um you think about one
thing at lead to something else and
leads to something else and leads he
wrote it initially because he wanted to
explain um why
jokes
Discovery and art are like each
other um these are all involved in the
act of creation and the experience of
this sort of the the the the haha
experience with jokes the AHA experience
with Discovery and the ah experience
with art and he said you know where do
they come from and he he came up with
this idea of what he called bisociation
it's we it's this jux opposition of
opposites and incompatibilities in a way
that resolves in three possible
ways and he then went on to say but ah
that tells us something about the
cognitive process of the creative
process and he then begins to look at
how various artists and scientists uh uh
and humorists create and then he begins
thinking about what does that mean about
thought processes and how is that
related to biology and is this a little
bit like the regrowth of Limbs on
salamanders that have lost their limbs
and it's all about these creative
processes these generative processes Al
so I write I I read this as a as a young
teenager and I went oh this this is so
wild interestingly enough this book was
required reading at Harvard in the late
60s um I don't know that anybody
remembers it but but it got me going in
this direction um what got me going
after this is coming in contact with a
man named Gregory baton um and Gregory
baton I I first of all read his stuff
reading about complex systems theory
what's that his dad not William baton
yes his dad is William baton the
geneticist Gregory baton was once the
husband to Margaret me the the
Anthropologist he and Margaret split up
but they both attended um this series of
conferences called the Macy conferences
in the the
the 40s and 50s and this is this is
Josiah Macy and who's I guess it was his
son put this together was to talk about
um what was then called
tonomy information Theory and complex
systems theory and the beginning of
computation stuff that was beginning in
the late 40s and early 50s and they were
trying to put it together with theories
of culture of Mind of biology and that
sort of thing really a productive group
so you can find the the information
about the Macy's conferences online but
it's it's where um I would say systems
theory thinking got into all these other
domains um so Margaret me and Gregory
bason Gregory was initially an
anthropologist himself um but then
became much more interested in
information Theory and stuff and um uh I
came in contact with him initially by
picking up his book um uh steps to an
Ecology of mind his idea that that
mental processes were like ecological
processes that we had to think about
biology and ecology and economy and
mentality with the same
tools and it was just a collection of
his essays but they were so mindblowing
that I became immediately interested I
eventually found a guy with one of his
students uh a fellow um who was at the
time uh in British Columbia and wrote a
book called system and structure based
upon Batson's ideas and in the early 70s
taking in structuralism and Marxism and
economic theory and trying to trying to
figure out if they all fit together um
uh his name was Anthony wien um and Wen
then
introduced me to Bateson eventually um
and I became a total acolyte in this
this area um but then and this is this
is what's weird um this has to do with a
one of these strange moments in history
that happens to many of us I as a as a
college student I was poor supporting
myself couldn't buy books and and so to
to read the latest things that are out
there I couldn't find in the library
because of course they were just
published so what I have to do I have to
go and sit in the bookstore take a book
off the shelf and read it while I'm
sitting there in the bookstore so this
became you know my study area um and I
remember going to the bookstore and I
was reading books about you know the
other person that was really influential
at the time was was W Ross Ashby and his
introduction to cybernetics and his
design of a brain and that kind of stuff
taking cybernetic Theory and trying to
make it sensible link it up with
information Theory and and so on all
this stuff and and complex systems
theory and starting to read the
beginnings of genetics that were
developing in the 70s and so on all this
was exciting so I was sitting in the
bookstore reading these things and the
guy was stacking books in the bookstore
um who I think was sort of on the
Spectrum um not a very good communicator
but really apparently really knew what
he was doing I would find him suddenly
he would be behind me looking over my
shoulder and and he would say oh you're
reading that you should read
purse and I went what do you mean purse
and he said well well Pur is a
philosopher and I said well at the time
I don't read philosophy you know I'm
into science here none of that stuff and
so I would go on with my reading and I'd
pick up another book and and again and
again you know week after week there'd
be a time he'd show up and he said no
you're reading this one now but you know
you should you should look at purse it's
almost like a Google ad yeah yeah
exactly
and I stop bothering me you're a weird
guy you couldn't possibly know what's
going on um and finally I picked up a
book um that was by a neuroscientist um
Warren mccullock called embodiments of
mind um and as I was reading through it
I came into the later chapter and it was
all about purse I went oh my God and so
he comes around me again and I said okay
I get it give me something to read about
purse and so he picked he went over to
the philosophy section he pulls out this
book he said here's a collection of some
of P's work take a look at this I
started to read it and I went oh my God
this is all the stuff that all these
guys thought they were talking about
that they were ignoring and that this
guy 75 years ago was writing about and
it's seen through these problems and I
went oh I got to learn purse so I
dropped that
out I was in college I dropped out and I
took all the money I had and I bought
the only set of books of olive pures
writings oh this collected volumes they
produced by Harvard University press
That's and and I
spent I don't know if it was a full year
but a long time just sort of struggling
through it um it was a mess it was
terrible this guy is a horrible writer
um and Brilliant um and
a Despicable guy nobody liked him um and
so most of his work was never published
interestingly enough I've never read bir
personally I'm I'm looking forward to
checking this out afterwards H so here's
what I did after this I went back to
school and I wrote a senior
thesis on P's Philosophy particularly
his semiotic theory and its relationship
to cybernetic Theory it's called semios
it's called cybernetics and semi
the relevance of Cs
purse um I'm G to start I'll send it to
you because although I disagree with
many of some of P's thinking
particularly his his metaphysical
thinking I find it Troublesome in some
respects but the semiotic theory just
blew me away and and so I as a as a
young now just recently graduated I did
my senior work I graduated I got out of
there um I applied to Harvard and I sent
this off and I said you know I want to
work with somebody that knows P's work
and this philosopher named Israel
Sheffer said okay come into my
program and so here I am this nobody
from the Northwest a small little
College you know out of the way um goes
to Harvard you know Drive AC drives
across country with my newborn daughter
and my wife and in an old VW
banded weird story and what I was going
to Harvard to do was to study with
somebody about this and I had just
learned that all of P's unpublished
work was in a library at Harvard called
the hotton library in just manuscript
copies of handwritten material I thought
wow this is where I want to
be I got there studying with this guy
spending time with the other
philosophers that were there brilliant
people you know there was there was
Willard Herman Quin the logician um who
I studied with briefly there was Hillary
putam who I studied with briefly took a
seminar from these guys
um never worked out as it didn't work
out with CH photo the field I mean you
mentioning yeah I know it's amazing but
you know that's the power of being in a
place like that you get get to rub
elbows with these these guys that that
sort of blow your socks off I think one
of quin's quotes I remember was studying
the human mind without studying AB
normal mental phenomena is is basically
like scratching the surface of of
nothing I mean you're just literally
just looking into nowhere yeah well
that's right the only it's an N of one
yeah yeah of course so so but anyway the
the the longest short of this is that I
was unable to get to purses unpublished
papers I was a
nobody I can't put my hands on this
valuable stuff so I gave up and I
shifted ter were the people who were
allowed to actually touch
it so So eventually yes okay now and
it's a lot of stuff has moved to Indiana
where they've been trying to put it
together and the other problem with the
early purse work that I read is it was
organized topically not historically not
in terms of how he was thinking in time
not his so so stuff that he was thinking
early in his life is next to stuff he's
thinking at the end of his life and he
had to sort of read the read the notes
at the bottom to find out when it was
and so I had to also reconstruct how he
reconstructed his thinking um with this
luckily there was one author that tried
to come up with with a history of P's
thoughts at the time that helped me a
little bit um but I was unable to do
that and so I jump ship philosophy is
not where I'm going to go I'm going to
do Evolution and evolution of the brain
so I'm going to take courses in
Neuroscience I'm going to take courses
in evolutionary biology and
this is when I also left the left St
taking courses from people like chony
and Fodor now this is just philosophy
I'm gonna I'm gonna leave that behind
that but the perian influence has been
with me ever
since and then when you into that when
you into the new realm of of
evolutionary biology who became your new
Heroes and icons in the field uh I was
very very lucky at the time um so at the
time at Harvard um this is the big
arguments around um sociobiology were
were Brewing um so I got to work briefly
with with Steve Gould with dick Lenton
with um Edward Wilson um with um and for
a year uh Bill Hamilton came to give a
set of talks um I had this this great
class with electric class with William
Hamilton and Robert triers I don't know
if you know who triers is um
triers um as far as I could tell never
gave a lecture
unstoned um um
and I'll see if I can describe this
scene here we are in this big lecture
hall and there's a there's a stage and
and you know all these blackboards over
the back of the stage um Bill Hamilton
comes up and he says a few words turns
to the Blackboard and starts writing
equations talking and that's the rest of
the hour
lecture um Bob triers comes up in the
next
lecture sits down on the front of the
stage with his legs hanging over with
his sandals
um and and starts free associating about
evolutionary theory and about Hamilton's
theory of kin selection and so on and
what it means and so
on totally weird duck supposition but
incredible at the same time I'm starting
to make friends with Steve G and Dick
Lenton who hate this stuff um Steve G
definitely hated those I room I remember
and yet Steve G was himself brilliant
yes wonderful dick Leon brilliant uh and
so here you've got brilliant ideas
Waring with each other people that don't
like each other and you know and yet
they're all doing great stuff
so I was in the camp with the
evolutionary biologists so gou was sort
of not in my camp but I had to but I had
to know what he was talking about um and
I got a lot from him and I would say
that I've you know after he passed um
rediscovered a whole lot of stuff that I
now realize was there that I hadn't paid
attention to
um but he was sort of about the outs
among the Harvard biologists they didn't
like him because you know he didn't get
grants he didn't do lab research he
didn't do field research you know he was
just writing these popularized things
and his students even got support mostly
from his
popularization um so you know it wasn't
it and yet he had this incredible mind
this incredible sort of crossover from
the philosophical the historical uh put
all this stuff together and just a one
ful way and so you know I've gained a
lot from that um but so I was in the
middle of this was a great place to be
because you got to I got to listen to
all these people talking to me like
trying to convince me about why I should
not think that and these guys are trying
to convince me that I should not think
that um it was just it was a terrific
place to be and you of course then went
through that rise and fall of
behaviorism at the same time oh exactly
so behaviorism was was just collapsing
this is the end of the 70s beginning of
the 80s behaviorism was on its way out
and so I also got to study with
developmental psychologists in fact one
of my um I would say the closest
Confidant was a guy named Sheldon white
um who was a developmental psychologist
who was studying the development the
historical development of Developmental
Psychology um and sort of recognizing
you know how it was de how we we're
changing our thinking about how Minds
developed at the same same time petan
Psychology was all the rage at Harvard
and so I took classes from petan
psychologists and from linguists who
were interested in child development of
language um so it was it was a great
time to be in the middle of all of this
um so and that's why I did my my
research um you know tracing Connections
in Monkey
Brains because I thought well now you
could do something empirical to sort of
pursue this um I became very
disappointed in the developmental
psychologists in part because they were
treating the brain of a child as the
brain of an adult that just didn't have
enough input yet um and so now you now
PHA says well you know you developed
these ideas then these ideas follow then
these ideas follow these stages follow
one after the other and that's because
of you know the ideas the knowledge
that's being accumulated by assimil
assimilation and accommodation and so on
um but in fact children's brain are very
different than adult brains yeah and two
two old two-year-old brains are
radically different and so as I began
studying brain Evolution I realized you
know Evolution doesn't go from adult
brain to adult brain to adult brain it
goes from adult brain to a child brain
to maturing differentiating to an adult
brain to produce another child brain
differenti and the brains of youngsters
are very different and the developmental
process um constraints how Evolution can
actually work what can actually evolve
so in my PhD work which eventually
contributed years and years later to the
symbolic species was recognizing that
you can't understand Evolution unless
you understand development you can't
understand how brains evolve unless you
understand how brains develop because
the developmental process will determine
and constrain how The evolutionary
process can take place the evoo
perspective you know I was thinking evoo
at a time when you know the term wasn't
there but it was a necessary part
there's a bunch of us all over the world
of course being hit by this Evo Devo
problem um that was that Steve Gould had
already talked about that Steve Gould
was already aware of was a problem um
but just historically you know going
back to Heckle and going back to his
problems of
of neony and so on which I think were
dead ends ultimately but but
nevertheless he he recognized that this
was a problem so that's what I'm saying
it was it was a terrific time to be
there got this far you got a quite a
massive it's almost like this m rashm Mo
era of philosophy and science coming
together with that gives you this unique
perspective and I think like a nice
closing question would
be what's your thoughts on this
relationship between philosophy and
science at this point how do you see
these two Fields coming together or
moving away from each
other which they're both doing sadly um
um so there's a lot of good philosophy
of science out there um and one of the
things that's happening in the field is
a lot of philosophers young philosophers
are going to study with
Scientists going to hang out in labs and
trying to figure out how it's done um
I'm not sure that's the way it should go
um the real problem with science as I
see it the technical Sciences is that we
know we often know so little of the
philosophy and as a result we
um how should I we reinvent the wheel
again and again and again and again
ideas or thought hundred years ago come
back again and again because we haven't
realized that no you can think yourself
outside of that box if you're careful um
so I think the science has lack that and
philosophy of course um get to be too
preoccupied with
itself um and not
looking so that I have not
really a sense that the two will come
together I think they're separate planes
they'll run separately but there will be
interaction I mean I'm somebody who I
would say that I can't not be in both
Realms in my thinking uh and and and
that's probably because of my background
but probably because you know you
know I flirt between all these areas you
know
I I think deep down you still love the
philosophy even though you are more of a
scientist yeah no I would say and and
and I think people have oftentimes they
they look at people like me and say oh
he's he's a scientist that's gone into
philosop uh you know he's no longer you
can't trust him because he's just
thinking philosophical things um a lot
of us you know who have a scientific
background that begin to sort of ask the
questions that we never asked when we
were younger um um our thought of you
know okay they're getting older
daughtering forget what they're what
they're thinking um I think that's stake
but I realize I'm probably in that ballp
Park as well no I agree with you I mean
that even happens to me as a doctor when
I talk about philosophical even if I
speak about idealist theories of
Consciousness with other guests when I
go back to work I have friends who who
just who think I'm completely out of my
mind just because of exactly exactly
it's it's got nothing to do with
medicine so they just think I'm crazy
which is which is pretty cool to see how
ignorance well the other thing that
happens and this has happened in my
career that that most people who know
about my fetal neural transplantation
work are my developmental brain research
or my comparative brain brain anatomy
work don't know that I think any of
these philosophical thoughts um people
that have read incomplete nature have no
idea that I actually spent decades you
know doing laboratory research with you
know neurons fetal neurons and and
measuring the structure or that
structure in the brain or doing Tracer
work nobody knows about that work and
then in the in the 90s I was doing all
this work in in transplantation and part
of it was medical of course it's about a
lot of it was about hunting's disease
and and Parkinson's disease and maybe we
could use cell transplantation methods
uh to deal with these diseases so people
know of my work in that realm and then
they wonder why I left it you know you
know why am I not still doing this stuff
um that's the problem if if you if
you've got too many lives people don't
know that you've had all these
lives but all of these lives have
inuence my thinking in each of these
rounds yeah thanks Terrence thank you so
much this was an absolutely wonderful
conversation you've been such an amazing
guest I I really appreciate your time
all right well we we'll get back to it
at some point I will definitely and I
look forward to our round two I can't
wait for it thanks so much I'll send you
a couple of papers to the your appetite
for the next cycle I'm I can't wait I'm
excited them as soon as possible J ter
all right
