I'm about to say something that you
would never expect to hear from more
perfect union Elon Musk is right about
something Elon Musk is suing the maker
of chat GPT suing open AI suing open AI
for breach of contract by putting profit
ahead of benefiting Humanity elon's
lawsuit against open AI the most
recognizable developer of artificial
intelligence was big news but when I
heard it I was a bit confused when has
Elon ever been against profit so I dug
in I read and I watched far too much of
these guys talking about AI I think that
AI will be a technological Revolution on
the scale of the Agricultural the
industrial the computer Revolution AI is
about to revolutionize digital biology
and genomics and transportation and
Retail artificial intelligence this is
it is a Renaissance this is a uh world
changing set of advances by the time
these lawsuits are decided will have
digital God so digital God I noticed
three things that the rise of AI is
inevitable that it will change
everything about our lives and that
there's a war Brewing between a handful
of billionaires to seiz control of it
Nvidia became one of the most valuable
stocks of all time producing chips for
AI Microsoft reached an over $3 trillion
valuation based on its AI work and open
AI tripled in value in just 10 months
but where do uh we you and I and
everyone other than the dozen or so
billionaires duking it out for control
fit in we're already seeing plans to
replace human nurses with AI media
magnates killing jobs to focus on cost
cutting with ai ai written driel filling
the internet and AI that does karaoke
for you but let's look at the possible
AI future through the rise of Sam Alman
CEO of open Ai and just one contender in
the billionaire battle for the
future Sam Alman is the ruler of Silicon
Valley startups and that's not me saying
that he thinks that I think the
president of YC is sort of The
Unofficial leader of the startup
movement YC is why combinator a
significant Venture Capital firm and
Tech incubator that Alman ran from 2014
to 2019 he' originally connected with YC
in 2008 when the firm funded his app
looped when he was 19 years old and wore
two popped colars looped was a common
Silicon Valley story they raised a ton
of money gathered a bunch of data and
got in trouble for texting everyone in
your phone when you downloaded the app
Altman sold the company and it all but
disappeared Alman landed at Y combinator
where he rose to president in 2 years
under Almond's leadership YC combinator
invested in massive companies most
people have heard of like Reddit Airbnb
coinbase Dropbox stripe twitch door Dash
and instacart in a lecture to Stanford
computer science students on startups
Alman quoted Peter Teal's advice as
Peter teal is going to discuss in the
fifth class you want an idea that turns
into a monopoly but you can't get a
monopoly in a big market right away you
have to find a small Market in which you
can get a monopoly and then quickly
expand quick expansion is an inherent
part of the way Venture Capital funded
Tech runs today this is Tim O'Reilly
he's been in Tech forever and if you
know phrases like open source or Web 2.0
it's because he popularized them one of
the big problems with today's Silicon
Valley is that it no longer really
supports remarket competition early days
of BC you were really talking about
funding Insurgent companies that had an
experimental idea most companies didn't
actually raise massive amounts of
capital but at some point that changed
but then you fast forward to 2010 in the
wake of the the of the look super low
interest rates there all this cheap
capital and companies are just buying
market share and I call this the Uber
problem you we didn't see real
competition with different business
models different pricing we saw two
heavily capitalized companies uh driving
everybody else out of business by
growing rapidly with a bunch of capital
Uber created an ecosystem where if you
want a cab you need to use Uber the old
system of car services was pretty much
pushed out of existence Uber is not an
alment company but door Dash Airbnb and
other companies that used similar
strategies totally are in 2015 we get
our first hint of open AI I actually
just agreed to fund a company that is
not even really a company sort of a semi
compan semi- nonprofit uh doing AI
Safety Research open AI is announced as
not a company but a nonprofit focused on
AI safety funded and supported by y
combinator Elon Musk Reed Hoffman the
LinkedIn Guy Peter teal Amazon and
Infosys basically a who's who of the
people who built the broken Tech
infrastructure of today the stated goal
of open AI was to advance digital
intelligence in the way that is most
likely to benefit Humanity as a whole
with no shareholders to be beholden to
we wanted to build this um with
Humanity's best interest at heart that
doesn't sound too bad right a
groundbreaking new technology it's power
available to all without any
responsibility to
shareholders but let's dig a Little
Deeper
they say they want to make the world
better and do it safely but what does
that mean to them most of what Alman
talks about in regards to what open eyes
products can do seems to Center on
productivity efficiency and margin
boosting our ability to have amazing
ideas for our children to like teach
themselves more than ever before for
people to be more productive how does
that make life better for the rest of us
well Allman claims to have the answer in
his essay Moors law for everything he
explains it would require simply
changing the entire economic system
Alman claims AI would drive down labor
costs so everything would get cheaper
and the lost jobs would be offset by a
universal basic income coming from
corporate and property tax rates with no
other taxes which sounds great maybe but
how true is that would corporations see
falling labor costs and reduce prices or
just keep the profit for themselves
would a flat tax and Ubi mean more money
for working people or more tax cheating
by the rich and Social Service cuts for
everyone else and there's a running
theme through all of what opman says the
inevitability and the danger of
artificial intelligence listen to this
clip you know I think AI will probably
like most likely sort of lead to the end
of the world people like Alman benefit
from The Narrative that AI is this big
scary thing even as they're the ones
trying to build and profit from it
here's Tim O'Reilly again it it feels a
little bit like a kind of misdirection
they're basically calling for a kind of
regulation of an extreme risk to avoid
the regulation of the many proximate
hars we can see today if they were
really afraid of it they would stop
doing their research instead they're
racing to accelerate it so they he can
get a monopoly it's a lot like the the
famous lion from The Wizard of odds pay
no attention to the man behind the
curtain and a lot of what I spent my
time in talking about AI regulation is
this there is a man behind the curtain
or a series of men who are making
decisions for their business advantage
and those are the things that we need to
be regulating why are they moving fast
to break things I mean in the AL clip
from before where he says the world
ending thing he literally says this
right after you know I think AI will
probably like most likely sort of lead
to the end of the world but in the
meantime uh there will be great
companies created with serious machine
learning companies see it's right back
to profit but hold on isn't open AI a
nonprofit not
anymore just 3 years after the founding
of open aai they transitioned to
something they're calling mixed profit
to do what we needed to go do we had
tried and failed enough to raise the
money as a nonprofit profit we didn't
see a path forward there so we needed
some of the benefits of capitalism but
not too much and the new board of open
AI is Rife with the profiteers who've
been extracting value from working
people for decades they're also not open
none of this stuff is just simply
available sure an old version of chat
jbt is free and kind of fun sometimes
but open ai's Real product is enterprise
software doing Partnerships with other
giant tech companies and loads of stuff
we don't even know about defense
contracts included openai has a product
to sell a product they see as having
inevitable near Universal proliferation
which is a pretty damn good business
plan but it's dangerous for the rest of
us you remember what Tim O'Reilly said
about the Uber problem here's how it
applies to AI all of the smaller AI
firms are already starting to fold uh
because there are a couple uh in in the
form of open Ai and anthropic that are
incredibly heavily funded that have tens
of billions of dollars of capital and we
don't know that they're the best
companies we just know that they're the
ones that big investors picked up early
and so we have a defective kind of of
Market where if you really believe in
the wisdom of millions of people making
independent decisions based on optimal
information uh to kind of do work this
free magic mark Market we don't have
that any we have a Central Committee of
deep pocketed investors it all
illuminates elon's lawsuit against open
AI when he and Alman had once been such
good friends I'm looking for a new video
game to play can you give me a
recommendation OverWatch I play
OverWatch yeah great
um uh I named it opening ey um after
open source um it is in fact closed
Source it should be renamed super close
source for maximum profit AI um but he
has his own for sale for profit AI that
he wants to be predominant he made it
open source in a seemingly empty gesture
but meanwhile Nvidia Microsoft and
Google all want to take control of the
tech that will change our future and
destroy our jobs it doesn't matter that
these guys say they're doing it for good
it matters what they are actually doing
look at the daong of the internet itself
or Web 2.0 that's social media and user
generated content all of that seemed
great and yeah the modern internet has
obviously had a lot of clear benefits
but it was also pretty quickly ruined by
giant corporations and profit motive
we're already starting to see effects of
the AI power grab Nvidia the main
producer of the chips used for AI is
partnering with a company that wants to
replace nurses with an AI that costs $9
an hour look at anything from the
history of the American Medicine
industry will a new lowcost tool
actually help patients or just pad
investor Pockets companies are using AI
to do job interviews and it's shutting
out applicants unfairly and on a simply
annoying level they're spitting out
content that's making the internet even
more unusable than it already was AI
generated LinkedIn comments why don't
you just not post anything if you don't
have anything to say so what are we
going to do about this well
let's turn to Sam Alman for advice he
has what he calls the more good guys
than bad guys approach he wrote in that
mors law essay there are bad humans but
all humans are within a magnitude are as
powerful as one another and the good
humans band together to stop the bad
humans it's been that way through all of
history so far what if the bad humans
are actually the people building the
system one built entirely on fast
profits and Monopoly advancing as
quickly as possible then we need more
good guys and we've got them they're
like 12 people what if we all stand up
and say no when electricity was first
becoming widespread it was still
dangerous for the low paid workers who
were setting up the systems but those
workers stood together and formed the
International Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers that's the electricians union to
demand safer jobs and and better wages
it worked and it didn't hamper progress
we clearly have electricity today right
that same concept applies to AI too
remember the writer strike the
screenwriters Guild stood up and said no
to AI taking their jobs Senator Bernie
Sanders just introduced legislation for
a shorter work week do we continue the
trend that technology only benefits the
people on top or do we demand that these
transformational changes benefit working
people and one of the benefits must be a
lower work week if AI is going to make
workers more productive and labor
cheaper workers should be able to take
advantage of it AI cannot exist without
being trained on all that Humanity has
done before that's literally how Chachi
PT the way most people interact with AI
was built by reading a bunch of stuff
online and then synthesizing it so it
can talk
if all of this is built on the labor of
all of humanity then it should be all of
humanity that
benefits thank you so much for watching
if you want to support more human
written human edited human shot videos
like this please don't forget to like
And subscribe
