Paul I think that you reached the
conclusion a long time ago I guess
initially for environmentalist reasons
and now for additional reasons spiritual
reasons cultural reasons that there's
something inherently self-limiting about
modernity that there's a there there are
there are problems with modernity which
will out and I sort of ended up reaching
the same conclusion maybe fire slightly
different themes but yeah the same
conclusion that this there's there's a
this is not going to continue
indefinitely um should we start Maybe by
talking about your your early
environmentalist qualms
about modernity per se yeah it's it's
very interesting how so many people
are kind of concluding Lighting on the
same unpleasant conclusion from
completely different angles at the
moment because it's increasingly
inescapable really so for me I mean I
became an environmental activist because
I loved the natural world because I
loved the connection it gave me with
something that was bigger than myself I
think now um and I became an activist at
University and I was in my early 20s so
I was young and arrogant and utopian and
all the other things you are in your
early 20 s and I thought that we could
you know we could save the world and
back then it was this was the early '90s
so environmentalism was still fairly
young it wasn't ubiquitous like it is
now you wouldn't see climate change in
the newspapers for example so it still
felt quite radical it hadn't been
corporatized and colonized by all the
mainstream narratives and it felt like
it felt to me anyway that
environmentalism was a challenge to
modernity in the first place and
actually if you look back at the origins
of the movement and some of its pioneers
and it's thinkers firstly interestingly
quite a lot of them were quite
conservative with a small sea
traditionalist in the sense that they
believed we need to go back to human
scale ways of living but also they were
very openly challenging the the premises
of the modern world which really spoke
to me because I felt even back then that
there was something wrong with it even
though I couldn't quite explain what it
was so environmentalism for me was
always a probably slightly romantic and
probably unrealistic attempt to sort of
turn the oil tanker of modernity around
um from the perspective of the natural
world which it which it ravages and
destroys you can't separate
industrialism you can't separate
modernity from about the 1800s or the
1700s onwards from the burning of fossil
fuels you know that's really if there's
one thing that changes the course of
humanity is discovering a ton of
fossilized dinosaur bones and trees
under the under the surface of the Earth
which it turns out you can burn and
create an incredibly intense burst of
energy that that that there has been
absolutely nothing like before and once
you've got through it there will be
nothing like again and if you start to
examine the history of the modern world
not just the obvious
technological uh boosts that you get
from that but everything else um from
obviously the creation of European
Empires which are enabled through the
technologies that fossil fuels creates
from the telegraph to the the steamship
but also things like liberalism you know
the individualism that we enjoy that we
can experience because we have
technology to liberate us from the
things we needed to do as families and
communities before and the modern
Medical Systems enable us to prevent our
children dying so that we can have Herer
of them and all these other things I
mean almost everything from liberalism
to democracy to feminism to the internet
is enabled by fossil fuels which we now
know are changing the climate so we've
got all that anyway so environmentalism
for me was a sort of attempt to turn
this around and it sort of becomes
obvious fairly quickly that you can't
turn it
around um you cannot turn the fossil
fueled economy off firstly because we
like it even though we pretend sometimes
that we don't we like to blame the oil
companies for climate change and they
are to blame but so are we because we
like the things that modernity gives us
and even if we don't like them we have
to use them and it's just no the entire
world now has become technologized and
caught up in the system you can't turn
it around and so what's happened is we
are we are going through um what I think
is a giant poent at the moment and the
pretense is that we can make the
industrial economy
sustainable and what that means is we
can somehow replace the intensity of
fossil fuels with some other fuel source
whether it's you know Renewables or
nuclear or some other thing that they're
just about to invent but they never
quite somehow do there's no evidence
that that can work at all and there's no
evidence that people are going to put up
with an an industrial
economy that is not correct there's no
evidence that people are going to put up
either with the consequences of the
industrial economy or with the
consequences of not having one if you
like so we're all we're all stuck in
this bind anyway the short version of
the story is that I
decided by the early 2000s that
environmentalism was becoming
unrealistic because it was calling for
things which weren't possible which
included attempting to turn modernity
around or to make uh industrialism
sustainable by using wind farms and
solar panels or to uh save the Earth in
100 days or whatever else was going on
and so when I started writing about that
it was still a fairly rare thing to say
I think 15 years or so ago it's become
quite a common thing to say now and I
launched the dark Mountain project with
doled Hine in 2009 which was built on
the basis of a Manifesto in which we
both sat down and said look this Society
is unsustainable and therefore it cannot
be sustained and if that's true we ought
to start living like it's true and
particularly as writers we ought to
start writing like it's true and where
does that leave us and what we wanted to
do was try and follow the the logic of
that down which I suppose I've been
doing since then so yeah
environmentalism became to me a
well-intentioned but completely
unrealistic attempt to either make
modernity sustainable or to stop it
happening and it's too late in my view
to do either of them you know the um
three-part typology of En Mentalist the
bright greens the dark greens the light
greens you're familiar with this listen
as you want so the light greens are the
sort of I think what you're describing
there sort of mainstream
environmentalist view of turn the tap
off while you're brushing your teeth put
a solar panel on your house like Minor
Adjustments but basically our lifestyle
Remains the Same and we'll be okay um
the bright greens are the radical
technology people who say we just need
to you know colonize Mars whatever like
the next front here is what will solve
this and the dark greens I was about to
ask I think is where you now find
yourself right the the actually the
whole
thing is UN unsustainable that the
Industrial Revolution
itself will end up destroying the planet
one way or another yeah I would say so
well I mean I I've almost come out of
the other side of that I mean that's
where I found myself 15 years ago
strangely enough I find myself as an
Orthodox Christian these days which
takes me Beyond dark greenness as well
but yeah yeah absolutely um that gives
you a whole other perspective which we
can talk about later but yeah absolutely
I mean I was I was a dark green for a
long time that was the basis of the dark
Mountain project and really the dark
greens versus the bright greens is is is
the thing that's worth focusing on
because those are the two I mean the the
the you know the middle ground is
neither here nor there because this
thing doesn't work so you can either
just be realistic and face up to that
fact and see where it takes you or you
can try and continue busting through the
limits which is what the bright green
want to do you know we create food in
Vats and we fly off to Mars and colonize
that and we mine the asteroids and we
somehow develop nuclear fision or Fusion
or whichever one it is that they're
always about to invent um and there's
always a miracle technology that's going
to save us that's the The Ellen musk
kind of worldview which is very popular
because it's a kind of a last ditch I
think you know that line for The
Simpsons um where hom says um alcohol
the cause of and solution to all life's
problems so it's like technology the
cause of and all pretty much that's
where we bright green view yeah that's
where we are and you can't you can't
pretend that either of those things is
not true you have to have both at once
but then the thing that frightens me
about dark greens is
um I think that it's all very well I'm I
don't mind about giving up flying I
don't like flying anyway I don't mind
about giving up whatever like mass
produced fashion there's all sorts of
stuff that you could ditch and actually
would probably be happier for it and
maybe it would actually be better for us
all to live more slowly and grow veg and
keep chickens and stuff that's fine but
there is a lot of other stuff actually
that comes along with Industrial
Revolution which we're going to miss
dreadfully if and when we lose it I'm
thinking of things like sanitation
vaccines modern Medical Technology full
stop that's and and also just the
acknowledgement that if we don't have
fossil fuels we probably can't sustain
the population size that we have right
now and so and and what's the route to
getting there right like there's a lot
of very very frightening thoughts
lurking behind this topology I think the
problem comes when you adop when you
turn any of
these perceptions into a political
position so the dark green thing is
useful in the sense that it can make you
it can give you a very realistic AR
stringent political position where you
or or or not political position but
understanding of where we are and where
we just say look this thing has happened
we're in here now but it's not going to
go on so we're going to end up it's
going to end up fading away if you turn
that into a political position whereby
you think that you have to destroy
industrial society in order to save the
planet and there are a few people like
that around then you very quickly become
a kind of dangerous misanthropist and
I've known a few of them and been on the
verge of becoming one at times in my
life as well I have to say because if
you really love the natural world and
can see what's being done to it by
industrialism then is a logical position
you know the only way to save the planet
is to destroy industrial society and
there's a logic to that actually but
obviously it can lead to Horrors and
anyway it's no more realistic than
flying to Mars because you're not going
to do it but you're right um there isn't
a com thing is we've got ourselves into
a situation that there isn't a
comfortable or easy way out of there's
no simple solution because it's not a
problem it's not a mathematical puzzle
that you can somehow solve it's just we
did a thing we discovered all these
fields and we went oh great look at this
and then we had this huge huge kind of
Festival of invention and and and
creation which has completely reshaped
the world we're now completely dependent
on it and it's destroying us and it's
destroying the the the the Ecology of
the planet and there is not an easy way
out of that we just have to somehow
Bumble through whatever's going to come
which is probably not going to be
pleasant but I just don't I think that
anyone who offers an easy solution
whether
it's primitivism or escaping to another
planet is offering something foolish and
dangerous and there's no historical
template for this because this hasn't
happened before there is we've not done
an industrial revolution before it's
like the what it's like it's like the
collapse of an Empire which is what it
is but it's an Empire on a global scale
it's the human Empire and it's a
technological Empire the like of which
we haven't had before I mean all empires
have been technological we've had Fairly
Advanced Technologies at different
stages in history the Egyptians did the
the Romans did although of course it was
all based on human slavery rather than
fossil fuels so it's not as if we
haven't lived in Empires which have
collapsed before but this is a global
one it's a global Empire and it's and
the technology and the number of people
and the sophistication is is not doesn't
have a precedent like you say so there
isn't there's there's no road map to it
we don't have any easy answers my
husband sometimes accuses me of being a
um his expression is collaps hard and my
lovely listeners have actually set up a
book club have actually set up a book
club in association with the podcast
called the collapsed hard book club
right um it's it's obviously a joke but
I do sometimes wonder in myself if I am
psychologically primed to expect this
kind of disaster not least because
millenarianism is such an important
aspect of of Christian
thinking do do you wonder the same if to
some extent this feeling that we're
rushing up into a void which I feel very
strongly might actually be a sort of a
psychological artifact or might be I
don't know a temperamental
urge people that's interesting one of we
got when we launched the dark Mountain
project we got called a lot of names uh
and one of my favorites was crazy
collapsitarian which is I think Prett
good so it's similar to collap basically
what collapse
means we got a lot of people telling us
that we were depressed and we needed to
see psychologists instead of writing
manifestos I think there's yeah there's
a couple of things aren't there so
firstly there's definitely a
temperamental type which likes to look
at these things um which you probably
are and I certainly am um I am just a
bit of a Doomer um and there's no doubt
about it you can just I've written nine
books and if you read them it's
impossible to deny
it so there it is there it is it doesn't
mean that the thing is not happening it
just means that some people like to look
at it and talk about it and write about
it and analyze it and other people want
to just avoid it or get on with their
lives um often people when they talk
about things like being a collapse
you know that there's a kind of sense of
superiority in it you know they like to
think of themselves as the good people
and you as the the the baddy who likes
to focus on the negatives maybe that can
be true sometimes but it's also possible
that they're in denial and you're just
facing the reality which is another way
of looking at the situation because if
this is true then it's an important
thing to be looking at and I think it is
true and you don't do yourself any
favors by pretending it's not happening
because you don't like it which is a
very common human reaction to any any
kind of pain which is what this is right
just avoid it hope it goes away maybe
someone else will deal with it put it
off till the last minute that's what
we're doing as a society I think it's
you know we're going through the stages
of grief and we're still somewhere in
between denial and bargaining I think
that's what we're doing denial is
pretending it's not happening bargaining
is putting up the putting up the solar
panels and the wind farms eventually you
have to come to acceptance maybe some
people just come to acceptance more
quickly that's that's another way of
looking at it
um the Christian thing is interesting
because it's true that Christianity is
focused on you know it ends with an
apocalypse which then turns into a new
beginning um and so there is a there's
probably a cultural sense of that having
said that my wife comes from an Indian
family she her family were her parents
moved to England from India in the 60s
and so she she's born in Britain like me
but she her family are Indian so her
religion is sik and the siks believe
like well like all Indian religions
really they believe in a kind of great
cycle of
Ages and um the age that we're in at the
moment according to the siks is called
the kjug which the Hindus call the kuga
which is this dark age in which
everything is collapsing in which truth
is impossible to see everything is
smothered by lies everything's falling
apart and after the kjug comes a
collapse but then the cycle begins again
and you go through all these different
ages so that's not a Christian
perspective but it's still a perspective
which is able to see that there come
times where things just collapse and
fall away and disintegrate and then you
have to go back to the beginning again
so whether you see it as a kind of
apocalyptic ending and then a return to
the kingdom of God which I suppose is a
Christian perspective or a endless
number of cycles in which this stuff
keeps on happening lots of different
cultures have this understanding that
there are times when things just
collapse and everything comes apart and
and interestingly when you talk when I
talk to my wife about the kuk there's a
lot of concentration there in about on
deceit and humans denial about the
situation and the deceit of their rulers
and the sense of kind of moral collapse
and again you can look at you can look
at um accounts of of life in the late
Roman Empire and you can see the same
sort of thing being recorded So it's
it's true that there's a Christian sense
of Apocalypse but it's also true that
society's collapse all the time
endlessly every Empire that's ever
existed has collapsed and this one is
now collapsing too
that's the way I see it it's just that
this collapse which will probably be
slow and take centuries is global rather
than Regional and that's the difference
yeah the slow and Tech centuries point
is an important one because I think that
um maybe disaster movies have primed us
for this to think of a great event you
know that may always be on the horizon I
remember reading such a great substack
essay by an anonymous writer a little
while ago about the um political fantasy
inherent in Zombie Apocalypse movies
where what happens in Zombie Apocalypse
movies is that there's a single event
there's a there's you know there's a
there's a day Zero where something
disastrous happens and what inevitably
happens is that our hero who's a sort of
small town American male who's
undervalued in his own time his skills
become enormously important and he's
sort of Vindicated because he's able to
flourish in this basically
post-political landscape where there are
no people left there are just rampaging
zombies and you just have to kind of
fend there's like there's like an
American individualist fantasy I think
in the Zombie Apocalypse movie but
that's not what we're talking about
we're not talking about a single event
we're talking about as a a gradual
disintegration as the world becomes
smaller things we used to have available
to us are no longer available to us
technology stops working stops
developing everything just kind of
Retreats that seem seems like I mean
that's that seems to have been mostly
what happened with Rome obviously you
have some some dramatic moments but
generally this this this it takes
centuries is actually the norm
historically and yeah it's happened to
everyone before us so there's no really
no reason to think it won't happen to us
too yeah the com the zombie thing makes
me think of Tremors with Kevin Bacon
which if you haven't seen it it's one of
the world's best films um fantastic it's
just like a zombie apocalypse is set
with giant underground
worms uh it's exactly that story a bunch
of small town Hicks save the world or at
least save their Community it's great
it's actually I wrote I wrote some
essays during the covid pandemic which
got me into trouble um but one of them
was because they were a critique
critique of the response to the pandemic
but one of them actually talked I wrote
a bit about how we had primed and
actually been primed by so many disaster
films about deadly viruses to behave
towards covid as if it were the deadly
virus that we'd seen on the films and so
we immediately react and our governments
reacted as if this is the big one here
it comes lock yourself inside it's going
to kill everybody and then actually it
turned out not to be that bad and the
arguably the response was a lot worse
than the pandemic but we responded and
certainly the media responded in exactly
the way that we'd seen on the on the
films about deadly viruses like you know
28 Days Later or something where
everybody dies except 5% of the
population and yes there's a hero who
comes to sort of put everything right
again or at least to survive and we've
been so primed by that story that we we
exist within it so um we like one of the
things that we one of the points we made
in the dark Mountain Manifesto actually
is that there's two stories we like as a
culture one of them is exactly that it's
apocalypse everything suddenly ends
right so there's a nuclear war there's a
deadly virus there's a zombie attack
endless numbers of films and stories
about that you wake up one day and
everything's dead and then you have to
get your gun out and you have to fight
the zombies and there is a kind of
purist relief to it it's like yeah all
the crap's over no more culture
going to work I just have toes now you
it's like
refesh you are the zombie and you know
it's that that's a story that we like
even though we wouldn't want to live
through it in a way it's recognizable
and the other story that we like is the
Star Trek story which is the story that
ellon musk and his crew are living in
which is the sort of liberal democracy
and progress go on forever and ever and
they expand out into the universe and we
have a kind of Galactic un and we're all
flying around in spaceships and we can
live forever and teleport and that's
attractive as well because we'll be fun
to live in that um but the actual future
is possibly going to be more like the
long drawn out collapse of Rome or any
other culture that takes so long that at
the time you're not even necessarily
aware that you're living in it in quite
the same way you know things just grind
down over a long period which is seems
to me is what's already happening when
people talk about the collapse of Rome
incidentally from the perspective of an
Orthodox Christian it's quite
interesting because of course Rome the
Western Roman Empire went well the
Western Roman Empire declined but the
the center of Rome moved to the east so
it moved to Constantinople and
technically the Roman Empire didn't end
till the 15th century when Islam finally
conquered Constantinople so that was in
its own in in its own sort of decline it
was a very long drawn out period of all
sorts of things happening there's no
obvious explosion where the barbarians
just pour into the gates one day and
then that's the end of that there's an
American writer John Michael GRE we
still have the Roman Catholic
Church well we do we do indeed I I was
going to say there's an American writer
John Michael Greer who has this phrase
in fact he wrote a book based on this
phrase the long descent which is what
which is how he frames the same thing
which is I think a really good way of
looking at it that's what we're going
through already we're going through a
long descent and that it will be
punctuated by periods of collapse and
horror and awfulness and then probably
periods of stability and Decline and
maybe even some times when things look
like they're getting better but over
several centuries it's a good bet that
industrialism will just fade away and
we'll be somewhere else that won't look
quite like premodernity but certainly
won't look like modernity either that
would be if I had to put money on
something that I won't be around to
see that's probably what it would be I
return to the human Norm yeah it seems
overly to be the most likely outcome and
that's the thing and as I say fossil
fuels for For Better or For Worse have
completely changed absolutely everything
about the way that we live in
fundamental ways um I've even about
allowed us to believe we've abolished
religion for example because we don't
need it anymore um and yeah we will be
returning to the human Norm which is
better in some ways and worse in others
and people are going to become more
religious I mean as as I you know the um
the the two this of course feeds into
the birth rates question as well right
and one of the things that I've been
forced to conclude from looking at the
data on um fertility rates cross culture
Al is that there is a there seems to be
something I don't know something in the
human brain where you reach a certain
level of comfort and affluence and
people lose a desire to reproduce not
just lose the desire to have 2.1 kids
you know lose the desire to have any
kids and this is seems to be a really
consistent thing across our species the
only exceptions are um some we've
mentioned Elon Musk already right some
eccentric billionaires and uh country
like Israel which isn't really
representative because it faces such
severe security threats but this has is
quite fertile and is um and is wealthy
but apart from that this seems to be a
very very very strong uh
Trend and what it makes me wonder about
is whether or not that suggests that in
some way modernity cannot last because
if as soon as you reach that threshold
of uh abundance technological
sophistication affluence peace Comfort
all of these things which we I mean our
revealed preference is that we like
these things we strive for them as human
beings but that as soon as you hit that
point the society starts to collapse in
on itself because it people stop wanting
to reproduce and so and right now the
people who are continuing to reproduce
apart from the world's poor most in
subsaharan Africa are um religious
people overwhelmingly there's a best
predictor and it and it and it it even
down to the fine grain of you know how
often you go to church predicts how many
children you'll have on average going
once a week versus once a month versus
once a year tracks fertility so I'm
forced to conclude that basically
religion is going to have the last laugh
and soon that
secularism as we know it seems to be
self-d deleting many of you will know
that Christianity is a subject of
Fascination for me and the role of
Christianity in shaping the modern world
is a theme I return to again and again
on the podcast my view is that we really
can't understand the world or ourselves
without getting to grips with it which
is why I'm very glad to point you
towards a new online course called 321
it's an introduction to Christianity
that's imaginative thoughtful engaging
it assumes absolutely no pror knowledge
it's presented by the wonderful Glenn
scrier who has been a guest on the mmm
podcast previously and I've also been a
guest on his show Glenn presents eight
video Leed sessions which are based
around some beautiful animated stories
that illustrate the Christian message
you can check it out for free at 321c
course.com
just enter your email choose a password
and you're in there's no spam there's no
fees just visit 321 course.com for
mmm I think so I think secularism is
another one of these products of
modernity secularism comes from
liberalism liberalism comes from
Enlightenment rationalism that comes
from a certain type of protestantism
add that to fossil fuels Scientific
Revolution Etc you get a very culturally
contingent thing which really comes from
the Western World and calls itself
secularism and for a Time lives on this
fantasy and I think it is a fantasy that
you can somehow create a rationalist
public space where people can be
religious or not be religious it's
entirely up to them I grew up believing
religion would fade away because that's
what we all thought I mean I was I'm 50
now I'm just over 50 and and that was
that was what our generation thought
religion fade away because it's nonsense
it was just stories people told before
they had science we don't need it
anymore so there's still a few religious
people down in the poor bits of the
world but you know the Richer they get
the more religious they'll stop being
there are more religious people in the
world today than there was when I was
were when I was born atheism and
secularism are a tiny proportion of the
planet and they exist in this very very
modern quote developed part of the world
where as you say people have stopped
having children we're also very clearly
in a
a place of cultural disintegration we're
rejecting all of our ancestral stories
we uh are confused about our gender we
are having an endless ongoing culture
War we don't function as a culture
anymore we're ripping ourselves apart
for whatever reason um and as you say
the birth rate's collapsing and that's
requiring a project of mass immigration
to keep the economies going which isn't
sustainable either because it's a ponai
scheme because when the immigrants get
old they'll need more immigr and
eventually you run out of immigrants the
whole thing doesn't work and we're
already in a position of trying to prop
up this system which almost every level
doesn't seem healthy if it was healthy
we'd be the happiest people in the world
and I'm pretty sure we're not so yeah I
think it's interesting is again as an
Orthodox Christian you know I I come
across people with big families all the
time interestingly especially Americans
I come across I meet a lot of American
Orthodox Christians some of them have
got six or eight children um and and in
Eastern Europe people still often have
larger families and we do in the west
and it's quite it's quite converted to
me I have two children but I regard big
families As A really lovely thing and
I've seen so many of these Orthodox
families that are just seems much more
natural and normal um but I think
absolutely religion if you take religion
seriously if you believe there is a God
then God puts God is somewhere in your
heart and you need to connect with him
all the time and we have tried to create
a society in which we don't do that
because we don't believe in it and so if
you Dethrone God if you remove him from
the center of your culture and every
culture that's ever existed has had God
or the gods at the heart of the culture
somehow if you Dethrone God you have to
put something else on the throne because
there's always a throne and what we've
put on the throne is is ourselves so we
worship ourselves we worship the self we
use technology to make the self live as
long as possible the self wants to
colonize Mars the self wants to go on
and on and on um worship of the self of
course is what the devil does that's
that's Lucifer's offer so off we go we
worship the self um and we start to eat
ourselves and then we fall apart and so
religion is a cultural system which for
all of its flaws helps us to focus on
the bigger picture and so a society that
has religion at its heart will have hope
and it will have belief in something
beyond the self and something beyond our
personal desire and every religious
system I've ever come
across tells its adherence to put their
personal desires second and focus on God
God and focus on other people and focus
on community Jesus tells us to love our
neighbor all the time because we can see
God in our neighbor and God in our enemy
as well come to that and that's the
opposite of worshiping the self there's
an essay I wrote in my book about the
machine that I'm putting together and
when I talked about modern science and
magic and how they come from the same
roote um and I wrote a bit about alist
Crowley who's increasingly seems to be a
kind of symbolic figure for the modern
world and of course his famous dict to
is do what thou wilt
and that's what we do do what they will
is pretty much the the Mantra of the
Modern Age and you you oppose it to the
Christian uh Mantra if you like teaching
which is thy will be done which is what
we say to God so we've got do what thou
Wilt which is the modern modern
formulation versus thy will be done
which is the traditional one and the
traditional one is going to win out
because we've tried to build a culture
based on just fulfilling our personal
pleasure and ironically it hasn't is not
even giving us much pleasure at this
point you know it's just looking a bit
horrible and decadent and so yeah
everywhere I look as well I see I see
religion winning out as you've written
somewhere the armish are growing the
Mormons are growing the Orthodox are
growing um and all the secularists are
all shrinking so do give that another
couple of generations we just fade away
cheery thought well I mean it isn't away
right yeah but yeah the alternative is
human extinction yeah yeah well well I
think you know here's the thing this
stuff all sounds very doomy to a certain
type of person but to me it's it's
optimistic this is my perverted brand of
optimism because you know I think there
is God and I think there's a way to live
in relationship to God and I think
there's a way to live in relationship to
our families and our communities and
without idealizing the past which we
should try and avoid doing because you
know had plenty of problems as does the
present we can say that that way of
living actually does give us a sense of
hope and forward motion whereas this one
which is supposed to make us look
forward and we call ourselves
Progressive after all it doesn't seem to
be doing that it seems to me to be
making us depressed and nihilistic and
selfish and almost suicidal at this
point culturally um because it's not
based on the truth it's it's based on
self- worship um and it's and it's a
delusion and so if it's a delusion it it
has to end I think the reason that this
isn't actually a Duma story even though
it sort of looks like it is because um
it provides really very good evidence
that Christianity is
true if the it's not as though we're
being kind of smited by Thunderbolts per
se right but it does seem to be the case
that living
against Christianity rejecting it living
in ways that are in direct opposition to
what the Bible
teaches causes harm causes people to be
unhappy causes problems causes it like
it's it seems to be An Almighty error
you know I say advisedly Almighty error
um and I think that the people who and
and and some of this is proofed through
the birth rate things some of this is
proofed through yes as you say the
worship of the self and how that seems
to make very very reliably make people
utterly miserable and cause terrible
social problems and if if Christianity
is true then that's a good thing because
it means the Christian promise is true
as well it's interesting isn't it it's
because you mentioned the smiting and
the smiting is very old testament way of
seeing something and I I think about
this a lot and I think what does this
mean and what it means I think is there
are simply consequences to your actions
so the Christian story is that we are
created as free individuals right from
the beginning right in the Garden of
Eden and God says okay here are the
rules here's how how you should live but
you're free to do what you want but by
the way don't eat that because if you
eat that there will be
consequences and we do eat that and then
there are consequences and the expulsion
from the Garden of Eden for example
which is the removal of human beings
from their original connection with God
and connection with the rest of creation
and falling away into work and labor and
self-centeredness and War and
interestingly industrial society which
develops just two generations after
after the fall as a consequence of it
that's simply a consequence of our
actions it's not even a punishment as
such it's a consequence God says here
are the rules here's how you live here's
you can either live in communion with me
and you can grow uh in communion with me
or you can go off and follow your own
follow your own path which by the way
that snake who is the devil will want
you to do because that's his offer and
that's the offer we choose right from
the beginning we choose to follow that
path of the self and then there are just
consequences the Tower of Babel falls
down Sodom and Gomorrah collapse Empires
fall the Israelites spend 40 years in
the
wilderness you know Moses goes up the
mountain and he comes down to find them
worshiping a golden Cal so that's the
end of that as well we repeatedly fall
away from the law of God and then we get
corrected and we don't have to
be struck down by lightning we get
corrected by the consequences of our of
the failure of what we do the thing we
create just doesn't work we build the
Tower the tower collapses because it
can't exist because it doesn't operate
within the law of God so that's the
story as I understand it and it is as
you say quite simple it shows you that
there is a there is a moral law there is
a universal law there is a law of God
and you know what it is you know how to
live and however imperfectly you try to
live it you know what to do and if you
decide you're going to rebel against it
which is what we've done for hundreds of
years yeah you you're you're going to
have a fall the tower's going to come
down and I think the tower's coming down
with us inside it at the moment the
thing I wonder about though is whether
or not
um whether or not technology
itself is in some way in defiance of
that moral law because people people
have pursued I mean sometimes people
have pursued technological innovation
for selfish and hristic reasons but some
but often not often it's pursued with
the best possible intentions you know
people the people who the overwhelmingly
men overwhel many English men who say
invented
vaccination or modern sewage systems or
any of these things which have saved
countless lives they they were
Christians and they did this with the
best possible intentions and they didn't
know and they couldn't know that it
would produce say overpopulation and all
the problems that would lead to you know
I mean we can we can say now looking at
the sequence of events of the Industrial
Revolution and onwards that you have
this kind of cascade of it's like what
they talk about in um child birth the
intervention Cascade right you intervene
in one way in the natural process of
child birth and then you have to
intervene again and then you have to
intervene again you have to remedy the
side effects of that intervention that's
what you
in the industrial
revolution but people did it with the
best possible intentions and the bright
greens are doing it with the best
possible
intentions is it still possible that
that's that that's still wrong is it
still you know should we be more should
we be more more opposed to technology
per se well I am I'm instinctively
opposed to it but that's me um I mean
everything is usually done with the best
of intentions most people think they
have good intentions so
very few people probably say to
themselves I'm going to go and do
something really evil now I'm going to
do this thing I'm going to I'm going to
do an evil thing
um you can always find the best of
intentions but you're right I mean the
people who started the Industrial
Revolution were Christians the people
who started the Scientific Revolution
were Christians the Enlightenment
thinkers were Christians and there's a
strong strain of thinking within
Christianity which says God has given us
these gifts and so we have to use them
you know we're supposed to be
co-creators here and not least
intelligence technology yeah so and
there's something to that yeah because
humans are questing creatures and we
can't just sit here and do nothing we
have these skills we have these brains
we have these opposable thumbs we do
things we create things um you know
building a cathedral over a 100 years is
an enormously complex
technological um uh process if you like
so there's a notion that uh the
historian Ronald Wright developed which
he called the progress trap which is
another way of just talking about what
you were just talking about with the
Cascades whereby we develop a technology
to solve a problem it then causes new
problems then you have to develop a
bunch of new technologies to solve that
one um so we for example we developed
the Green Revolution back in the 1960s
and we go look at this this is fantastic
we can double food production um but of
course we've done it through creating
artificial pesticides and fertilizers
they rely on fossil fuels they also
destroy the natural world they kill off
the the insects they destroy the soil so
then you've got to do something about
that and every time the progress trap
the ratchet is kind of tightened you're
going deeper and deeper and deeper into
a Reliance on technology and then you
get to the point where you can't back
out now because you have so many complex
things going on that's pretty much where
we are at the moment we can't stop using
technology even if we want to we can
limit it in our lives I try to limit it
in mine but I can't live without the
internet I can't live without a car I
can't live without various things I just
have to have to function just the way it
is um you both make a living on the
internet well everybody does I mean like
I said my Indian mother-in-law who moved
from the Punjab in the 60s and has never
used any technology in her life apart
from a telephone she's had to get a
tablet just to use her bank account she
goes down the local bank they won't let
her take take the money out so this is
how it goes you you know you're wound
into this thing deeper and deeper all
the time I tend to think that
maybe maybe the answer with technology
is again spiritual so the answer is not
never to use any technology because how
would you even do that language is a
technology fire is a technology humans
can't not do that but if you put
technology to a kind of spiritual test
or a community test then you're asking
yourself what you're developing it for
and maybe you have more of a chance of
controlling it so a good example would
be the arish which we mentioned earlier
which I'm Who I'm no means an expert on
but my understanding of this is that in
an armish
Community Technology is always put to a
test so a new piece of technology will
be introduced say say smartphones the
armish will say right we'll try
smartphones for a year and everything's
done through Community meetings so
they'll introduce the phone in their
community and then they will monitor how
it actually impacts them how it impacts
their religious life their Community
Life their family life and then they'll
meet again in another year and they'll
say right should we keep this or not and
some of them decide to and some of them
decide not to and you can say to
yourself what does this technology do
does it cause Community harm does it it
sever me from nature does it mean that
I'm on a screen all day and I don't talk
to my family does it do something to my
concentration span what does it do to
the natural world how do we judge this
having a critical intelligent attitude
to technology and also asking who
technology serves does it serve God does
it serve your community does it serve
your selfishness does it serve greed
does it serve capitalism whatever those
are the questions that we almost never
ask we just go is it cool does it make
things go faster can it create a profit
yes
and even if we don't like it it's
inevitable so we just have to do it
anyway and it's it's a kind of ignorant
childish way of responding to technology
and because we live in a society that
worships technology because it's the
only thing that we think could save us
from almost any of our problems we have
a completely uncritical attitude to it
so again the answer is probably not
destroy all the machines which you can't
do
or just bring bring on everything
because it's all fantastic it's to have
an intelligent attitude to ask yourself
what what the machines are actually
serving which God are they serving there
is a political program that comes out of
this though right I me I know we spoke
earlier about the simplistic kind of
political offerings of say the bright
greens or the light greens but you you
have to reach some very political
conclusions from looking
at our past and our future in these
terms you can't I mean for one thing the
the the well so going back to the birth
rates question for instance
people say you mention Mass immigration
as a sticking plaster for this or indeed
I mean any number of uh there are also
some some disturbing transhumanist
visions of sort of growing babies in
Vats and so on so that you can keep
feeding the uh economic growth
engine I look at this and I think
well or maybe we just have to let the
welfare state die mhm it's only existed
for like 100 years out of 200 thousand
years of human history like maybe the
the idea that you just have to keep
growing GDP in order to maintain this
given that we live in a world with
finite
resources and the land mass of Britain
thinking just about britan is really
just not that large at the end in the
end right maybe what this means is
actually all of this stuff that cannot
exist without constant population growth
actually cannot exist full stop and so
what you know how do we get there I mean
this has been this is we we're talking
just after general election where every
single party has promised pensions
protection and and and more money for
the NHS and just funneling more and more
money into a welfare system which is
very new and clearly very
unsustainable I I I mean the the the
political um point that pops out of what
we're talking about in a in a grander at
the grander scale is also at the modest
scale we can't do that sorry we have to
this isn't this isn't sustainable and no
no no um voter base wants to hear that
no they don't and and look at the things
that almost all the political parties
promised in Britain so on the one hand
we're going to lower immigration but
we're also going to have economic growth
and we're also going to protect nature
and we're also going to build loads more
houses and the NHS is going to be funded
forever and it's going to work really
well and you're all going to get great
pensions and those things do not fit
together and oh by the way we're also
going to get to zero carbon and etc etc
they don't fit but as you say people are
we because we're all dependent on this
machine we don't want anything to be
taken away because we depend on the
things or we just like the things and
the things we've become dependent on in
just the last few decades which never
existed when I was a kid the internet
being the most obvious one but also that
the the holidays people think they need
and then consumer crap that they think
they need that people now imagine they
can't live without um the NHS was only
created when really when my mom was born
um and even then it was a fairly limited
thing um and now it's expected to do
absolutely everything for absolutely
everyone all the time and we worship it
like a God and it is unsustainable and
politically the realistic thing to do is
to say okay yeah look I mean
interestingly this is what some of the
green parties tried to do for a while
and some of them still do is to say
actually look you need a transition
right so You' got a transition from this
high energy destructive culture to a low
energy non-destructive culture that is
sustainable and people have written
books on this they've laid out whole
plans and programs about it there's some
intelligent stuff out there but no one's
going to ever vote for it that's the
basic problem no one is ever going to
choose it because you have to choose a
self-limiting lifestyle and even if by
some miracle one country could be
persuaded to vote for some smaller scale
lower technology more sustainable way of
living it would still operate within a
global economy which would destroy it
financially within about two seconds and
then the Americans would
invade something would happen you know
and you know it's because you're are
operating in this global system now
where everything is highly techn
technologized if you like it's almost
impossible certainly impossible for me I
come to a dead end thinking about it to
to imagine how you could elect a future
so the only conclusion I've come to is
that that has to be done small scale
within local communities in a way that's
to come back to the arish again the the
way that they do that you know small
scale
localism can work still difficult but um
I I've come to a sort of um if I if I
have to think about politics which I've
sort of retreated from just because I
got so stuck with it and I don't think
it's it's the solution um I'd rather
concentrate on prayer which I'm much
less good at than thinking about
politics but it's much more important um
so I've got that I've got that project
but the only solution that I can come to
in terms of solutions is I think we're
going think we're on this long descent
we're in this long collapse and so the
rational thing is to be very
clear-headed about what's going on not
to delude yourself at the same time not
to try and wallow in Doom because here
we all are and The World Is Still
Beautiful um but to you know think about
small scale local Alternatives how you
can actually make a community work how
you can rebuild the things that you need
whether that's how to communicate with
your neighbors and cooperate with them
or what technology you would need or
what food you can grow we do a little
bit of that on the land we moved to here
in Ireland but it's just a small scale
thing but the communities that are going
to survive probably in the long term
will be people who have religion people
who have good numbers of children
because they have religion people who
have strong families people who are
living in communities with others who
think like that who are sharing things
um have an intelligent critical attitude
to
technology um those people have a better
chance of coming through than anyone
else because as you say they're actually
realistic in terms of what the world is
is we think that we're a terribly
realistic culture but we're actually
living in a fantasy so that to me seems
to be the Best Way Forward because
you're not going to you're not going to
get a political party that's going to
promise you anything that will ever get
elected by anybody it's it's it goes at
a a more fundamental human level than
that I think yeah and I think that when
political parties do employ
um
environmentalist agendas you mentioned
it zero I mean like on the micro scale
but one environmentalist policy
supposedly which I really don't like
because I think it's actually
um class Warfare in Disguise is ulz in
London this is a very parochial issue
for you know as a Londoner but um it's
basically a tax on people using
polluting vehicles in central London and
what it means in practice is that
Tradesmen who are normally white working
class who have been displaced from
London over the last few decades who
live outside of London and need to drive
in in order to perform their trades
whatever it is and need to bring their
tools and so can't use public transport
and who can't afford to buy fancy new
Eco vehicles that they basically get
taxed with the full knowledge that
they're not labor voters anyway and so
the labor meraly can just persecute them
basically without any consequences
except I mean there's been the sort of
mind minor local battles over UL cameras
being destroyed by activists and stuff
like that I mean it's all very small
scale but it's it's an example of this
actually envir environmentalism being
used as a stick with which to beat one's
political enemies which is I think
normally what you actually see happening
in practice when environmentalist aims
are pursued by governments it's not
really that one it doesn't I mean as if
UL is going to make any difference
whatsoever to our to our it might make
some difference I spose air pollution
but it's not going to make any
difference to our carbon emissions as a
nation I think that that's I think we
should be very
uh alert to the misuse of
these ideas the trouble is here because
we're again we're so dependent on this
machine we've all be become interlocked
into the industrial system um we're
completely dependent upon it but we know
that that system is environmentally
destructive and if it's true that the
climate is changing at the rate at which
a lot of the scientists seem to think
it's changing you need to radically
reduce its emissions and no one's going
to vote for that so you've got into a
political binary here where the greens
are using big sticks to beat people um
and not even very effectively it has to
be said because the emissions aren't
going down at all um people then resent
that and then there's a reaction against
it so on the one hand you have a sort of
left green group of people who seem to
think we should use the state to be
as uh authoritarian as possible to
protect the planet
and then on the other hand you got a
bunch of people on the right who
increasingly hate the greens and so they
want to pretend the climate isn't even
changing at all and we should be able to
drive and fly as much as we like and
screw all the hippies um and neither of
those is is a sustainable solution it's
just turned into a culture War battle
it's a left right battle but it stems
from the fact that we are all dependent
on the machine for our lives and any
reduction in its activities is going to
affect us negatively that's just the
reality but because we live in a
democracy everyone's pretending that's
not true including the greens they're
all pretending that we can have a lovely
future that we can all all elect but we
can't we're actually going to have to
cut a load of stuff out people would
have to stop driving and flying and
using the internet at anything like the
level they do at the moment to make
modernity remotely sustainable even if
that were possible and no one's going to
vote for that so you end up backing into
a kind of green authoritarianism which
then creates a reaction and then you're
stuck in in a political fight again um
and it's because of that depend on on
the machine that we all have because
nobody wants their stuff to be taken
away from them and as you say there's a
class element to it and the greens tend
to be middle class and the people who
don't have a voice tend not to be so uh
that's that's the way that works out um
it's always it's always easy to beat the
working class with a stick and pretend
you're doing it for the planet as well
the episode is not over there is another
maybe 30 minutes of content but it is
behind a pay wall if you would like
access to that content if you would like
to show support for the show PID
subscriptions are what keep it on the
road allow me to pay my producers put
food on the table all that important
stuff the extended version of the
podcast is available at my substack
louis. substack tocom that's where you
can also find as I say every week bonus
episodes extended episodes uh the mm
chat Community all of this um please
sign up for a pay subscription it makes
such an enormous difference to my
ability to keep producing the podcast
and grow it even bigger produce more
episodes all that good stuff there are
other ways you can show your support for
the show as well you can rate and review
us on Apple podcasts you can like us on
YouTube you can tell your friends and
family uh how much you like the show if
you find it valuable all of these things
make an enormous difference to our
ability to keep making it thank you so
much
