does anyone remember where they were
when the first season of stranger things
came out do you remember the initial
Word of Mouth spread for a previously
unknown spooky little TV show set in
the80s I remember exactly where I was I
was at a family friend's house where
after walking in and asking um oh what
what's this You' put on they they say um
oh it's just a it's just a it's called a
stranger stranger things and I go oh all
right I guess I guess we'll we watch it
give it a go oh whatever and then the
credit
started oh my
God can't we ended up watching the uh
the entire thing in one day I'm pretty
sure now this family friend's house was
the kind of house that has just slightly
better everything you know the sofa was
larger they had a a nice kitchen they
had a bigger TV and most importantly
they had Netflix this is back before
Netflix was like a staple on most
televisions okay every time we visited
this family friend's house we'd
eventually have to go back with our our
horrible sofa our tiny little kitchen
and our old TV with no Netflix on it yes
that's right for the formative years of
my childhood I grew up just like rushy
sunac famously Sky
TV that was something that we never had
growing up I'm old enough to have had a
childhood where the TV and the Wi-Fi by
were two separate things but still that
never stopped me from watching things
you don't know how many  DVDs I
owned okay how many DVDs I went out and
bought if I heard about like a film or a
show that I really wanted to watch you'd
either have to go to a shop and buy the
DVD or you'd have to order it on Amazon
and then wait like a week for it to show
up sweet sweet memories of waiting for
my Buffy season 1 DVD to show up and
then you know being met with this
no I won't go
back with all this in mind you have to
understand what it was like to have such
an abundance of film and television at
your fingertips we as a family
eventually got a new TV that had Netflix
on it around 2017 so kind of late into
the game and look the remote even has a
has a Netflix button on it little did I
know that in the current day whenever I
now look at the same Netflix button I'm
filed dread anguish for what Netflix has
become the broken promise the hubris
there was a bit of a Netflix sweet spot
in the 2010s when you know Disney hadn't
taken off its programming there was less
of this kind of sectioning off and
exclusivity that we have now with Disney
plus and Paramount plus and HBO or
whatever it seems that the people behind
Netflix at the time knew that eventually
this would be our reality so essentially
you know Netflix were the first
Prospectors in a kind of media gold rush
with streaming we can bring you a much
different and much better experience
than what you get when watching
traditional television downloading a
movie or even playing a DVD streaming
means that it's entirely on demand and
always ready to watch instantly on
virtually any device that connects to
the internet Netflix streaming puts you
in full control you can even pause fast
forward or rewind as you see fit so give
Netflix a try and enjoy your favorite
shows and movies entirely on your
schedule the main thing that was so good
about the new stream system was the
Newfound convenience gone are the days
of you know stacked up DVDs and
scratched up discs and waiting for a
show to be repeated on broadcast no you
can watch whatever you want whenever you
want wherever you want for however long
you want in other words I can watch
Gilmore Girls until 3:00 a.m. and no one
can stop
me around 2013 Netflix started producing
their own original content because they
were worried about the longevity of
having to pay for the licensing of
everything on their platform in case you
know the office or friends was just
yanked off their platform and they
needed something else to fall back on
that initial first round of Netflix
original shows was basically just put in
place so that more people would have a
reason to subscribe to their service it
was just a little bit more exclusive so
essentially you want your original
content to match the Val value of your
subscription cost as a basic principle
you want it to be worth it if a Netflix
original show gets talked about enough
through word of mouth you're going to
have more and more Curious people you
know subscribing to your service to
check it out a show like Orange is the
New Black for example there is so much
soul and amazing character work in that
show like I I really love the show it's
one of my favorite shows and I'm just
glad that Netflix originally took a risk
and made it and made it well I think it
was just cool of Netflix to start a
brand of content based immediately on
Artistic integrity and and trusting the
people behind it I think that's really
cool and then Netflix of course started
making money and then it all flew out
the window this is a bowling ball and
this is a cake
what so in recent years the whole
Netflix brand has become a bit of a joke
like everyone's kind of over them now
they're kind of the super villain of the
industry but like not good super
villains just super villains that keep
making really bad decisions and
canceling shows basically they used to
be cool but now they're not the the
second season of Russian Dell just
premiered on Netflix and two things you
definitely want to be associated with
right now are Russia and
Netflix obviously Netflix in terms of
Company Success are doing very well they
have a lot of money maybe they're doing
too well maybe they're getting too
powerful honestly they're like Palpatine
where it's like he's too dangerous to be
kept alive I feel like if you just went
up to someone in the street and asked
like what's your opinion on Netflix they
just
go hates that look like everyday
objects okay but why is it like this
like how did we get here how did this
start is Netflix's bad decision making
the the cause or an effect of the state
of the industry and who is making these
decisions honestly I spent an
embarrassingly long time
trying to write this video as like a
cohesive video essay one long thing it's
just so hard there's so much to talk
about so I have made this into a list a
list of the reasons why Netflix is bad
number one dwindling of the original
Vision When I Say the original Vision I
mean the vision of the creative people
behind Netflix the people behind the
Netflix originals because of course the
vision of the executives is very
different you know their Vision mostly
consists of whatever's on a graph and
yeah some profit and did we pass quota
this quarter and I don't know I've never
been an executive I don't know what it's
like we're talking about the creative
Workforce I'm sure their initial Vision
was very wide-eyed and bright and
excited for the future of Netflix our
goal is to deliver a compelling
affordable and easy to use service that
you'll want as one of your entertainment
options so if you keep watching we'll
keep adding more of what you love
Netflix was making a lot of promises to
creative people and kind of selling
Netflix as a kind of new way of doing
things separate from the the Hollywood
dominated industry you know if you're a
creative person working in the
television industry at the Forefront of
something new like this you're going to
try and and do the best you can you're
going to try and make the best product
that you can to try and be the change
that you've always wanted to see in the
industry I went into the Netflix
building I sat with the president of
Netflix and I said I want to make kids
history and that's what this is a lot of
the people brought on to Netflix were
already people that were kind of screwed
over by the industry so they expected
things to be a bit different you know
initially in the Netflix originals you
had like geni Cohen and baz lurman there
were CH to assist as David Fincher
Gilmore Girls was coming back for a new
special or whatever so I'm sure a lot of
them went into Netflix expecting things
to be different
it's very easy to romanticize this idea
of early Netflix you know before
everything went downhill the good old
days but I don't think it's necessarily
important to paint this picture of
Netflix being in conflict with with the
corporate and the creative side because
that's a battle that's been going on in
the industry since like since the
beginning I think it's an inherent part
of the industry that you can't escape so
maybe Netflix isn't that different after
all okay okay so I think it might be
best if we start putting some faces to
the the ideology that I'm trying to
explain right now next number two
underne management this is probably
going to be the lengthiest section of
the video like this is the bit that I'm
personally like really invested in I'm
surprised there hasn't been any drama
videos about this okay okay so there are
multiple characters in the Netflix
behind the scenes landscape first is the
original Chief content officer turned
CEO eventually Ted Sandos who to me just
seems like a bit of a strange person and
he looks like a character from
succession he looks like the type of
person that Logan Roy would shout at you
know Ted surrenders to me seems like a
very basic you know CEO character
there's not that much special with him
he is Trailblazer Ted Sando Chief
content officer for Netflix who
singlehandedly is catapulting Hollywood
into the future giving birth to the
binge watch digital streamer now turn
big budget Studio doesn't play by
industry rues back when Netflix was you
know building a foundation with their
Netflix originals a face that just keeps
popping up everywhere in like all the
photos behind the scenes at the
premieres with the show Runners was the
VP of original content Cindy Holland
Cindy was behind all of Netflix's best
shows you know all of Netflix's W's show
was behind like stranger things and
sense 8 and all the Marvel shows and how
cars and BoJack Horseman and Grayson
Frankie Russian Dole most importantly
she was in the trenches making Orange's
new black back when you know no one knew
that it was really going to work out
they were just kind of taking a risk and
honestly I think that deserves some
respect look at her she knows she's cool
she's like yeah the first show I did was
a highly explicit lesbian prison drama
what about it what's wrong what to Kia I
get the feeling that Cindy was the one
behind the scenes kind of creating this
feeling of creative freedom she seems to
have had a lot of close relationships
with the people behind the scenes of the
shows that she oversaw and she's there
hugging the people in oranges and New
Black in at the very beginning she's
almost like a kind of cool teacher guys
I know you might be scared that I'm the
chief content officer here at Netflix
but honestly just call me Cindy you know
I'm your friend yeah just like just
chill out man I'm Cindy in loads of
Clips where Cindy is explaining the
original vision for Netflix the point of
creative freedom and having a positive
work environment come up a lot bringing
in really you know big names and and and
the idea of total freedom can be
problematic you know we want to
entertain the world so we need to have a
lot of artists come join us and from the
very beginning we wanted to create an
environment that was freeing and not
stifling hire smart people you give them
the right support and then you you know
let them do their work and I think a lot
of the industry operates in a culture of
fear and we don't yeah so we're not
afraid to try a bunch of different
things some of which which may work some
of which may not if David Fincher and
jeni Cohan didn't have a good experience
with us on their first shows they
wouldn't have come back for more but
they both have right one of the things
I'm most proud of is that we've created
I think one of the best working
environments for artists in Hollywood
the fact that Natasha Leon is also in
this clip is a complete coincidence like
wherever Netflix is natas Leon is you
know that's just a fact of life okay so
the vision that Cindy laid out in that
clip from 2018 seem like the kind of
vision you'd want someone in charge of
TV to have and not only does Cindy have
the vision she has the goods to back it
up like look at all the shows that she
made they're just it's really good just
ignore this one photo yet like don't
don't look at that one okay don't look
at that one don't look at it stop
looking at it no what are you doing
don't look at it there's also a moment
in this video where Cindy explains that
you know with Netflix's streaming model
you can cater to people's a natural
eclectic taste in what they watch you
know stemming from the DVD service we
had ,000 titles on DVD and what you
learn from that when you have a catalog
of foreign films and indie films and
documentaries and not just what
traditional Hollywood makes you know you
realize that people have really diverse
and eclectic tastes and you can program
to those people don't watch the same
thing over and over again they watch all
sorts of stuff so being creative is
important and there's no point as a
studio to make the same thing over and
over again
right right a bit of foreshadowing there
for you you want a bit of that you want
a bit of that foreshadowing there you go
okay so since 2013 Ted and Cindy have
been the Dream Team behind all your
favorite shows but a really pivotal
point in Netflix's history came in 2020
when they had like records amount of
growth and it makes sense it's the
pandemic everyone's at home you know
with nothing better to do you know
watching TV um watching um Tiger King
Tiger King is yeah I don't know time is
an illusion there was a really big
culture shift at Netflix as they
realized with these you know Rising
growing numbers how powerful they really
were Netflix were just you know at the
top of the world and Ted Sandos who I
mentioned earlier as being the chief
content officer of Netflix working
alongside Cindy Holland was in July 2020
promoted and named the co-ceo of Netflix
and like two months after that in
September for whatever reason Cindy
Holland was ousted so what what are you
going to say at my funeral now that
you've killed
me here lies the body of the Cindy was
seemingly replaced with our next
character in this story Bella beeria who
is the new Chief content officer of
Netflix basically she runs this town
nothing gets made nowadays without Bella
knowing about it at the time the sudden
switch over and Fire Ring of Holland was
reported as being a huge turning point
for Netflix and I think that that
turning point is widely reflected in the
content that they're making nowadays all
you have to do is compare the shows that
Bella and Cindy have worked on you know
there is a clear dip in quality and just
The Vibes are off okay The Vibes are off
there is something about Bella beeria
which irks me I don't know what it is
maybe it's the fact that I know deep
down subconsciously that she's worked on
these horrible shows and I don't know
she has a very California energy which I
would describe as like Trisha Peter's
voice she has that m going on you know
she at one time I was fired and that was
really confusing cuz ID had success in
the job and it was an incredibly
difficult time but it taught me so much
and it didn't break me it actually led
me to this job which I love and look as
funny as this all is I don't want to
make this about uh pitting two women
against each other I don't want I don't
want to do that you the industry does
that quite lot already I just think it's
interesting how you know these two women
have such different ways of doing the
same job the change in leadership kind
of signals a change in Netflix's overall
work ethic there's one article from The
Hollywood Reporter which I think
perfectly sums up this situation by
describing it as the beginning of the
walm martiz of Netflix that sounds like
a video essay title the walm martiz of
Netflix this particular article is very
good at detailing the ins and outs of
the 2020 shift at Netflix and the
article claims to have interviewed um
top crators and insiders which I take
with a grain of salt you know this is
all alleged okay I'm just going to read
from the article Now sources say that
Holland was the one who nurtured strong
relationships with talent and took time
to offer thoughtful development notes
while still making people feel safe and
supported in pursuing their passion
projects that service was built on the
back of Cindy H's taste says one I could
give you a list of names of people who
would lie down on railroad tracks for
her Ted is a fan of content not a picker
I have a strong dislike for the word
content I'm not going to lie it's kind
of robotic and it kind of cheapens what
it is you know content I can't wait to
consume content it's like on social
media when they call it a feed like it's
feed me content I must be fed it's like
we're a bunch of winking pigs you know
waiting for the
slop yes thank you for another season of
never have I ever barbecue Showdown yes
I must consume former Insider says
Sand's volume strategy began to prove
destructive to the culture and the
quality of the services offerings Ted is
great at managing growth but the company
hit a phase where they needed to be
managed differently whether Holland's
spendy approach itself would have proved
sustainable is a question but several
creators believe Netflix lost much of
its early cache by over over rotating to
less expensive less curated and less
compelling or the company might say
broader Fair now this article goes on to
explain a bit more the kind of ever
expanding nature of Netflix's original
content and kind of explains that in
2016 both Cindy and Bella were working
in the original content but Bella was
managing the foreign language side of
the television whereas Cindy was working
on the main English side of things but
slowly Bella start dipping her toes into
Cindy's pool she apparently green lit
the now Infamous show starring Debbie
Ryan call back too earlier I guess
called insatiable if you don't know
insatiable was a 2017 Netflix original
where uh Debbie Ryan played a plus-size
high school girl who you know after
losing all her weight because um well in
the show they say that her jaw was wir
shut so she couldn't eat anything so
that's how she lost weight apparently
that's just like that's crazy that was
the story line I looked into it that was
that was the story line having my jaw
wired shut lost me more than just my
summer vacation it's a horrible show
it's just bad I mean Debbie Ryan in a
fat suit like for the First episodes it
genuinely reminds me of something that
Shane Dawson would made in his in his
Peak smells like vacon Anyway the point
is that Cindy Holland and her team at
the time passed on on insatiable they
didn't want to make it they were like no
that looks bad not making that sorry but
then Bella behind Cindy and everyone's
back was like no we're going to make
this show don't worry Debbie we're going
to make your really bad show cuz that's
what Netflix is all about you know I
walked into the uh the Netflix office
and sat down with the president of
Netflix I said I want to make a horrible
show and that's what this is I don't
want to sound judgmental but I'm going
to sound judgmental what was Bella
thinking like there's a there's a clear
division in taste level here it's called
it insociable gate within the halls of
Netflix this s says it gave the power of
green light to several people it caused
absolute demoralization and Chaos
everybody thought it was a terrible
thing that Ted did allowing one team to
Greenlight something that another team
had passed on Ted wanting to increase
content by a huge amount started to look
to Bella as what the company should be
Cindy kept saying we should still be
betting on high-end craters and making
some cheap things too as Holland
expressed unhappiness with the Border
strategy an Insider says that the
response was that things would work out
fine if maybe one in 10 shows works this
is one of the things that Cindy and Ted
disagreed on for a while this person
says see I think the biggest thing that
this change in leadership signals is
Netflix's attitude towards the corporate
buzzword of growth number three growth
like I said in 2020 Netflix had records
amount of growth and when confronted
with record-breaking growth Netflix's
gold as a company with with their
original content goes from you know
making the best thing you can with
really respected creators to global
domination the creation of Netflix's
content used to be split between Global
non-english and English programming
that's why Cindy and Bella were working
at the same time now that Cindy is gone
Bella just has free Reign Over Global TV
she's known as the head of Global TV and
Netflix because her domain is the entire
world and in all of the clips I see of
Bella she's talking about spreading
Netflix's influence all across the world
when it comes to Global ambition Netflix
is clearly ahead of the competition
Latin America has had you rich history
of Storytelling so many great movies and
TV shows and there there's great
creative ecosystem there and what's been
great is just to see it continue to grow
taking these big swings and having these
ambitious you know Productions and
really being able to expand that kind of
Storytelling is really exciting and look
I love that you know give people across
the world jobs but when your focus
becomes you know having as many
Productions across the world as possible
because money the emphasis on quality is
of course lost it's such a classic thing
to say quality and not quantity but
honestly it just Bears repeating like
Netflix look at that and they go um uh
guys uh I don't know what to do right
now was this what does it mean this is
not to say that Netflix hasn't made any
good programs since 2020 that's
obviously not true like look at like
Bridgeton and
um this isn't even meant to be a joke I
just genuinely can't remember I can't
remember any programs that they made um
baby baby reindeer squid game they did
squid game yes my title is head of
Global TV and people often ask me how do
you know when you have a global hit like
squid game we didn't know the squid game
would be the most watched TV series in
the world
not just for us for anybody like the
biggest Series in the world and there's
no way that anyone could have predicted
that on a personal level I wanted to
know if Bella had any more to bring to
this conversation like I wanted to know
what she had to say so I looked more
into it and found this one a New Yorker
article the article is called how much
Netflix can the world absorb Bella
bajeria who oversees the streaming
Giants hyper aggressive approach to TV
making says success is about recognizing
that people like having more no Bella no
this is the wrong Outlook to have no
stop Force feeding me  garbage no
no I can't explain how infuriating is to
hear that you know people people like
having more no I don't
no honestly flicking through Netflix
right now and trying to find something
to watch is just so hard like there's so
many options there's so much content
good luck trying to quickly decide what
to watch while you're trying to eat
something you know the amount of times I
tried to find something to watch while I
have something in front of me to eat and
then by the time I actually find
something my dinner is just cold I just
give up and put YouTube on that's what I
do there's one particular part of this
article that I find quite haunting at
some point Bella does start talking
about Cindy some of Cindy's shows are
tough people made them for Prestige and
for their friends she said but jia's
team more readily embraced the company's
new objective the executive said not
only to compete with cable but to
replace our television okay I was not
being hyperbolic before when I said that
Netflix's new strategy is just global
domination they've just flat out said it
now and what she means by that is
Netflix not only wants to keep doing
what they've been doing for years but
also wants to replicate all the aspects
of the pre-established television
industry like all the aspects the
reality shows the game shows the drama
the foreign language programming even
the really bad Channel filler that you'd
see on like a a Wednesday afternoon it's
really strange to me how you know
Netflix is easily like the biggest shift
in the industry that we've seen for a
while like when they came around
everything changed and they're so big
and successful that they have the power
to change the industry like they really
do they can you know do something
completely different start a new trend
and just completely change the industry
for the better but they choose to do
everything again I think they're
forgetting that shows like the floor is
lava would only exist on the traditional
television structure to fill gaps in the
schedule take up as much air time as
possible that's why a lot of game shows
have like
3,000 episodes because they're just
there to fill up airtime but no Netflix
want to they want to recreate that buter
actually goes yeah I want a bit of that
it's the hottest game show in
history it's very ironic because also in
this article there's a description of
what Bella is wearing and what she wears
quite a lot which is a kind of bed
blazer with the term art is truth
written on the pocket art it's trueth of
art is truth oh that's so powerful wow
art art art art just the hubris of it
all to imply that Netflix has the power
to replace all television whilst also
wearing a Blazer that lets everyone know
that I'm an artist like well done Bella
well done good good job Netflix have
kind of fell into this trap that a lot
of companies go through where everything
that used to make them special has kind
of gone out the window in order for
company growth the corporate idea of
growth means that all you're really
trying to do is just make a line on a
chart go up even if you're already at
the top you still you need to have the
growth Netflix actually had so much
growth and expansion in 20120 that it
seemed at one point a couple years later
they kind of hit a ceiling of their
subscriber number numbers now Netflix
are notoriously secretive about their
analytics and numbers but what we do
know is that in 2022 Netflix for the
first time actually lost subscribers
they lost about a million and of course
Netflix did the obvious thing where they
don't take accountability for anything
they literally just blame everyone else
oh did you forget that there was a war
in Ukraine that's why we lost
subscribers as you know it was it it was
the password sharing and the economy as
well it's not our fault it's everyone
else but the reality is is that Netflix
doesn't really have that much more room
to grow they already have a massive
subscriber base so Netflix now have no
choice because they've hit the top of
their subscriber base they have to
spread out into new business ventures
four business ventures and expansions
did I change settings yes am I sat on my
bed yes is it more comfortable yes are
we going to talk about it anymore no get
over it it's my YouTube channel this
section is probably going to be like
most embarrassing look for Netflix
because I mean it's kind of cringe isn't
it like really trying to expand into new
territory when you're basically just a
glorified DVD rental company and it just
plays into this idea of Netflix having a
big ego thinking that they can do
anything I guess it's good for like a
business to be a bit a bit malleable and
expand into new Ventures but Netflix
what the hell Netflix games what are you
do what what what we trying to do do
here as if the homepage wasn't badly
designed enough now we have this eyes
saw the quality of these games honestly
just reminds me of the kind of spam
adverts that you'd see on on Twitter
what is this underwater melon what
Netflix I'm already addicted to a game
just like this on my phone you're too
late this is horrible I hate this I hate
doing this it's easy anyway don't don't
mock me are you looking at me don't mock
me also with Netflix games you can kind
of tell that Netflix are being a bit a
bit Cory about it because you know
they've put beta next to it and they're
saying oh don't worry this is just a
work in progress and any issues and it's
not our fault okay we're trying to
figure things out guys it's a beta test
it's an excuse get this off my page it's
kind of uncharacteristic for Netflix to
be that koi about something usually they
have a lot more of an arrogant manner
kick off summer of new Netflix popcorn
cinnamon popcorn share with the family
you're going to love it step right out
popcorn Indiana honestly I have like a
picture perfect image of tids and randos
being being lured into making popcorn
for Netflix like almost like the villain
of Ratatouille when the villain of
Ratatouille makes some Chef Gusto
microwave meals or something like come
on Ted think of the money millions and
millions of burritos and it sells
burritos millions and millions of
burritos also on the topic of food
Netflix also at some point decided to
open up like a chain of popup
restaurants that were Netflix themed
orders up Netflix is cooking up
something special for fans of our
favorite food shows with the opening of
our first culinary space Netflix bites
an elevated dining experience from
several of our most well-known chefs
have you ever watched Chef's Table is it
cake or Iron Chef quester an iron Legend
and wish you could dive into your TV to
sample The Delectable dishes on screen
no quite frankly I've never watched any
of those shows and never wished that I
could dive into the TV screen also I
hate the name Netflix bites I'm just I
don't know what to say I'm just going to
sit with that for a bit I just hate that
name just I don't know what to say I
just don't like it Netflix bite bite I
just why is my voice Netflix bites will
marry our top food Talent with the
proven success of our popular live
experiences that's right Netflix has
done like live experiences and they list
them here the Queen's ball a bridon
experience stranger things the
experience money Heist The Experience
now with Netflix shares down about 37%
over the past 12 months the company is
hoping that experiences consumer
products in video games will help Drive
engagement and ultimately will also help
Drive Revenue Bridgerton Queens ball
it's happening in the evenings in
downtown Los Angeles it's also happening
at London I bet Cindy Holland is at home
thinking oh my God I'm so glad I got out
of Netflix at the right time because
like what is this Netflix are really
going for it when it comes to like live
experiences like they they're really
expanding this side of of their brand
Netflix have announced this uh intention
of a new Venture called Netflix house
which from the S of it would just be a a
continuation of these immersive
experiences but instead of popups around
the world they would be clustered into
one space not really a Disneyland style
but more of a a glor ified shopping mall
basically you've started to create toys
and live experiences you got the
Bridgerton ball all these traveling
experiences that we've been doing we're
going to pull them together and and
start to build out these more permanent
experiences this is a concept of one
something we're calling Netflix house uh
that will be full of these kind of
consumer experiences they'll be food
experiences basically taking what we've
learned from all of these putting them
under uh Under One Roof in several major
cities around the World Imagine Bing
with your partner to an orchestral cover
of a Taylor Swift song on the replica of
a Bridgeton set and then walking around
the corner to compete in the glass
bridge challenge from squid game after
pretending to fight for your life you've
worked up an appetite and want to get a
bite you see a nearby restaurant with
food inspired by Netflix shows from
around the world the meal is memorable
but you still want to buy some stranger
things merch luckily there's a shop that
sells that hellfire club t-shirt you've
always wanted not the hellfire club I
forgot about the hellfire club not the
Eddie mson cosplayers I don't know
Netflix as a brand is just a weird thing
to create as one big bubble because well
the intellectual property that Netflix
actually own is just kind of all over
the place there's no there's no F line
like it's all over the place you can't
really put it under one bubble I want to
dance on the Bridget in set and then
play the squid games and then buy a
t-shirt okay before you know it there's
going to be like a Netflix hotel and
then Jenny Nicholson's going to have to
do like a 4-Hour Deep dive into it I
would watch the hell out of that number
five pricing in making this video I
remember doing like a one of those
submit question things on my Instagram
story I was asking people directly if
they thought there was a particular
reason why Netflix has had a downfall
recently the majority of responses that
I've received were about the price and
how Netflix has been upping the price
over the years and is getting out of
hand and yeah that's like the main
narrative as to why Netflix has had a
downfall it's like the easiest kind of
numerical thing to point to I think
raising your price as a service is
that's one of the main things to
directly impact the consumer even if
someone doesn't use Netflix but still
pays for it you know maybe they have
kids that use Netflix and they don't
actually watch anything on it at the end
of every month they're still going to
get the notification that Netflix has
taken money out of their account and
every time it's just going to be like oh
Netflix oh Jesus just every month you're
reminded that Netflix is slowly drain R
in your bank account and it just hurts
but as Netflix gradually rais their
prices they think well well we we're
like a staple in the home we have
stranger things we have squid game
everyone's just going to have to make
sacrifices and Netflix is right you know
we are the Schmucks as much as people
like me complain about how Netflix is
bad or whatever we're still going to pay
for the convenience of watching stranger
things on the TV or on our phone
watching 11 do her thing back when
Netflix actually started their streaming
system the standard price was $8 a month
it's instant it's unlimited and it's
only 8 bucks a month start your free
trial today and then in 2014 they
announced that you know okay guys we're
going to up the price but we're going to
do it in 2 years okay we're giving you a
lot of warning we're going to up the
price just a little bit and we're going
to do it eventually please don't be
angry at us guys please but Netflix are
a lot less apologetic about it now you
know ever since 2016 the price of
Netflix has in some shape or form almost
every year gone up it used to be a
2-year warning for a little upping of
the price and now it's a yearly thing of
okay Netflix are upping the price again
remember when they first came around the
standard price was $8 and as of today
the standard price of Netflix is
$15.49 a month that is almost double I
say almost in that way because I I have
a little bit of a theory okay I think
they purposely made the price $15.49
cense because like you can't
mathematically round it up to 16 there's
a 1 cent difference if you added a cent
then it would go up to 1550 which then
would be rounded up to 16 and then 16 is
double of eight so a lot of people would
be able to make the headline Netflix has
doubled their streaming cost since they
began which is a very good headline
that's very eye-catching it really puts
into perspective a lot of things and I
understand like I wouldn't be as angry
about the price increases if it was just
you know boiled down to inflation or
something I don't know but no every time
there's a price increase Netflix cite
the reason as we're just investing more
in our original content which are you
are you investing more in your original
content Netflix because honestly it
doesn't feel like it in fact the quality
has gotten significantly worse this is a
bowling ball and this is a cake and if
there is a good quality Netflix original
show that doesn't necessarily mean that
you have to put loads of money behind it
and up your price to pay for it but no
Netflix have to pay for their real life
squid game and their interactive dining
experiences that's where the money is
going if you ever find yourself
wondering where the money is going this
is where the money is going and it's
also the fact that they make so much
content now their money is being spent
on just the volume of content I could
spew ACH bunch of statistics about how
much content they make but honestly I
think it would be best if I just show
you the amount of shows that they make
the Wikipedia article alone is just
insane
number six cancelling shows this is
probably the other most popular
suggestion on my Instagram story like a
lot of people get very heated about
topic and I think rightly so seeing that
never-ending list of content being made
by Netflix knowing that a show that you
got really invested in isn't going to
have a conclusion because it was
cancelled oh it hurts it's it's worse
than a breakup especially if a show ends
on a cliffhanger oh every so often
there's a discourse you know of angry
fans tweeting about their favorite show
getting cancels I remember hearing a lot
of discourse about like mind Hunter
Warrior nun the OA most recently the one
that people most angry about is this
show called the the the dead boy
detectives which is a show that I've
never watched I never even heard of it
before it was cancelled sadly and that's
just because you know I'm out of the
loop I don't really watch TV like I
don't really scroll through what's new
on Netflix anyway people on my Twitter
feed were very angry about this show
getting cancelled reminder that this
show had lower ratings in its first
season than dead boy detectives hey
Netflix quick question for you what the
is the point of watching any of your
shows if you're just going to cancel
after one season sooner or later all of
these cancellations are going to catch
up with you I can't believe you cancel
dead boy detectives a well-written
subbly acted labor of love to make room
in your budget for this garbage shame on
you your greed is strangling art I will
never forgive you for pretending this is
okay really wish you'd spend a fraction
of this promotional Budget on dead boy
detectives but you set it up to fail and
canceled it even though it had better
numbers than hot stoer season 1 shame on
you again I think this all boils down to
Netflix's obsession with growth putting
all of the budget into making as much
content as possible to you know replace
all television Netflix definitely could
have afforded to make another season of
this show like let's be real they could
have afforded it they have the money
it's somewhere they always have the
money but instead of keeping their
integrity and sticking with a program to
The Bitter End they prioritize having a
volume of content even if it means that
the content that they're making is
unfinished Netflix are notorious for
doing this now you know doing a first
season of a show investing in it and
then immediately canceling it because it
didn't do like squid game or Tiger King
numbers of growth it's an increasingly
harder criteria for shows to just get
made all the way through now and I don't
care if they try and justify this by
saying like it's really hard to compete
with Disney Plus or whatever here's the
business idea why don't you make shows
that are actually worth the subscription
price that I can watch from start to
finish you know number seven short
Seasons I literally just only want to
say that it's really annoying when shows
have like Eight Episodes a season and
then every season is like 2 years so
you're waiting every 2 years for like a
minimal Eight Episodes and it's just
like Doctor Who did that recently with
only eight episodes and it's just
annoying and I bet it's Netflix's fault
somehow because you're making a show
like more bingeable or something I know
it's just annoying just putting it out
there next number eight sag strike so
last year from the 14th of July to the
9th of November there was a mass strike
of members from the screen actor's guild
and the writer's Guild you probably
remember it it was it was very widely
talked about at the time I believe it's
like the longest strike in s history we
are being victimized by a very greedy
entity the entire business model has
been changed by streaming digital AI you
cannot change the business model as much
as it has changed and not expect the
contract to change too actors refused to
work Productions were delayed your
favorite celebrities took to the streets
oh there's natas Leon again one of the
main issues that caused the uh strike in
the first place was the issue of
residuals gained from streaming meaning
that Netflix was under yet another round
of scrutiny for essentially screwing
over the actors that appeared in their
shows by paying them in pennies like
actually pennies I remember seeing a a
particular video of an orange disy black
actress kamiko Glenn who was receiving
her residuals and it was just absolutely
nothing and look you can see the paper
it list the episodes that she was in
some of them amounting to a penny each
and alog together coming to the sum of
$27
.3 and just to say like she did have a
moderately large part in the show she's
not like an extra it's not enough to be
like a million dollar but like at least
$100 at least $100 $27 will buy you like
a pair of socks in Hollywood we saw this
a lot at the time you know a lot of
discourse about how the streaming system
is built and how actors are paid
considerably less than if they were on
say traditional television you can't on
the one hand brag about your 100
millionth of subscriber and then go oh
but we really can't give you you know a
very modest pay increase it just doesn't
work I think it's a very quick and
effective way to sway public opinion on
a company and its business dealings by
getting everyone's favorite actors out
on the street and getting them to spread
awareness about how Netflix is bad for
most of last year it was kind of cool
and Hip To Be anti- Hollywood and well
informed about Union issues let's say
and rightly so like Netflix were they
were absolutely evil at the beginning of
the strike it was said the studios and
streamers reportedly have no intentions
of negotiating with the Writers Guild
for several more months the end game is
to allow things to drag on until union
members start losing their apartments
and losing their houses and as this
became more and more like a Twitter
drama as if Netflix was an influencer
that was being cancelled a lot of like
Stan Twitter accounts would reply to
things and be like girl what about the
strike this really isn't a good look
this should have stayed in the drafts we
got to the point last year where uh
people were treating labor disputes as
if it was all just one big you know pop
crave headline you know at this point
it's just a universally Undisputed fact
that Netflix is not only bad content but
also just greedy and thanks to last
year's strike you know everyone knows
exactly how greedy they are number nine
design of the algorithm okay let's role
play for a bit let's say that I am a
person who never keeps tabs on the
industry I don't pay attention to the
news I never go on Twitter I don't have
any knowledge about Netflix's reputation
my only relationship to Netflix is the
fact that I pay for them and their
button is on the remote even if my
knowledge of Netflix was that small I
think I would still hate them is bad
products because this system that they
have is a mess okay Netflix opening
Netflix there's a lot of lag the S
titles that is lagging rolling for 5
years there's so many things top
searches uh games H what the hell is
this ignore my
wallpaper ignore it why is it auto
playing why are they so big look the TV
can't even keep up back to black what
the hell the main hurdle that people
have to overcome with Netflix is the
constant over stimulation the Panic of
not knowing what the hell to watch
because there's no more sense of quality
control at this point it's just so
frustrating to even scroll through
Netflix especially when you're with
another person oh it just it never ends
why don't we uh why don't we watch that
no I don't really feel like watching
that no well what do you feel like
watching I don't know like a comedy
movie or something like something
something funny you know okay well go to
the comedy film section because right
now you're looking at cookery programs
oh yeah yeah comedy section okay yeah my
veggie kabamba is getting cold okay I
have a veggie I have a veggie bad right
in front of me and it's getting cold it
just feels like you're scrolling for
like 20 years and you every program
every film has equal amounts of real
estate on the page it's just information
overload and I know that behind the
scenes there's going to be like a real
life web developer like a person whose
job it is to design all this and I'm
sorry if you're watching this but it's
just not good like it feels like it's
gotten so much worse the 2024 Netflix
experience is offering you like 300,000
different options and only 10 of them
being good and uh well good luck finding
them because not even the best web
design in the world could fix this
amount of over stuffing of content the
common criticism of of Netflix that you
hear in the industry people feel like
the programming on it has gotten
worse I think it's just there's more of
it and it's not all for you so that's
that's the truth so and it's not just
the expansion of original content
there's also a growing amount of cheaply
licensed titles that are put on there
because I know Disney took the good
stuff and Netflix has to feel like they
have a lot of content even if you're
never going to watch this and then even
if you put something on your watch list
for later and then have a moment where
you go you know what I'm going to watch
that thing now after all this time I'm
going to watch that thing you go back
and it it's not there it's not it's not
on Netflix anymore is a streaming
service supposed to be this stressful
because I'm so stressed out right now
okay I just want to watch something over
my veggie Kebab okay I want to eat my
veggie I've seen a common suggestion
from people that Netflix should add a a
random Choice button so that people feel
you know less pressured to find
something to watch but fundamentally I
think the need for a random Choice
button on a streaming service
is well let's see okay adding ads to
your service having a bundle of services
being offered as an option the service
choosing what to watch for you it all
kind of sounds like traditional cable
television doesn't it it doesn't it like
we're just back to square one this is
cable we're back we're back where we
started oh my God 10 the cycle I think
that streaming becoming inherently the
same thing as cable was always
inevitable it is the same money hungry
people and the same money hungry
companies behind this all so like did
you really expect there to be a change I
think that the main reason that people
paid for cable back in the day I sound
very American saying cable look if I say
cable then one knows what I'm talking
about so I'm just going to keep saying
cable okay don't make fun of me the main
reason that people paid for cable back
in the day was the feeling of choice you
know you have you have the whole world
at your fingertips you could choose
whatever you want out of all these
channels and then the downfall of cable
came in the fact that you know out of
all these channels that you were given
you'd only just end up watching like two
or three all the channels that you were
offered were really just garbage that
you wouldn't watch so it became harder
to justify the really expensive price
and at the time Netflix came in and they
all defiant like no we've put all the
good stuff into one place for a much
lower price using the power of the
internet it was like having a new
collection of box sets that you could
just you know just lightly scroll
through and be like oh I could watch
that bit of breaking pad oh I've never
watched breaking pad before I'll go and
watch Breaking Bad and then I'll watch
Mad Men and then I'll watch Gilmore
Girls and now streaming is at a similar
point to where cable was before it
downfall the economics of it all don't
make any sense the creative people are
struggling and the the companies behind
it all have a really inflated ego so
really I'm just waiting at the upper end
of this cycle just waiting for a new
Netflix to come around and be like we've
taken out all of the streaming services
and we've made it even more cost
effective starting 2035 yeah it's it's a
new dawn for the industry what a Boy Can
Dream I don't think that's going to
happen but a Boy Can Dream you might not
be able to tell by the runtime of this
video but I am thoroughly disappointed
by
Netflix the reason I started this video
on a little anecdote about stranger
things is honestly I just wanted to keep
alive like the the original vision of
what streaming could have been cuz it
really felt nice for a bit for like a
period of 2 years it felt really good a
lot of people's consensus now is that
streaming is actually worse than cable
ever was because cable television never
had like an algorithm that knew
everything about you not in the way that
Netflix does if I do some deep soul
searching and introspection and really
search Within Myself of you know what I
want to say right now I think what I
want to say is just I want my DVDs back
I want to feel how I felt when I played
a DVD and I opened on the BBC logo
like there has been a huge Resurgence of
people you know loving and appreciating
physical media and I'm not talking about
the usual nerdy people that collect like
Blu-Ray steel books or something I think
the everyday person is learning to
respect physical media again people were
realizing how much they love physical
media simply because streaming services
like Netflix have  up so badly
they have ruined their relationship with
their consumer there is an intrinsic
thing within people to collect you know
to bundle together all the things that
we love on a little shelf and you know
show appreciation for it and then our
collections that we've made for oursel
start to reflect something back at us
someone's collection of DVDs or vinyl
records will reflect the media
consumption in a very personal way like
when I was a little kid I did have a
collection of DVDs and if anyone took
the time of day to actually ask me I
would have been able to say where I got
the film when I got it if I liked it
what I liked about it what happens in it
I would have been able to tell you all
of it I like memorized all my DVDs you
might be able to tell that I spent a lot
of time indoors as a child I just think
that people's love for building like a
little collection of what they've
watched and what they want to watch is
just unavoidable that's why things like
letter box are so popular why we love
watching celebrities give their top four
favorite films and it's why I was up
late last night watching criterian
closet videos while I'm making this
video I find myself questioning more and
more like the reasons why I watch what I
watch and my relationship to what I
watch you know away from the algorithm
of the streaming services I think a big
reason is I like the feeling that I've
found something whether I was
recommended it or I found it by accident
a DVD collection feels like a uh a
collection of discoveries there's
something deep inside of me that wants
to be a curator of what I watch and
really whatever the hell is going on
behind the scenes at the the Netflix
office is honestly nothing special
because the people in that environment
will always be the same they will always
repeat the same mistakes that they've
always made and as much as they like to
think that they're the ones in charge of
what people watch no I'm in charge I'm
the one with the remote doesn't matter
if you replace all television or make
loads of popcorn you know it doesn't
matter doesn't matter it doesn't matter
if you wear a blazer that says art is
truth on it Bella what were you thinking
with that Blazer anyway uh Justice For
Dead boy detectives and uh justice for
Cindy
Holland anyway become a member subscribe
