these people are cheering on Pro far
lers and some of the others the
brutality of the USSR and like ran would
not have wanted to be in the same room
with these people and because of this
and I think that issue made me you
know that they're on the opposite sides
of this kind of Great Divide I think
really matters and really matters to how
you judge them like can you have been
honestly a supporter of
Stalin welcome everyone to our
discussion of The Visionaries by wolf
from
isenberger uh I have before me today a
panel of discussants who have lots of
reasons to want to talk about this book
the book I should read the subtitle of
arent bovar Rand V and the power of
philosophy
in dark times so one of the subjects of
this book these are four philosophers
all of them women living in the middle
of the 20th century and one of them IR
Rand is is someone that all of us have a
special interest in uh and that's why
I've assembled this group of of people
to discuss the book today so I'll let me
quickly introduce these people before we
get into the thick of things uh first we
have Greg sari who is a senior scholar
of of philosophy at the Salem Center at
the University of Texas he's also the
editor of the Blackwell companion to
irand so there's uh something that tells
you about why he's interested in Rand uh
we have my colleague Jason Ry who's a
fellow and instructor at The irran
Institute formerly a philosophy
Professor uh a expert in ancient
philosophy and we have shash mgram who
is a professor of English at Virginia
Tech she's written on subject ranging
from naov to Steinbeck she's a
specialist in irran she's currently
working on Iran's biography and I am Ben
bear I'm also fellow and instructor at
the IR Institute with Jason also
formerly a philosophy professor and uh I
saw this book uh advertised uh I think a
few months ago and then I read a review
of it in the New York Times and I said
well we I'd better read this and part of
my interest of course a big part of my
interest was that Rand is featured
and uh I was interested to see that she
was being put into a kind of virtual
conversation with uh these other
contemporary thinkers of her day um who
are most of whom are taken quite
seriously by uh by thinkers today by uh
philosophy departments today Rand is not
usually taken so seriously so it was
interesting to see an author uh putting
her into conversation and wanted to see
what the result was
so what do we want to say about this um
well I said I think we said we were
going to go around and first ask
everyone for their General take on the
book and then we'll we'll dig into the
reasons for those takes and I'll I'll
share mine once I've heard the rest of
you why don't we start with you
Greg um I also was attracted to the book
because uh it had ran in it's one of a
couple of books that came out I guess in
the last year this one came out in
German before but came out in English in
the last year that um treats Rand in
parallel with other figures so I was
intrigued by that Trend there's um
freedoms Furies by Sandifer which talks
about Rand along with Isabelle Patterson
and Rose Wilder Lane and um there's the
individualists by tamasi and jinsky that
talks about various thinkers that it
views as libertarian and so I see it as
a kind of part of a a literature that's
growing where rand's put in conversation
with people I was interested to see that
I was pleased that the author seems to
be taking her very seriously and taking
all the figures seriously I didn't feel
like he was casting shade on them he was
uh trying to be fair to their views and
I thought largely was fair to the
content of their views where I knew it
um uh it's easier for me to judge with
Rand than with the other figures I was a
little there were topics in rand's
thought that it seemed to me odd he
didn't bring up given the things he did
in the other thinkers thought and I have
a feeling if I knew each of the other
figures well I would have the the same
impression it felt a little bit random
what he included and what he didn't and
the book felt a little disunified but I
uh overall was happy to see it and um it
was thought-provoking uh shashana how
about you okay well I I pre-ordered this
book I was very interested in seeing
what he would do because all four of the
figures are of some interest even though
I'm most interested in irand Hanah arant
would be the second one that I'm
interested in in in read
uh what I also noticed that appealed to
me from the beginning was the the title
in German was different and the titon
German in some ways is better you know
it's the it's the the fire of Freedom uh
the rescue of philosophy in you know
difficult times and I thought oh
philosophy needs needs to be
rescued so that was interesting that he
was going to be talking about philosophy
and not just politics even though the
dark times led me to think that he would
be talking about the time I also was
interested in the fact that it was
limited by period 1933 to 1943 which
does take us up to einan's uh first
best-selling novel and one that she was
always proud to have
written when I read it I did I admit I
did look at the irand parts first then I
didn't notice what I thought was what
some inaccuracies but I thought well I'm
going to read the book from the
beginning and see how how it goes
because I was not as expert certainly
not any kind of an expert on Simon deir
when I started reading that I thought
let me check some of what I see here and
I actually had trouble with some of the
accuracy of what he said about deovir
right from the start and not even the
sort of thing that's a matter of
interpretation but he has a note and
then I look up the note and it does not
say what he's just summarized it as
being well that was useful because that
led me to see what I was going to see in
the book which is a big view by someone
who is enthusiastic and exciting and
maybe even in some ways would like to be
a novelist himself and a philosopher and
so he's allows his enthusiasm to make
him rush by niggling details which some
nickling details are important you know
you can call it nitpicking to criticize
errors but if you don't pick the nits
you're going to end up with a headful of
life
so I think it is important to try to get
things right and frankly that's
important to Hannah aett she talks about
the importance of Truth and what
totalitarianism does is that it erases
the difference between truth and
falsehood so I have to say that I
started reading it more as a novel and
as an impression than as something that
I could take as a
source Jason how about you um so the way
he conceives of this project it's
interesting play off what shashana just
said is he thinks of it as a kind of
non-fiction novel where he's balancing
sort of four characters and that's how
he thought of his previous book um the
time of magicians um and he planned a
third one in a sort of Trilogy we don't
know which four figures it was but he
describes it as he knows how to sort of
Juggle four balls at once and that's why
he does these but he doesn't think of it
as a kind of group biography like
biography of the bloomsberry group
because
there these figures are not really
directly in dialogue with one another
briefly deovir notes VI and they talked
once um but and there's a sense in which
he kind of creates a AIS in which VI and
Rand are are two polar ends and that's
sort of obvious in a way but um uh but
he's he picks a certain period of time
which is not the most fruitful period of
time to get the Magna Opera of these of
these women thinkers it's too early and
he knows he knows that but he his
interest he said in interviews is the
intersection of philosophy and biography
and like how what role philosophy plays
in a person's actual lived life um he
also thinks that current academic
philosophy is both stylistically and
intellectually Mor abund I don't
disagree and he finds it interesting
both that these four women want um all
of them when he was in graduate school
would not have been called philosophers
now they would um all of them wrote in
forms different from the kind of Aid
academic philosophical article for
professional philosophers and journals
all of you know they were interested in
writing fiction and journalism and so on
and that's sort of what he does but I
think it's ill conceived because
the you know the the the subtitle right
as shash mentioned right um it's the the
salvation by of philosophy in in dark
times now it's it's not so much the
people who say philosophy but I think he
partly means that in the sense of
they're keeping alive a kind of
philosophy that he thinks is worthy of a
name but what he also means is that
philosophy was keeping them alive under
in a period of incredible pressure and
the thing is is that that kind of comes
out I mean but part all that comes out
is these are three four incredibly
intellectually precocious and intense
thinkers whose lives are lives of ideas
and writing and sure okay um including
the dark times in their lives sure um
how it actually sort of saved them or
how it actively changed their personal
lives is unclear and where he kind of
weighs in on that I think he tends to
with the exception of Simone V he tends
to see um a mixture of authenticity and
self-deception um like it doesn't bear
out in their lives the way they you
would think it doesn't bear out in
dubois's life the way you would think it
doesn't bear out in in rant I think he
thinks Viet really does but VI didn't
save her it her thought killed her um
and in a very literal sense
so so I think if you wanted to create a
dialogue between four women who three
all of them are um displaced with the
events of World War II um they're all
women um intellectuals all born between
1905 and 1909 all writing in a
non-standard form all and all of them uh
anti-totalitarian in some sense and um
all of them interested in the
challenging dynamic between the self and
the other um you could do that and you
could make a really interesting
conversation but he didn't do that he
just recycled some biographies of these
people during a certain critical time
period in the world and in their lives
and makes hints suggestions about how
you can juxtapose them but neither does
the analytical work um nor uh in
philosophically for you nor um does the
kind of psychological work work in a
responsible and really thoughtful way
about how this was actually how these
thoughts were actually changing their
lives um and and not just a kind of
papering over of the problems in their
lives you know I agree I agree with what
you said obviously not a work of
scholarship because in a work of
scholarship you show where you've been
and other people can follow you there
you document everything but I think and
I I think I agree with you also that it
is not book that has a thesis and
demonstrates it it's possible that he
thinks that that's what other
philosophers do and he doesn't want to
do that uh and partly in some ways one
of the flaws turned into a virtue for me
because I could see he was not being
accurate so I thought if I want to
really know I I have to check it out for
myself and he made the characters seem
interesting but I think you're right in
that the whole doesn't add up and that
the very the very thing you mentioned
about the conversation is only hinted at
in one there's one place where he has
just set out on Rand and her ideas it's
around page 306 something like that and
he says what would the other three do if
they were going to discuss her ideas and
I and would they and he didn't name them
but he said would they think this would
they think that and I thought you know
that sounds like a really good book yeah
you know that that would that would be
the heart of an actual conversation but
it's almost as if he leaves that to the
reader yeah this would be okay as notes
for a book you plan on writing maybe but
not yet the book or background um and I
should just mention sh that um in terms
of he wasn't trying to do defend a
thesis and that's maybe what he thinks
other philosophers do I think that's
quite correct he his dissertation was on
Mikel Bactine and he says that one of
the themes he's interested in pursuing
in his work is that concept of of polyon
of just different voices and putting
them side by side um and I
think one part of that is just having
these different thinkers say what
they're saying at a certain period of
time or think what they're thinking but
I think it's also sort of leaving it to
the reader to make any kind of judgments
about why how they would relate to one
another um but in a way I mean you did
the work of picking your subjects and
picking your time frame that's most of
that's most of the the of the step
towards a kind of editorial a point of
view already so so now say something
about it and I don't think he does I
will say one thing I liked is that it
does he is he was attracted to these
women for I think all even if misguided
sometimes good reasons in in a sense um
their intelligence um their uh
intellectualness their their uh they're
kind of willing to do figure it out
write the way they want to write um and
their their and I think he thinks also
in certain sense their their courage or
maybe it's bravado sometimes that they
all they all think you know it's the
world that's wrong I'm right um and I'm
gonna defend it before I uh what did you
think Dan before I share my take I think
we should get clear on one important
thing which is pronunciation of the
second Simone's last name because I've
heard each of you say it differently and
according to the Audi book version that
I listened to and the Wikipedia
pronunciation guy it's ve Simone ve oh
sorry and uh but you know you it's to be
understood that it would be pronounced
different because it's spelled we i l um
sorry I guess because it's a German name
we tend to pronounce it in a German way
and but it's she was she didn't you I
guess write she didn't write in ger yeah
okay yeah so I I thought this was a very
interesting book to read
especially because of the kind of
novelistic quality of it where you're
not just reading about their ideas but
you're seeing uh what's happening in
their lives especially against the
backdrop of some pretty dramatic uh
geopolitical events of the period I mean
this is this people talk about how bad
things are politically these days and I
was reminded uh how much better things
are uh in comparison with mid 20th
century Europe uh by reading this book
but as to the treatment of the figures
so the one that I knew the most about
was Rand the one that I knew the least
about was Simone V and so I was
interested to learn about all these
figures uh and but also to be able
to make estimates about how accurate he
must be in presentations of their views
based on my knowledge of L Rand and how
well he's presenting her and on the
whole I thought it was better than a lot
of other treatments of Rand by non fans
uh but still there are definitely things
to uh to critique and we'll hopefully
talk about some of those
later uh one thing I would say is that I
about that is that I I read this book
one and a half times so I tried to
finish reading it a second time that I
would have so it would be better in my
memory and on the second pass through
although I didn't make it all the way I
I was definitely noticing more problems
with the presentation of Rand than I did
the first time um mostly because I think
there were double standards uh by which
she was being judged uh she the author
is holding her to standards that he
doesn't hold others to and I'll maybe
mention some of those examples later um
but uh it it gave me the sense that he
was trying to take her seriously in the
eyes of the audience without necessarily
really taking her as seriously as he
could have um but like I said we'll go
into some details about that later uh
Jason in your comments on the book can I
just um or if we're going to go into it
later but but let me just say I think I
don't think he's doing it as as a double
standard in the sense that like he isn't
taking her as seriously I think he's
very dependent on the secondary sources
and what they do wrong he kind of
repeats well I think he also has the
sort of style where if he thinks he has
something interesting to say he'll say
it and he won't necessarily check his
his work um and and so and yes it is
more forgiving a v
as compared to the other three um but I
don't think it's like at least from
things I've seen I think he thinks he's
he's generally interested in what Rand
is saying and what she's doing um and is
impressed as with her as a person even
if he doesn't agree with the ideas but
so yeah it can come off like well that's
more unfair to her than it is on this
than he was with some other dimension of
somebody else but I don't it it's almost
giving him too much credit to say that
it's a double standard I just think it's
he's just sloppy and kind of Hit or Miss
treatment of of Rand and nii I thought
was the weakest thing about his
treatment of Rand he reads her through
nii um and doesn't think enough about
points where she's where she's different
including in places where he sort of
indicates them once or twice early on he
indicates things but then that just goes
by the wayside in randis and ichan and
there's not thought of about well how is
how she similar and different from nii
uh relevant here and that's particularly
important if you're thinking about Ran's
thinking through the period of
totalitarianism what does she make of
the Nazis what does she make of the
Communists what does she make of the
right kind of social relationships and
again it's not like you could read the
book and not see that there's a
difference but it's so in the background
um and I think that's a the the worst
problem in the treatment of her and I
think for the benefit of our audience
and we've we've referenced Simone v a
few times now uh she's one of these four
subjects of the book we should we should
say something about the ideas about what
her ideas and maybe this is a way of
easing into uh discussion of what the
theme of the book is it came up already
once in this conversation that there's a
way in which the author rightly portrays
Ran's ideas as antithetical to V they're
kind of perfect antipodes in a way and
uh so we know Ein Rand is an advocate of
individualism of a kind of ethical
egoism and leser capitalism and Jason
how would you characterize V's very
different ideas they um begins as a
Marxist then becomes a um a non-marxist
socialist um kind of trade unionist um
and then she becomes a Catholic
Christian Mystic um um the through line
throughout her entire uh intellectual
life is an extremely intense form of of
altruism and a notion of um one's both
more obligations to others um though
that somewhat shifts at the very end
towards obligations to God
um she um she is anti-totalitarian in
the sense that she denounced both Soviet
Union and the Nazis and like ran was one
of the early people who was pointing out
that these are really the same I mean
that's basic they in a nutshell is for
most of her life just
intensely um preoccupied with others in
their suffering and that there is just
absolute moral obligation to do
something about the suffering of others
that nobody really has a right to be
happy or Alive While others are dying
and suffering um that's the kind of
essence of her for most of her life and
then it eventually becomes um I have
this God is talking to me and
Catholicism is the real thing and it
becomes even a kind of platonism where
real values are Transcendent not of this
world um the respective values of this
world including even the ego is an
illusion and a
sacri that's more or less they as I
understand her and what's what's
especially interesting about V is that
she's so intense about at least trying
to practice what she preaches which gets
to the the issue of how this book is
part of what this book is about is uh
the use of philosophy in life not just
in an academic setting because so she
early in her life when she's a Marxist
she goes to work uh in the factories so
that she can experience what it's like
to be uh a laborer and to deal with the
oppression of the capitalists in this
system and then she goes to fight in the
Spanish Civil War in her uh very
amateure kind of way but she's putting
herself uh in constant threat in
constant mortal Peril and then later
moves to you know working for if not
fighting for the free French and their
uh resistance against the the Nazis now
she's a she's a slight uh and sickly uh
uh young woman who's not able to handle
most of the physically demanding uh
tasks that she puts herself up to but
she's she doesn't seem to care about uh
her health or well-being and uh it's
it's always about finding the most
suffering people and working to to fight
for them it's more than that it's more
than that she wants to suffer and she
wants it to be very public and seen it's
really martyrdom right like I want and
and it's it's worse than just she's not
up to the task it's I'm putting in
danger other people's careers and lives
so that I can be such a conspicuous
martyr I'm going to go and really
understand the workers meanwhile her
very well-to-do parents can save her at
any minute he buys her BS she's a
tourist right um there's a there's a
really nasty moment where deboa is
talking to VI the one time they had a
conversation and Vive
simultaneously acts like morally holier
than thou art and makes a back about de
bis's appearance and says it's clear
that you've never gone hungry well
Simone Vine never had to go hungry she
just refused to eat um in a very
conspicuous way and and probably drove
her parents who enable her to
desperation hoping that she wouldn't
starve herself to death which she
eventually did um and and and so and
even though she changes her ideas over
time the holier than now attitude and
the I have this I it's the most
important thing in the world is for
everybody to see me martyring myself
never goes away and isenberger seems to
confuse the recklessness of it with
courage and I don't think it's
courageous I think it's neurotic what
well I think that what he what he likes
is that she's not a
hypocrite okay and you could say look
what she's not a hypocrite about but at
least you know she she walks the walk
and not she doesn't just talk the talk
but she doesn't
I I think that what well what she
actually does is she puts herself at
risk um she has that accident with the
boiling oil and that's why she doesn't
go off to serve but not every single
idea of hers is about throwing her life
away she had that idea about a squad of
nurses who were trained to go into the
dangerous thr other women's lives away
yeah no no she was gonna do it herself
and them yeah okay but the idea though
is that that's not for nothing
you know going into a dangerous place as
a trained nurse is not for nothing well
she wanted to get done in that case as I
remember from the text it wasn't even
that she thought the nurses would be
able to accomplish anything it was that
it would be a dramatic demonstration of
the difference in the World Views
between Fascism and and Ultra altruism
where for that to really work the nurses
need to need to die or think said
specially trained so you know why did
they throw away the training but
specially trained to die I mean to to do
this triage in the middle of
battlefields but but I think Ben's right
like the whole idea is that this will
become they will be martyrs right and
they will prove to the world as if the
world didn't understand this Nazis are
bad um we good only her notion of
goodness is is by say Ran's uh
understanding the very thing that caused
Nazism in the first place yeah yeah that
for morality for her amounts to being
willing to suffer you were mentioning
the eating um one of the incidents
reported from a friend of hers who also
was the one who's the biographical
source is that she was at the table with
her parents and the question came up of
what would happen if a German landed
here would you turn him in and so on and
father said of course and she said okay
I'm not eating with you you know I W I
won't share a table with you when
exactly this issue of not eating
yeah Greg you were trying to jump in on
it's a kind of power assuming Power by
threatening them with her own suffering
there were two issues with with v one is
is what she's after a kind of
self-aggrandisement in people's eyes
watch me suffer watch how much of a
martyr I am Etc um or is it the literal
to be a martyr it's not so much about
people seeing her but but she just wants
to Marty herself I don't know which it
is I don't think the the second is any
better than the first if anything I
think it's worse um but it's pretty CLE
there's not a kind of causal thinking
about how best to alleviate the
suffering of whoever it is not that I
think that's what somebody should focus
their lives around but I think one
shouldn't uh but
the altruism in
general is and becomes of has to be a
fetishizing of suffering and I think
that's what we really see in vas life
it's all about the suffering and being
around the suffering and seeing if I
could have some of the suffering of the
sufferers and there's very little actual
even attempt to better anyone's life
including her own it's really gross so
we've gotten some of V's views on the
table uh you can see then why uh the
author would characterize her as an as a
kind of antipode to einan einan the
author of The Virtue of selfishness who
was a Critic of all forms of
self-sacrifice would have certainly uh
seen the views of v as uh contemptible
did see those views as contempt um I
think that gives us a little bit to say
more about the theme of the book because
what does what do these four figures
have in common with each other why why
talk about them well you see already
they and Rand are antipodes on a certain
question they're antipodes on a on a a
question
about uh about morality about ethics
about uh life in society on the basis of
that they're struggling over what is the
relationship between the self and
Society uh
andir and arent are also uh also
struggling with that same question and
taking up different kinds of positions
on this spectrum of the relationship
between self and others deovir is
described as being mostly politically
uninterested in this book but still
struggling to understand otherness and
its role in defining one's own meaning
in life and rent uh is also as a uh as a
German Jew living in the 30s and 40s
thinking about what is the role of one's
membership in a tribe and a nation uh in
making one a victim uh how does one
defend onself in this kind of
situation uh
and and is it possible to Define oneself
or does history and position Define you
beyond yes um any or is any attempt to
kind of look beyond that essentially a
kind of self-deception about the
facts one of the things I found
interesting about the the four of them
is that even though there are big huge
differences say between they and Rand
especially there there's at least
there's a way in which the author at
least is suggesting and there's question
is this the right interpret
but there's a way in which the author is
suggesting that each of them has a sort
of Quasi individualistic street so even
ve uh who's opposite of Rand is
described as being an individualist
socialist and the reason that she
objects to capitalism is because she
sees it as oppressing the individual by
making him into a into the Cog of a
machine and that's part of the reason
that she goes into the factory to
experience what that's like uh and there
are similar things to say about de
deovir and aren each of them in their in
one way or another put some kind of
emphasis on the importance of defining
one's own existence thinking for oneself
uh I suspect they mean very different
things by those Concepts than what Rand
means by them for instance but I think
this is the part of the Thematic unity
and I I wonder what the rest of you
think about what the author is trying to
say about this general idea about the
role of these figures in this idea uh if
there's an idea here at all is this
really a thematic Unity or or is it is
it uh only superficial resemblances
thoughts on this I I think they are all
dealing with this question of self and
other I think with they it's just the
same old wine in actually the same old
bottle um it's just the ancient altruism
kind of thing I think deboa and arent is
thinking about it in terms of how
history and Society May Define Us and
how we may have to try to Define our VES
in light of it the the parvenu and the
Pariah and and what that what what it
means to you when you're not part of any
society as a refugee that's part of her
thought um I think both W and Rand kind
kind of are more more about on the same
page at like a deep psychological level
how do you define yourself your thought
in regard to the other do you think for
yourself does the other affect you can
they defect you all the way way down so
I think in this formative years random
deir really coming to groups of very
similar questions along these lines and
unless we think that it's just how she's
framing it in the Fountain Head of sort
of the first-hand and second-handed the
self or other I mean when she does
sketches for a present presentation of
her philosophical system after writing
her magnumopus out the shrug one of the
things she first says is like basic kind
of Distinction like self and other um as
as a kind of cognitive step of the the
child just figuring out what they are
and when she describes how the be you
know the worst kind of intellectuals go
wrong early on in their lives it's in
part psychologically in terms of her
sort of Terror and uh obeses to the
minds of others and things like that so
it goes pretty deep I think yeah I I
agree with that I think that he does
underline a particular question of all
of them wrestled with the question of
who am I and who am I in the world and
who are these other people now it's
almost as if the philosophy is written
in the first person and even when it's
not using the first person I think
that's one of the reasons when he's
talking about irand he's leading up to
roor and says RoR is speaking for irand
which you know that's that's true uh but
I think that's the connection for him
between the biography and the philosophy
is that the others are also and he
mentions that a number of times are
speaking for themselves and whe whether
hanahand is writing about um a she says
that Rael baren was would have been her
best friend but she died a hundred years
ago you know it's um it's almost if she
also is is writing in the first person
when she's writing that that that that
treatment of her which um you know
becomes the book and deovir writes
herself into her
fiction so yes it's uh it is an issue
the self and the other and the
individual and the mob or the collective
but it comes up in both well actually
the way you know Iran put it you know
individual versus collectivism not in
politics but in the soul and I think you
could say not only in politics but in
the soul I think that is that's a
through line that's something that
they're all interested in and
in in a broad sense you know in a broad
and deep sense even if they don't mean
the same things yeah I genuinely thought
wow a kind of deep comparison of De both
war and ran sort of thought about a
number of issues including um we now
call gender sexuality but also just the
self and the other but actually be could
could be potentially very enlightening
um and I mean I found it interesting
assuming he's right about this
that one novel that deoir was doing was
supposed to be you know self and other
in kind of one's personal life and then
she wanted to go Branch out and look at
that same Dynamic at the political
social level and that's what Rand sets
out to do after finishing the Fountain
Head and turning to Atlas
Shrug you know it grew beyond that sure
but to see it's also personal and the
way he puts it and I think this is a
correct identification is that all of
them noticed that other people weren't
like them yeah and that had comp that
had implications because especially for
some of them they wanted to think of
themselves as associated with other
people or as immersed in other people or
subsumed in other people and Rand of
course didn't think that but well if I'm
different from other people then how can
I understand them and live with them I
you that he mentioned that and he really
had it's around it's around page 200 or
so I mean I'm sure remembered it's it's
very striking because that's their
fundamental question of how do they fit
in the world he suggest and other people
and this is where he ought to be
bringing in the beginning of the
Fountain Head where Howard L is thinking
there's a difference between me and this
Dean and I don't understand it what is
it and uh and um he suggested also that
is um isenberger suggested not BR that
this question of I'm different from
other people how do I fit it uh how do I
make sense of this is
not just a question that these four
women struggled with but it's somehow
Central to philosophizing or or where
philosophy begins uh I think maybe
that's too broad a claim but it's a
plausible claim and it's an interesting
claim that at least a lot of people
intellectual Journeys a lot of the most
interesting people's intellectual
Journeys include that as an element to
it and that's you know sort of one of
the things that's brought up not too
much explored but maybe that's his style
he wants to drop ideas and get you think
about them rather than than work about
and I thought that was an interesting
thought so there were a lot of thinkers
in this period who were struggling with
questions about the relationship between
self and others not just these four and
one wonders then why it was these four
of all of them who were
chosen and especially
why why are all four of them women is
there something important about that now
you can speculate about uh what's fatish
in Academia being part of the reason why
he why he chose Four Women
um that by itself might not be a good
reason to group them together but is
there anything interesting about the
fact that all four of them are women and
anything that we can learn from this and
about the fact that four women
intellectuals in this period female
intellectuals in this period are all
thinking about the same kinds of
questions or not I mean so this comes up
and has come like in interviews with him
and and he seems to think like yeah no
there may well be some interesting
things to draw out that all being women
in this time period Etc you therefore
see but he also could thinks I'm not
gonna make that call I'm I'm not going
to kind of make the claim that it's
relevant in this way or that way I think
it is relevant in the just how smart
they had to be to make a kind of impact
as as a woman in that time and really be
noticed even if poly so that's part of
it I think part of it is just that they
all of them are likely to be very kind
of determined to to think what they're
going to think and say what they're
going to say and work it out and whether
or not Society thinks that's the
business they should be in and that's
what draws him I think to all of them um
he admires that in all of them um and
rightly so um but he also says you know
um and I think this
this explained something for me which is
that um in this
period none of them are
particularly interested
in what it means for their life or
thinking that they are women now
eventually deoir would write the second
sex right the most important work of
feminism in the 20th century right so
it's not that she didn't think about
this stuff Jason there is place in this
book where it again you probably know
more about dear's original text than I
do but at least Pages 88 to
89 uh the author is saying that
according to De boar this passage that
he quotes from her is a prime example of
Boar's lifelong conviction that the
intellectual dispositions of men and
women are generically different and uh
talks about the difference between
plasticity versus rigidity and it's it's
a passage about uh men being more likely
to get sucked into the lunacies known as
philosophical Sy systems women are not
by Nature prone to obsessions of this
type so she does have the view that
there's this differently female way of
thinking
and I have more to say that but let me
hear what you have to say oh well if you
look right there it says that she
recorded this in the late
1950s okay at a time when the second sex
1949 um you know was already 10 years
old so I think it's fair to say that to
read this back into the earlier time is
maybe something like what we call redcon
um I see so Jason you were making a
point about the earlier deovir no I was
gonna say I don't necessarily think he's
reading this passage correctly that is I
don't think that we should think that
when deovir is saying this she doesn't
have in mind the fact that all of this
is modulated by the roles that Society
puts women in
um she's acutely aware of that right now
she thinks that ultimately there there
is a biological slh historical
explanation of how men came to dominate
over women and and Dore thinks that
women are just more victim to the
biological needs of the species that
they just have to suffer more for which
probably is true um um and no it is true
um but uh um
but I don't think she thinks that there
are she doesn't believe in evolutionary
psychological differences of men and
women how they think that's not I think
this is just another example where he he
kind of crudely misreads things and
again I don't know this passage from her
journals particularly well but
everything I know about dear's later
thought in the second sex makes me very
suspicious of this reading and I can
point to lots of places where he badly
misreads other philosophical texts that
I know well um well that's even more
interesting than uh for me because what
thinking about this issue led me to was
that if you so if you don't think that
there are genetic differences in the way
that men and women think uh as as I I
don't uh then there's still a question
of well then why
are why does someone like the author
fall for this uh idea and more broadly
why are men and women treated
differently uh when it comes to their
role as thinkers such that a woman would
have to work harder to be taken
seriously and I'm reminded
of a point that I think some of
us must remember from a old lecture by
uh Dr lard POF who's one of
uh Iran's students uh talking about
differences in male versus female psycho
epistemologies uh where the difference
isn't because of uh genetic difference
but because of uh socially culturally
uh entrenched habits that that that are
stereotypically associated with one
gender or another and that uh he talks
about how the men who are fans of Vine
Rand tend to be more rationalis
that and and to be inhabit Realms of
floating abstraction whereas the women
tend to be more focused on concrete
experiences and that made me think that
the I mean that's not just something
about objectivism it's about
intellectuals in in in many different
fields I think it's significant to
though about D Leonard's lecture that it
wasn't a lecture on differences between
men and women it was a difference on a
lecture on two bad ways of thinking and
then he he mentioned you it because of
these various factors of how we're
raised one tends to have more men fall
into it and one t to have more women
Fallen right and so I started this
conversation with the question is there
anything interesting or significant
about the fact that all four of these
figures are women and one of the things
that we had said earlier was that they
do all have uncharacteristic ways of
doing philosophy they're all very
interest in the living of a philosophy
and in the concrete experiences that
inform a philosophy and so some of them
write fiction and some of them go and
and live out the life of that idea as
opposed to in all cases focusing on
these abstract treatises that you get
published in journal articles and so it
does seem to me you know for whatever
reason because our cultures have decided
that men are supposed to be analytical
and women are supposed to be emotional
and experience-based
that this you would expect this kind of
philosophy to come from women in this
period where uh they're not beholden to
The Stereotype of what it means to be an
intellectual because because they're
women and and in in many ways this is
for the better because it it it does
bring philosophy down to earth in a way
that in the the world of male
intellectualism uh it gets lost I don't
I think there is actually something Bend
to what what you're saying about it it
um there being um certain pathologies of
academic philosophy and it being
connected in various ways to its being
an old boys network and with but in this
book we have two examples of men who
forg this similar kind of literary
journalistic philosophical career path
we have sarra of course all the time
with dear and you have Kimu and then of
course you have Philip a fooot um
Elizabeth anome uh so women the same
period who are taking a more academic
approach so it's not um you know one
could be too uh one could make too much
of that point but I don't think it's
entirely a coincidence that um some of
these more iconic clastic figures who
are charting a different course are
women when it's harder to do that in the
um in the academy and fair point
about nothing sorry but the point about
the and in the case of so ver also two
recent books of the kind of of these
four um women from from Oxford um Philip
a foot Elizabeth anull Mary Midgley and
um Iris Murdoch um Murdoch and Midgley
had nonstandard academic career kind of
things as writers but philosophers um
but even foot and ancom sort of like
acknowledged midgely acknowledg um that
had it not been for the total um
mobilization of men from o during the
war they would not have come up the way
that they did in the academy um so it
may just be the circumstances of being
able to get to the US or being a you
know um something like that really
changes the trajectory I think we should
definitely come back to the question of
the book's treatment of Rand uh since
that is many of our entree into the book
and we've touched a little bit already
some of the we briefly touched on some
of what we thought was misrepresentative
of her thought uh we should dig a little
deeper into that may I offer a a bridge
from what we were just talking about to
that sure so there's one point at which
isenberger takes a
very um kind of critical or suspicious
read on Ran's more than one place a
relationship with her husband frankco
Connor and in particular thinks that the
kind of role she has in the relationship
is inconsistent with her own characters
and heroin sort of sense of of sexual
gender roles and the woman wanting to
have this dominant man in their life and
so on where in fact he thinks she was
and he even sort of says She's The Man
in the family and I think to bring this
back to a question that one of you
raised a few moments ago one of the
reasons that I think I think isenberger
does this he has certain gender
assumptions himself about what
performing maleness and female or
masculinity and femininity would look
like and then his reading kind of ran in
part through that interpretation as
well is that is exactly the passage that
uh I had in mind when I was talking
about different standards for
interpreting and judging these these
figures and uh why I think Rand is
getting the short stick in in this case
so this is this is Pages 126 to 127 she
shares this uh this letter uh with that
Rand had written to her husband
and talks about how she misses him but
she doesn't really miss him and uh
because she's gone off to to work on her
uh on her writing in a separate place a
Howard work we can say with some
certainty would never have set such
things down on paper just as one does
not need to have the eye of a trained
coup's therapist to detect considerable
potential for tension in these lines the
role play is still intact while the
roles themselves shifted long ago and
it's like well yes one does need the eye
of a trained couple's therapist to infer
about these kinds of things and why is
it that you are taking on that role Mr
isenberger uh of of psychologizing Rand
in this case when you're not doing that
in the case of someone like Sone Simone
V's religious experience which is
described on page 168 to 169 uh where
she EXP experienced herself in the form
of Jesus Christ entirely imbued with
Divine love Etc asking no psychological
questions about whether the fact that
she's actually in the hospital for a
neurological condition at the time might
have had something to do with uh her uh
misinterpretations that would be where
you wouldn't actually need to be a
trained therapist to ask the question
but it's not asked and that strikes me
as rather un and also the kind of
commentary on Ren and her husband's
relationship when
there's a kind of judgment there about a
kind of Faking involved and there's so
much less of that when he's talking
about a debar in effect acting as a
procurer for um for SRA um I if you're
going to start reading it's not like he
doesn't show that there are some things
a little dubious about their uh little
family but the there's not that the same
degree and the other thing with that
letter you should explain what you mean
by the procurer there by the way scoping
out young students and bringing them to
to sleep with SRA and her um but the
pattern the pattern is she took up
relationships with her former students
who were younger than her and then often
those them became the lovers not only of
her but then of of SRA and in one at
least case she's explicitly thinking oh
this would be good for him this will get
him out of his Funk now the first place
he brings this up he describes it as
clearly predatory but then he drops that
and he cites a bit from her journal
where she's wondering how much she's
living up to these existentialist
Notions of being self-determined or how
much is she just wants a husband and you
know and that's and it's most
interesting because it comes from her
but there's a lot of of passing over
some really darkk stuff in those in
those passages he's he's he's almost
immediately dismissing the fact that she
might be jealous and saying no because
she's telling us she's not jealous she's
telling us she's just
trying to live by the strictures of
existentialism and uh there's at least a
pretty good case for the fact that there
was a degree of jealousy there uh which
is just
dismiss I should say I don't think I
read him a little differently there I
think he with deovir he's pretty clear
at various points that he thinks she's
putting herself on um my my kind of but
I do see a difference between the
treatment of deoir and randit he doesn't
even consider the possibility that ran
feels about her husband the way she says
she feels yeah the that it's just a the
other thing is that letter that he
quotes um I don't think anybody just
reading that letter would get what he
says he gets out of that letter I think
the reason he puts that constru on that
letter is because that's how Rand and
Frank's relationship is portrayed in um
the various biographies of Frank whether
for for for good or ill whether it's an
accurate portrayal or not I don't think
anybody just reading that letter would
read any of the things about role
reversal or whatever that he's reading
into it I think he has a narrative about
her life that he's and about her
relationship that he's picking up from
these other biographies again whether
put aside whether it's a accurate or not
and then he's just reading that letter
in light of it in a way that I if you
just read it it's uh it's a woman
talking to her husband who's just left
and uh you don't get any I don't there's
not not objectively in there alone
outside of that context anything that
would even lead you to suspect that um
and so then we could talk about what is
the narrative on R's relationship that
one gets in biographies how accurate is
it but there's something odd that he's
doing he's not showing us why he's
thinking the way he's
thinking it's definitely a good he does
even necessarily even site where he's
getting the information from I mean over
on um 180 he said that Frank Mur says
seemed not remotely inclined to provide
spontaneous service to rans increasingly
elaborate fantasies of seizing
possession of the world quote like an
animal
unquote okay I don't even know what that
sort of means except that I did follow
up the quotation and it is from the
journalist description of roric as being
like a healthy animal and in the other
time within the book when he uses the
quotation he gets it correct and so here
he's and it's not about seizing
possession of the world
there isn't anything about elaborate
fantasies and so it looks as if he's got
a source but he hasn't even done it
accurately and it doesn't say what he
says he's it's supposed to be saying so
he's he's made it up um and of course as
you say he's made it up because of some
things that he's read but he's not even
saying Som he says my account of this
comes from so and so but he doesn't he
doesn't always do that he just assumes
that the reader will go along with him
the idea that he's getting this from
these other biographies is definitely
plausible uh what occurred to me is that
we're not it's not it's hard to prove
that because psychologizing by which I
mean
uh trying to explain someone's Behavior
by unfounded psychological speculation
psycholog psychologizing is just so
dominant and widespread among
intellectuals across the board he
wouldn't need to get it from the
biographies then again he doesn't do it
to some of these other figures in the
same way and so that could either be
just bias of his against against Rand or
or it could be the biography but it's
not just that it's that there's nothing
in this passage that I think would lead
anybody to think that you have to have a
a take on you know Frank's kind of
neishi guy who just goes along with
whatever his wife wants and she's
writing about these Grand Heroes and
he's not like that and so forth and all
that he actually says is that he had a
film career that didn't go very well and
then he he went and did some other
things which isn't enough to get any
kind of read on what kind of person he
is so where is he getting it from and
the the place where you find it is
that's how he's portrayed in all these
books and there assumptions as to what
their sex life must be like which
there's no evidence for a little bit of
evidence there is points in the opposite
direction but it's not discussed and um
you know so that's why I'm assuming he's
getting from I think maybe he didn't
read the introduction to the 1968
edition of The Fountain Head I mean and
that's a real Source that's einan's own
words and that's also where she explains
the difference between herself and
N just saying I mean I think that with
another writer he might have made
reference to that sort of thing and
given it some Credence and said where he
got it from he mentions it's
pertinent he mentions that um that ran
does occa occasionally use Theo of of of
Frank in in her novels yes but he says
um her add to her regularly or typically
hu um humorless pros and if you read The
Fountain Head like it's so it's such a
sarcastic hilariously snarky book in
various places whether you like the
philosophy or not there it's it's not
humorless by any means nor is we the
living they have a dark and sardonic
humor in the kind of narrator and what
the narrator says and doesn't say it's
it's he's just not a good
reader not a careful but again there's
this Rand has this rep of being
humorless right and you get it again in
how she's portrayed culturally and he
just doesn't where that comes from is a
good question and why did people see her
this way but I don't think like a lot of
people independently see her this way I
think some book put it that way and
people don't bother to look past
it well I think that one of the problems
that you know with this book is that he
really is so vivid and it's only when
you come upon something that you know
yourself right away that that doesn't
correspond
with the book or the writer or something
then you you realize that you can't
accept what he's
saying 100% without looking into it and
that's you know it's it can interfere
with the reading because you there are
these question marks in the margin of U
I wonder what I wonder what what this
what's really true here yeah he's he's
intellectually he's also I totally agree
with that intellectually he's you know
like some people don't want the peas and
the mashed potatoes mixing together he
does not do any kind of way keeping this
sort of out in in the in the Thinker
idect in other words if you're trying to
be careful you wouldn't just put
something away that your reader might
understand but a way that would also be
recognizable and syonic for the author
and there's so much that he will put you
know he'll put Ran's view in a way she
would never say for various reason
reasons so for example you know that she
has the same contempt like for
capitalism as social no she would never
talk like that like yes she thought
people were second-handed and had little
lives and so on but she would never
treat them as morally equivalent or um
he often will use in talking about Rand
will use the platonic metaphor of
leaving the cave now he makes an
interesting observation which is that
there is an Going Underground and
finding light bit in Anthem but Rand in
does not use the the the kind of
platonic cave allegory language for very
good reasons because she doesn't think
that that the basic sense perception or
the way that the common sense people of
the world is bited and then you reach
some higher Vision it's I'm just more
honest to the starting point where we
all start and I don't mislead myself so
she has good reason to to Ober that kind
or to just have to not want the platonic
language but for him it's just like oh
yeah this is language of like going from
being unphilosophical to philosophical
so let me throw it in but he doesn't
know how the flavor pal the flavor
textures are changing when you mix the
peas and the mashed potatoes and yeah
well I think that he's trying to make
connections and there's a section when
he's talking about an Rand where he
explains about uh Human
Relationships having to do with treating
other's equals and cons uh consent trade
making a deal and you know which as
opposed to
force and you he's talking about human
relations and then he says but the most
fle socially flexible way of achieving
goals of exchange is clearly economic
through monetary
transactions and that's not what she
would say I mean of course monetary
transactions are a form of trade but
it's not as if that's the I
the best example of trade and then from
there he gets to and of course that
means less AER capitalism as if the way
she gets to less AER capitalism is
because she thinks that all human
relationships have to be based on
monetary transactions that are fair she
doesn't think that's anle and she
doesn't say that and while we're at it
by the way I didn't see I didn't see the
capitalism book in his references now I
understand that she wrote that later but
that doesn't seem to stop him in other
cases and you would think that that
would be if he's going to talk
about if he's going to mention
capitalism he might mention capitalism
the book that capitalism thing is the
same sort of foreshortening as in the
copyright thing like here's a point she
makes here's a place we know she gets to
uh here's a thread that would connect
them and it's not got nothing to do with
how she connects them but it's not the
center of gravity is all off it's not
how she would connect them and it's a
sort of rushing to and end he wants to
connect it to without doing the work and
without indicating that this is you know
one may you might draw them Rand does it
differently when she actually sorts it
out or something like
that so I've got one that was a pet
peeve for me which I want to ask
shashana about because I know she knows
something about it page
177 down to the last details Ran's
sketch for Anthem is based on the
science fiction novel we secretly passed
around during her l grad student days
written by her compatriot ygi zatan in
1920-21 I read zatan back in college and
the things that I know are similar are
the the Russians author the author is
Russian the characters don't have names
they have numbers and it's a dystopian
novel but that's about it and we and
shashana can you tell us more about
whether there's any evidence that she
even read and the other the other uh
point that people mention is that it is
called we and Anthem is based on the
appearance of the singular personal
pronouns I I think that they still use
them in the book right what the Char
right right they still use I in the book
uh I think that what's true is that he
he says down to the Last Detail and he
says secretly passed around and you know
the basic impression is that of course
she copied it while in fact I I think a
fair reading would see not only that the
point is very different because because
um we is anti-russian but it's not anti-
collectivism in the way that Anthem is
it doesn't have the linguistic um
originality it doesn't have the same
theme and the device of a character
talking in the first person that's a
detail well duh you you know that that's
that's not unique to dystopian fiction
is not unique to fiction and it
certainly doesn't show that there's a
direct connection now I have to admit I
did write about
I mean I wrote about Anthem and other
books that you could put in the same
category and this is one in which I
think that the parallels almost
highlight for you the
contrasts that they're quite different
um even even including the device of
going outside the city I mean that also
is fairly common if there's if there's a
dangerous place people might leave it as
part of their Rebellion so I don't I
I've kind of looked into this because
it'd be interesting if she'd she does
mention some in in her interviews some
books that she some writers she knew or
whose Works she knew in Russy she
doesn't mention him and I don't think
that she would have said oh I can't talk
about that because I copied him yeah so
it's a claim that's frequently made I
don't think it would be made if um
people read a bunch of dystopian novels
and these were two of them you wouldn't
pick these two out as saying they're
like each other I I I yeah I think
that's a great Point um and uh that like
if you just take the scope and the genre
like yeah this is not this would not
surprise you it doesn't um it's only
when you have just a just you know
something about this one particular and
this other particular you're inclined to
make some kind of causal connection that
you wouldn't if you knew the genre more
broadly um especially since Zan's book
is not about technology having backwards
it's about space travel you know it's a
technology going forward and so that's
very different now I know it's a detail
but there there was a story she read in
the Saturday evening Post in 1937 and it
was called Stephen bent Benet and it's
in the first person and it's someone
writing from a future that's decayed and
he needs to discover so that element of
it is indeed similar to what we have in
Anthem I mean
the is sorry we've yeah I was just going
to say she had the idea of anthem from
her childhood her teenage years in
Russia and the reason that there's a
there is a generic connection here in
firstperson narrative but she was hoping
to get hers published in the same and
sat Evening Post they well and it was a
good venue and she describes the post
piece as having been an inspiration to
her in a place where she talks about
this in the biographical interviews the
same place where unconnected to Anem she
mentioned
that there were some interesting
individualist authors being kind of
circulated around Russia um there's no
reason why she wouldn't have said it if
it had been an INF and maybe it was but
it's doesn't stand out as a kind of
certainly not
copy well one of the tropes that you
often see in critical literature on
irand along with the kind of
psychologizing about her motives and the
origin of her
philosophy is the idea that she just
copied it from uh some other uh some
other philosophers there this is often
an implication with her relationship to
n uh and here we see another example of
it and I I mentioned that
because um it's it's part of the reason
I think that it's a Trope is
because the critics have the idea that
well here's an individualist who claims
that she is a self-created woman who's
brought herself up by her bootstraps and
yet she's robbing and stealing all of
these ideas from other figures so it's
an attempt uh not just a general uh
diminishment but I kind of allegation of
hypocrisy but then you really better
have your uh you better have the
evidence for it if you're going to make
that claim as part that's the The irand
Ungrateful
irand hypocritical and so on I have an
example I don't know if it's too
detailed but it really to me was
interesting and because it also ties in
with what I was saying what we've been
saying at the beginning about the facts
when uh when he's talking about about
the acquisition of the contract for the
Fountain Head he writes apparently out
of the blue page 296 but in fact
engineered by Isabelle Patterson the
Indianapolis based Publishing House
Bob's Marl showed definite interest
particularly from a newly appointed
editor by the name of Archie Ogden
that's a quotation okay now he doesn't
give source for that but I think his
source is has to be Anne Herer so I
looked to see what Anne heler said and
an heler said that there were two
stories
of how she got the contract and one of
them is that she knew Richard Mand who
was her boss at Paramount Pictures yeah
she was writing the synopsis for and
that he made the contact with Arch Bal
ogon etc etc and then there's this other
story and the other story is that
Isabelle Patterson bludgeoned Archie
Ogden into taking it and the source for
this other story according to Anne Herer
is that isbel Patterson told it to
Mildred Hall and then Mildred Hall told
that to Anne
heler it would have happened in 1941 and
Isel pasin would have had to tell it to
Mildred Hall by 1961 because she was
dead after that and then in 2000 in 2004
Mildred Hall is talking to Anne
heler that doesn't that's not and it's
not documented and the other story The
competing story is documented in public
material you don't even have to go to
the Bob's Merill papers which I did
where you you get more information but
you don't have to go there you you you
can look at public documents and this
other story there's no documentation but
Mildred Hall said Isabelle Patterson
would not have made it up so well
Patterson talks to mild Hall talks to
Anne heler and this and Anne heler says
maybe they're both true and but what he
does now this isn't even scholarship
this is game of
telephone right you know all these
people talking to each other what he
does is he takes this story which even
aner doesn't see as definitive and he
writes but in
fact how did it get upgraded to a
fact and's a hack a
fact I'm very grateful pointed that out
that's that's a really um that's that's
really interesting and yeah and and the
things I I that and I thought okay what
else is he doing in his other sources
where things have been upgraded to facts
when it's a game of telephone and he's
gotten it from a source that didn't even
say what he's saying so
anyway maybe Isabelle Patterson did say
it to Mildred Hall but it wasn't
true uh I think we should start to wrap
up and I'm uh I'm interested just to
hear if uh any of you have have any kind
of closing thoughts or or comments you
want to make on any of the issues we've
talked about before we wrap
up there's one topic we didn't touch on
that I'd like to at least
briefly
um we've been talking for the most part
about this book but only a little bit
about the the other women mentioned in
it um but I'd like to just think what do
we think of these women in particular
what do we think of all of their um
attraction to flirtation with Devotion
to in some cases socialism and
particularly Communism stalinism mean
the both war was for a period of
basically an apologist for Stalin um
what do we what do we make of this how
do we think about this or certainly for
Lenin um what do we you know what do we
make of this is it's it's not unique to
them this was a a widespread
intellectual Trend in the middle of the
20th century but I don't think you
can if we're talking about Rand and
these three other women they're on
opposite sides of a major social
political issue the major social
political issue of the century and what
are we to make of that and how are we to
evaluate
it they actually had Leon trosky staying
at her house and one of the other things
that her her parents had to put up with
uh though admittedly she I think had an
argument with him on on matters of
politics
um yeah yeah so we had talked about
before the ways in which Rand is an
outlier in various ways from these other
figures she's the only one who from for
much of her life is Living in America
for instance and thinks of herself as as
an American well rent spends a long time
in
America well at least for the period of
time that we're talking about but for
the period of time
talk it's important because why is she
in America she's in America because
she's the also the only one who has
lived under communism and fled from it
and took refuge in America and
the I I want to emphasize this because
there are places in the book where when
you're going back and forth between the
different stories of the different
figures you see the Europeans living in
pretty Grim conditions because the na
are about to take over and then you flip
back to America and Iran's working on
her novel in relative comfort and to me
the implication the author is trying to
make is she's not having to deal with so
much and that's part of what makes her
humorous in his view okay but you didn't
get the picture of her life under
communism in the Soviet Union that she
fled from and that she knows a little
something about what its implications
were and that's why when she writes we
the the living uh it's it's it's not
just a uh a fantasy novel on her part
she knows how socialism and communism
destroy individuals and destroy the
kinds of individuals that that all three
of these other women would have been and
why they would have been destroyed under
this system I mean it is a pretty
important topic he's he doesn't make
enough perhaps about the fact that she
did live under this totalitarian system
um and but aent um was a Jew in France a
after the vichi Takeover deovir lived
through the whole period of vishi France
um also uh V's family right they flee to
America and she chooses to go back but
she goes back to England so it it's a
little more complicated because they did
live under kind of military occupation
it's not the same thing but I don't I
don't think he's he's kind of making I
think he thinks both historically it's
the same Dark Times
his perspective is ran sees the whole
world going to um going to hell and is
rightly you know or wrong but but is
concerned that America will too um so I
think from that perspective he's not
taking her lightly I think he's taking
that seriously as as a position but
um um I I I
um well part of what I'm interest is
doesn't it matter that we have
two wretched monstrous evils spreading
politically at this
time um and
belatedly uh all of these people come to
see some at least something a little bit
wrong with both of them but for a large
part of this three of these four women
are Advocates of one of these two evil I
think if you're to giving the biography
of intellectuals and uh int uals in a
historical period uh when uh there's
kind of monstrous evil and oppression
going on where they stand on it matters
and I think there's a kind of dancing
around there thinking of it as sweet
that oh well of course they were
idealistic so they were socialist and oh
they eventually you know not not even
that long came to think that communism
is bad too uh but there's not I mean
these people are cheering on Pro before
later than some of the others
the brutality of the USSR and like ran
wouldn't not have wanted to be in the
same room with these people and because
of this and I think that issue maybe you
know that they're on the opposite sides
of this kind of Great Divide I think
really matters and really matters to how
you judge them like can you have been
honestly a supporter of Stalin uh a
support you know could You' have
honestly had trosy at your house and
what must you be thinking and what could
individualism and life and all these
things mean to you while you're you know
yeah so I mean this the the takeaway he
makes about V when she has Trotsky in
puts him up in her parents' second
apartment uh is look at how Brave she is
to argue with this big man that
everybody looks uh uh looks up to and
she's daring enough to like indict the
Soviet Union alongside the Nazis not hey
she's putting up the commander of the
Red Army so he can have a fourth
International and he's simultaneously
defending the Soviet state while he does
that so you know trosky looks kind of
silly in light of it but like but not oh
God this is a horrible horrible person
and you can't imagine an episode like
this with Geral being passed over
lightly right yeah yeah that's right um
what yeah um and I think that uh you
know um part of the the part of the
problem here is in part like what worked
totalitarianism does as if suddenly now
Socialism or suddenly now dictatorship
becomes something totally different than
what it was before and that's sort of
how arent sees it it's like oh you can't
confuse this dictatorship from
totalitarianism and she does point out
yes there are some differences but but
they're they are a liking kind and um
and I mean in on to in origins of
totalitarianism which I read just for
this the sake of this understanding
better this book um arent uh so it has
three parts the first part is on
anti-Semitism the second on imperialism
the Third on
totalitarianism and my take is you know
arent makes some good obser some
interesting and insightful observations
but gives very crappy I tend to think
explanations and the entire section on
imperialism is basically recycled
Marxist views of of imperialism like
what causes it and what it's all about
and surplus goods and surplus labor and
and it's just and and she thinks that
the choice of different economic systems
is sort of irrelevant to political
Liberty but then there's some other
weird organizational feature about
totalitarianism that suddenly makes it
so much more monstrous and it's just it
it's you know I don't it's not very
impressive well it's inadequate by the
way when I said he doesn't have time for
this issue I didn't mean that he gets he
gets a pass because he ran out of pages
but that he didn't make time for it and
he should have so I I meant that to be
critical um it's interesting you just
mentioned about anti-Semitism because
that's unless I missed it he doesn't say
anything about dear's anti-Semitism
no yeah and he's close to it because
he's quoting some passages from her War
Diaries her notebooks where she makes
some very unpleasant comments um
about the Jews and typical
Jewish taking advantage and that sort of
thing yeah it's it's it's right in there
and it's in her own words so it's it's
there I mean in a rent um in the origins
of
totalitarianism makes a claim she
directly takes on the uh
conceptualization of the Jew that SRA
had offered and says no this is wrong it
that it's the it's you know you are as
others sort of Define you and that's
what and um but what aent does because
this kind of got her in in controversy
in the Jewish Community was she was
willing to kind of name what Scholars of
Jewish history serious academic ones had
been identifying for the last generation
or two which is
that the Jewish Community had been self
segregating in various ways and that you
know it's not just what they do to us we
wanted to be separate and so on so um I
don't know that was another place where
you could have brought any of these
themes to light also that was a view of
ran it's not really said publicly but in
her uh it was definitely her view of of
Jews that she knew um that they were
racist because they were and this was
before World War II uh because they were
cled and staying with one another and
not not socializing um that that was
something really wrong and bad one of
the things that Hannah rent one of the
doctrines or ideas that Hannah rent is I
think rightly famous for uh is her idea
of the banality of evil which she uses
to
explain uh ikan in Jerusalem uh how is
it that this this low-level bureaucrat
could end up being responsible for mass
murder he's not the type you would
imagine as as the mass murderer the
mustache twist mustache TW twisting
scheming uh n well he's he's a a
bureaucrat who's thoughtless who takes
the orders that he's given and it's it's
a it's an insightful analysis of someone
like ikan but you'd have to think what
other if if if it's so easy for uh a
low-level bureaucrat to become a a
killer because of his thoughtlessness
what other kinds of
thoughtlessness uh is there in the world
that every everybody takes as ordinary
everybody takes for granted that could
nonetheless be responsible for leading
us to become killers
and one such uh one such example that I
think escapes her notice and that
escapes the notice of several of these
other thinkers other than Rand is the
kind of ordinary moral ideas that we all
take for granted the idea that Simone V
takes super seriously when she says Let
Me Be be uh a martyr let me be a self-
sacrificer that's the idea that Rand
thinks is ultimately responsible for the
totalitarian regimes both fascist and
socialist that they are simply putting
into practice on a large scale the kind
of insanity that V puts into practice in
her own life and uh it's it's a it's a
banality that people take for granted
that morality consists in this kind of
sacrifice but one that you shouldn't be
thoughtless about that you have to
subject to scrutiny and that was I think
one of Ran's great
insights I agree with most of the
criticisms made of uh of the book and
yet I
still see it as progress and something
that's worth reading um for for a couple
of reasons so it's it's this category of
popular
scattershot um impressionistic history
and there's there are books like this
and you know one has to know when one's
reading a book like that versus when
one's reading a book of serious
scholarship that it's fuzzy it's not too
accurate it's not well sourced um but
you know that's a genre whether it's a
respectable genre or not um they usually
don't quite come to that much but
they're sometimes interesting or
thought-provoking uh we can talk about
whether there should be such books but
uh there are and if you just take it for
granted gred that this is one of those
as opposed to you know high level
scholarship uh or really careful
meticulous thinking um I don't think
it's bad for that kind of thing I think
it's pretty good for that kind of thing
uh it Compares some thinkers who are
interesting who it's worth comparing it
doesn't go very deep into the comparison
but um but it's thought-provoking by
doing it and the standard for people
writing on Rand outside of the people
who do it really well is really really
low
um if you look at philosophers who
publish articles on her even ones who
don't think of themselves as taking pot
shots there's no thought there's no
appreciation there's no delving into
what might be a value here there's no
attempt to compare them thoughtfully to
other people so much of the biography of
her is um lame attempts at Scandal
mongering or being salacious rather than
trying to think about how the ideas
developed and I think the project of
putting her in parallel with other
thinkers living at the same time living
through some of the same events thinking
about what she would have thought of
their ideas and what they would have
thought of her ideas the attempts to to
give her take on individualism versus
collectivism I think are accurate and
fair-minded to the extent that someone
who has this kind of a worldview and is
this kind of a writer can be accurate
and fair minded It's not precise it's
vague but it's not a caricature either
and she comes across as do these other
four as interesting thinkers worth sorry
other three as interesting thinkers
worth uh worth comparing and I think for
a good reason because they are and I
think he did a good enough job to bring
that out despite um being slip shot in
his historiography despite um having
some questionable moral views despite
not being terribly deep and uh you know
not every author is going to be terribly
deep I think we're better off having
this book in the world than not it's
interesting it might lead people to uh
see some things of value in rant who
hadn't before and it had led me to some
interesting questions about uh to both
war and arent in particular that I I
didn't have before I knew a little bit
about each of those things um so I have
a kind
of very qualified positive uh view of
the book uh I think Jason you have a
more negative view but yet I think we
agree on the fact of it so that's yeah I
mean I I also like I don't ask would the
world be better with or without this
book in it I or or let me put it this
way it speaks to some good facts that he
did this book the way that he did about
you know good about a reception of Rand
and uh I don't think it you know it will
hurt um efforts to understand her
because so many people will get the
wrong um picture or something I just um
I just and I'm not that worried about
the person who this is their first
entree to it and you know and then it
spoils everything thereafter but St
worry it does it add value does it add
value in some way and I think it does
just in a modest
way I mean I I think there were some
usually off- based but occas but often
daring and interesting and once in a
while Ring Of
Truth um kinds of comparisons or jux to
positions of her with something else and
I mean if I
discount the the value the negative
veilance of all the things wrong or bad
and I discount those things and I go
yeah okay there are some things that I
got out of it um sure I I mean yeah but
um look you know it makes me all the
more eager to to wish there was not just
a a really competent biography of ran sh
know I I I've been working on the same
book for 13 years so I have no excuse
but um
uh no but uh an intellectual biography
right but a real biography of how her
ideas change over this critical point I
think you know to really get
straight when was she where with respect
to n and Etc is just it's very much
needed and we've in the companion you
know Lester hn has written on that and
it's better than the other stuff that
people have said about that but you know
like we really need and darl Wright has
written about some of her early
moral thought we need more of this and
we need we need the big picture it also
gives you a hint of what better work on
that big picture of Rand can power and
what even the current work on that big
picture of Rand could power if you had
people taking it seriously because there
there's a lot of interesting things to
say about well how did she relate to
other people writing at the time what
are the interesting parallels if you
think of particular current events or
particular episodes or issues of Moment
In the period when she was writing how
did her position fit with the positions
of other people who were thinking about
that say the Barts or whoever it might
be and what can we learn about the the
issue about each of these figures by
doing these kinds of comparisons and I
think it's it's good to see that kind of
work that we as Rand Scholars maybe
aren't in a position to do as well
because we don't know all the other
figures but that work starting to get
done um hopefully it'll get done better
than this and hopefully it'll get done
in a way that makes better use the real
equality research that's been done on
Rand and hopefully even better research
that'll be done on her in the future but
it's early days in uh in that kind of
intellectual work happening and I think
if we think about the level of that sort
of intellectual work with any figure in
the culture how well Aristotle is
treated or Leonardo da Vinci or you know
whoever it might be um it's never done
that well I mean so the standard I mean
it is occasionally but the standards by
which we're judging this book I don't
think it's um
conspicuously bad by the standards of
books that do this kind of thing I think
it's probably middling by the standards
of books that try to do this kind of
thing I want to thank you both thank you
all uh for having this conversation and
uh look forward to having more of them
with you about other books that that uh
that do or don't relate to irand we'll
be we'll be I think talking about a
variety of them on multiple subjects in
this series so thanks for joining me and
uh good night to our audience
