do you require excessive admiration is
your birthday exceptionally important to
you do you have large grandiose eyebrows
if so congratulations you may be a
narcissist narcissist discovering you're
a narcissist may be a shocking and
jarring experience for you you might
have questions like what does this mean
for me or will my friends find out or is
this going to make it harder for me to
bend others to my every whim and siphon
their energy and of course your first
questions would be about yourself
narcissist well worry not it just means
you're evil that you're a secret monster
wearing the clothes of a normal human
and that there's no act against you
that's wrong now if you're watching this
and you're not one of these narcissists
you might be getting a little bit scared
it seems like I'm suggesting that the
world is full of covert energy vampires
masquerading as regular folks just
waiting to pounce on your soul well rest
assured you are completely right the
Earth is a dangerous and terrifying
place and most of it is out to get you
but what if I told you that you already
have the tools to detect these
sociopaths hiding in plain sight in fact
with the power of VI it's easy by the
time you finish watching this video
you'll be able to perfectly pick out the
villains in every room just remember you
are a good person person
we live in a Culture of Fear over the
past five decades we've seen a growing
obsession with identifying and labeling
the imposters Among Us what's sprung up
from a culture of self-help books has
since evolved into a cottage industry of
online creators specifically focused on
the dangers of one particular type of
person The Narcissist as clinical
language has increasingly become part of
our Collective vocabulary the number of
alleged narcissists has exploded
videos warning audiences exactly how to
detect and defeat them have racked up
tens of millions of views and have found
favor with a broad range of audiences
from Clinical psychiatrists to Wellness
influencers to Alpha Male Wolf types a
broad range of creators have found a
very lucrative niche in teaching viewers
how to protect themselves but where did
this trend come from who are these
supposed covert narcissists and perhaps
most importantly is this even a
thing yeah
yeah
yeah the term narcissist in an online
context is incredibly varied and also
usually pretty divorced from any
clinical meaning so narcissistic
personality disorder is an existing
psychiatric diagnosis with specific
criteria including low empathy a heavy
need for external admiration grandiosity
strong envy and a sense of entitlement
but many people using the term online
are not referring to the actual
diagnosis itself the term even predates
the construction of NPD by several
centuries instead narcissist is used as
a catchall for someone who is selfish
manipulative abusive or otherwise
unpleasant to be around a particularly
popular notion in these spaces is that
these narcissists are covert that is to
say they mask their true intentions or
emotions and can only be preemptively
identified as dangerous through practice
skill and ideally joining an email list
in buying someone's PDF books like
1998's the 48 Laws of Power and 2005's
the sociopath next door have played a
significant role in creating this
cultural landscape where readers are
urged to constantly be on guard against
others who may be undermining them
author Robert Green the 48 Laws of Power
adopts a strategic almost Machiavellian
lens on human interaction teaching
readers both to navigate power dynamics
and outwit potential manipulators
similarly the sociopath Next Door by
psychologist Dr Martha Stout Builds on
the idea of the covert Predator by
suggesting that a significant portion of
the population are sociopaths the book
argues that these people move through
Society undetected blending in while
secretly manipulating those around them
for their own own gain basically certain
personality traits make people dangerous
and these traits can be spotted if one
is sufficiently Vigilant listen to the
terrifying way she puts it about 1 in 25
individuals are sociopathic meaning
essentially that they do not have a
conscience it is not that this group
fails to grasp the difference between
good and bad it is that the distinction
fails to limit their behavior the
intellectual difference between right
and wrong does not bring on the
emotional sirens and flashing blue
lights or
the that it does for the rest of us
without the slightest blip of guilt or
remorse one in 25 people can do anything
at all as she later explains as
individuals people of conscience can
learn to recognize the sociopath next
door and with that knowledge work to
defeat his entirely self-interested aims
at the very least they can protect
themselves and their loved ones from his
Shameless maneuverings The Narcissist
next door written by Time Magazine
editor Jeffrey kuger in 2014 is a direct
evolution of this tradition like with
the sociopath next door it presents the
narcissist as a hidden danger someone
who Blends into daily life but is driven
by selfishness and the desire for power
control unlike with a sociopath next
door though kuger has no psychological
credentials the book is a mix of
reporting on studies and personal
editorializing partly about day-to-day
interactions with Nar narcissists and
partly about the state of American
politics incidentally the book argues in
its first chapter that Bernie maid off
just about every conservative politician
in the United States as of late and then
Miley Cyrus are all narcissists
narcissism here is presented as a subtle
everyday danger that manifests in a
bunch of seemingly mundane interactions
like a self-centered co-worker or a
manipulative partner this also makes the
concept of the secret sicko more
relatable and accessible to a general
audience people are less likely to
encounter a full-blown serial killer in
their lives but a narcissist that could
be anyone in your immediate circle as a
result the modern pop psych fixation on
narcissists allows for the creation of a
more pervasive narrative narcissists are
not just lurking in positions of extreme
power but they might be living next door
sitting at the office cubicle beside you
or even sharing your bed this narrative
tied to books and now especially
Amplified by social media pushes the
idea that narcissism is a constant
everpresent threat and individuals must
be well-versed in recognizing these
traits to protect themselves the
self-help industry laid the groundwork
for what we see now where this stuff is
absolutely everywhere Reddit in
particular was an early adopter of
widespread narcissism discussion the
subreddit r/ raised by narcissists was
originally established in 2013 as a
support group for people dealing with
emotionally abusive family Dynamics
since then the community has grown into
a major hub for discussions around
narcissism in personal relationships and
currently boasts nearly 1 million
members it was one of the first places
where we saw a growing fixation with
with labeling people as narcissists and
sharing strategies for dealing with them
and as with many things once it found an
audience on Reddit it was only a matter
of time before it found its way onto
other platforms as well in this more
current more skibbidy digital ecosystem
many self-styled narcissism experts have
emerged and their content often blurs
the lines between Psychiatry and
Showmanship a few of these influencers
do have actual credentials in Psychology
but most do not you see a lot of
unregulated titles like narcissism
experts or relationship coach or mental
health coach used in a way that I would
argue is incredibly deceptive for
instance Instagram personality and
narcissistic abuse healing expert Dr
Annie PhD U has a PHD in languages and
literature the use of doctor in this
branding is not strictly untrue but the
nature of this title is downplayed she
refers to herself as an abuse healing
expert among other things and her
website uses a lot of language about
healing and recovery but no mention of
her actual degree to imply through
Omission that she is a psychologist if
not a psychiatric medical doctor this is
all to advertise a $30 a month online
membership that includes access to a
Facebook group and zoom calls valued at
$7,500 or one particularly prominent
Creator we're going to see pop up a few
times here the narc abuse coach has
described himself as a narcissistic
abuse recovery professional and has
amassed hundreds of thousands of
subscribers accordingly some of his
advice borders on pseudo science or even
phenology in one video for instance he
su suggests that you can identify a
narcissist by their large eyebrows their
eyebrows are quite thick which is not to
say every person who has thick eyebrows
is a narcissist of course not it is
something peculiar with their eyebrows
they're filled with dominance
grandiosity and entitlement and in
another he claims there's a distinctive
smirk that's characteristic of
narcissists that particular claim the
narcissist smirk has picked up a decent
amount of steam lately in general and is
obviously deeply ungrounded despite the
absurdity of some claims these
influencers maintain a scientific
aesthetic that appeals to viewers
seeking answers and validation even when
the claims aren't as patently ridiculous
as narcissist eyebrows there's a glut of
viral content which essentially just
asserts that there are secret tells to
identify narcissists such as not making
eye contact having a public Persona that
is different than the way you act in
private caring a lot about your birthday
spending money on things that make you
look good worrying about being broken up
with and so on The Narcissist will
always be on their phone when they're
around you narcissists are obsessed with
money narcissists are notoriously bad at
giving gifts a narcissist will often
take their phone everywhere they go
including into the bathroom why does a
narcissist sleep so much they sleep to
avoid avoidance long-distance
relationships are great for narcissists
and here's why this notion and
particularly the body language analysis
flavor of it really came to a head two
years ago during the trial between
Johnny Depp and Amber herd suddenly
everyone was an expert on clinical
narcissism and the fact that Amber herd
was certainly an evil Harpy was evident
in her eyes in the way she smiled the
way she breathed Megan Markle too has
particularly faced the brunt of body
language analysis based narcissism
accusations of course as time has passed
and the evidence has consistently
Vindicated both of these women you won't
hear a peep about it from these
so-called experts but the underlying
idea Remains the evil walk among us but
there are tells not all narcissism
content is this clickbait Barnum effect
type stuff a small number of influencers
in this space are even themselves
diagnosed with NPD and aim to either
destigmatize the disorder or share their
lived experiences for example we have
creators like the nameless narcissist
and Kylie rackam who talk openly about
living with a diagnosis and working to
better themselves however their
followings are notably smaller than some
of the larger narcissism coaches the
more Sensational content the if she
breathes she's a narcissist stuff is
much more clickable a pretty significant
portion of this content is also directed
towards survivors of abuse blending
General abuse awareness with a focus on
narcissism many people in survivorship
communities use the term narcissist to
describe the people who have harmed them
drawing from the language of psychology
to make sense of their experiences many
of these folks are seeking answers and
support as well as wanting to share
their stories and as a result narcissism
as a topic has a lot of appeal in these
online spaces often though that
conversation begins to shift from
prevention of abuse to more surreal
almost conspiratorial directions for
instance these online spaces have seen
the development of new psychological
archetypes like the empath the super
empath and the dark empath respectively
people with psychic empathy Powers
people with super psychic empathy powers
and people with anti-hero psychic
empathy
Powers some content even suggests that
these individuals can use their own
emotional abilities to counter the
manipulation tactics of narcissists like
Pokémon The Narcissist will never find
anyone as great as you they're never
going to find another empath they're
never going to find another chosen one
this all adds a kind of psionic
Supernatural element to the conversation
where defeating the narcissist becomes a
much more literal battle as a result the
conversation around narcissists starts
to become appealing to a wide variety of
communities with slight variations on
how it's presented you can have the
healing crystals flavor of it the
scientific flavor of it or the
relationship coach flavor of it but
either way you're getting a cosmic story
of Good and Evil where the world is
under threat and must be rebalanced in
this sense the narcissist is no longer
just a psychological concept but a
cultural archetype The Narcissist
doesn't just mean a person who is an
 or a person diagnosed with
narcissistic personality disorder it's
like a Comedia Del Arte Persona a
recognizable character in a morality
play in the same way the used car
salesman or the caveman might might be
you know the costume before the
character even speaks regardless of The
Branding ultimately this content Taps
into fears of manipulation and offers
easy solutions and clear enemies if you
can learn to spot the secret narcissists
you can gain control over your life so
how can we start to unpack
this we already established that in the
vast majority of cases one of person
discusses narcissists they do not mean
people with an actual clinical diagnosis
they mean an however I do want
to talk about my theoretical standpoints
on these psychiatric systems at play
here too because where these diagnoses
do exist they are not neutral labels
either psychiatric diagnoses are not the
same thing as for example identifying a
broken bone or a measles infection
wherein these things can be observed and
categorized more or less objectively
rather they are words we use to describe
patterns of symptoms we see that certain
behaviors and traits tend to show up
together and so we group them together
under one name virtually everyone on the
planet has certain traits that you'd
label as symptoms of disorders everyone
has traits that autistic people have
everyone has traits that are considered
narcissistic or depressed or anxious
it's deemed a disorder when someone has
more than what we consider a normal
amount of those traits so if you have
enough of them to significantly impair
your functioning in daily life that
warrants a diagnosis but of course what
we consider a normal amount of something
gets changed all the time what would
help you function in one society and
time period would hinder you in another
behaviors once viewed as morally deviant
or socially disruptive have often been
pathologized in order to maintain
societal order or uphold specific power
dynamics homosexuality was in the DSM in
the 70s because it was considered
abnormal or going back we could look at
the 19th century diagnosis of Hysteria
which was usually applied to women and
pathologize their emotional expression
and sexual desires this diagnosis which
led to invasive treatments like forced
institutionalization or hysterctomy was
deeply rooted in patriarchy another
particularly harrowing example is the
diagnosis of draid amania proposed by
physician Samuel cartright in the
antibellum southern us draid amania was
presented as a mental illness that
supposedly caused enslaved black
individuals to flee captivity while this
theory was not widely accepted in all of
the US it was nonetheless published and
taken seriously in pro-slavery circles
psychiatric labels then have been and
can still be deployed to reinforce the
values of the time including when those
values are harmful and oppressive even
now we can look at Oppositional Defiant
Disorder a diagnosis that is often
applied to children who resist authority
figures or display defiant Behavior it's
been criticized for being overdiagnosed
and pathologizing normal childhood
Behavior it has also been found to be
disproportionately applied to children
from marginalized communities such as
Black and Latino children these
diagnoses don't spring fully formed from
Zeus's thigh they reflect and reinforce
course our cultural values biases and
power dynamics in this case the dynamic
at play where adults are in control and
children are expected to submit becomes
medicalized through this diagnosis like
any other diagnosis narcissistic
personality disorder is not a neutral
thing that just exists in the world
either the history of personality
disorders in general reveals how
psychiatric categories have been
influenced by societal values for
example past additions of the DSM have
described diagnoses like passive
aggressive personality disorder
self-defeating personality disorder and
sadistic personality disorder these have
since been removed not because the
behaviors no longer exist but because
the psychiatric community's
understanding of what constitutes a
disorder and what's an acceptable thing
to label someone with have evolved I'll
leave you with a small anecdote
regarding masochistic personality
disorder specifically in the book they
say you're crazy psychologist Paula
Kaplan discusses the construction of
masochistic personality disorder and the
growing critiques that it was
disproportionately pathologizing women
who were suffering from abuse she quotes
psychologist Lynn rosewater who was on
the dsm3 committee as saying they were
having a discussion for a criterian
about masochistic personality disorder
and the lead psychiatrist wife says I do
that sometimes and he says okay take it
out at other times diagnoses like
sadistic personality disorder were
removed from the DSM not because they
didn't think the personality type
existed but because they were afraid of
it being used as a legal Insanity
defense many of these disorders are also
very gendered in their applic ation men
are disproportionately diagnosed as
narcissists while women are more often
diagnosed with borderline personality
disorder now of course it's possible
that this reflects a genuine disparity
in the same way that women are more
likely to have breast cancer but there's
growing criticism that this division
also might just be sexist several
studies have concluded that gender bias
does exist in how these disorders are
assessed and diagnosed one 2023 study
even demonstrated that when men and
women had the exact same psychological
profile clinicians were more likely to
label the men as having narcissistic
personality disorder and the women as
having borderline personality disorder
similarly the term narcissistic is
specifically often weaponized against
trans women in particular from poorly
conceived Vibes based studies that argue
trans women are marked by a persistent
pseudo feminine narcissism to over
diagnosis of transp patients with
personality disorders to transphobic
newspapers and commentators calling
trans women's existence a heartbreaking
Work of Staggering narcissism these
diagnosis are often applied and then
weaponized in incredibly biased ways
like yeah I can't possibly imagine why
someone who struggles with dysphoria is
societally discriminated against and is
accused of being a sex pest on mass
might crave admiration be preoccupied
with fantasies of a better life and feel
envious of others clearly it means they
are evil and clinically insane some
researchers further argue that BPD and
complex PTSD have significant symptom
overlap this has led to questions about
whether the former is being overapplied
to women with with trauma histories
while men with similar trauma related
symptoms might receive different
diagnoses and indeed when you are given
a diagnosis of a personality disorder
you are being given a highly stigmatized
label that often carries shame blame and
Prejudice with it a 2022 study found
that people diagnosed with BPD often
faced significant stigma and
mistreatment when seeking Medical Care
this included being denied information
about their diagnosis having their self
harm misinterpreted by healthc Care
Professionals as attention seeking or
manipulative and even being refused
treatment altogether indeed despite or
even because of the high suicide rates
associated with both a borderline and
narcissistic personality disorder
diagnosis many individuals will find
themselves struggling to access support
because they are viewed as too difficult
so to bring this back to online
narcissism discourse when someone is
labeled as a narcissist we have to
recognize that one this is usually not a
clinical diagnosis and two even when it
is this label is not necessarily a
scientific objective assessment of the
individual psychiatric structures are
power structures and like any other
power structure they are fallible and
capable of reinforcing hegemony it's
just harder to identify in a lot of
these cases because well you're not
against science are you the values and
biases implicit in how psychiatric
categories are constructed mean that we
should be very cautious about applying
them liberally to label someone in our
lives as a sociopath or otherwise
pathologize them to be completely clear
here this is not a justification ation
of any harmful Behavior itself the
response here if a person has mistreated
you is not to Simply excuse mistreatment
as acceptable but rather than reaching
for ultimately flawed forms of
categorization it is far more effective
to Identify and discuss the actual
actions and their effects specifically
and think about how to respond to those
rather than getting mired in a
diagnostic can of worms so with that in
mind how should we be handling this
besides the unreliability of many of
these diagnoses another key issue with
this framing is the dehumanization it
inherently promotes it Fosters an
extremely binary view of people as
either empaths AKA fundamentally good or
narcissists AKA fundamentally evil which
reduces complex human behaviors to
stigmatizing and oversimplified good
versus evil labels part of me wants to
say we wouldn't invent a mental illness
called annoying who sucks disorder
but looking back at the AFF
forementioned history of Psychiatry we
probably actually would so even when
these labels describe something
meaningful it's worth asking what
benefits our society gains when we
categorize individuals in such a
demeaning and reductive way it's
especially important to point out that
traits often labeled as narcissistic
like strongly seeking external
validation are frequently pathologized
as deeply Sinister however when the
exact same actions are observed in other
contexts like anxiety they tend to
invoke sympathy instead whether or not
hey I need you to tell me right now that
you don't hate me and that you like
being around me is a sign of being a
sweet anxious baby or a reprehensible
narcissist is purely a matter of
branding the inconsistency reveals a
deeper issue it is not the behavior
itself that is condemned but rather the
label attached to the person exhibiting
it this leads to the second concern the
suggestion that these traits make
someone innately evil clearly this is
not the case I want to restate again
that mistreating other people is never
acceptable but here what's being
addressed is not actually mistreatment
of others as an action rather it is
about packaging people themselves into
very demeaning subjective and punitive
categories the focus is placed on
labeling certain people as fundamentally
flawed or inherently dangerous sickos
with sio disorders this approach doesn't
encourage solutions that address the
root causes of abusive Behavior instead
it promotes the idea of ostracizing a
small select group of people
the figure of the narcissist in this
context represents more than just an
individual who exhibits harmful traits
it embodies a kind of folk devil who
Taps into deep-seated fears about safety
especially in individualistic cultures
like the United States much like past
moral panics like the Satanic ritual
abuse scare the narrative Stokes fear
and hostility toward others it suggests
that narcissists are everywhere waiting
to steal your energy and that the only
defense is to constantly guard yourself
against them this rhetoric isolates
individuals and fosters a culture of
Suspicion we can compare this to the
exaggerated fears around human
trafficking where individuals are warned
to be constantly Vigilant against an
omnipresent shadowy threat human
trafficking does happen but it's not
largely white girls getting snatched out
of grocery store parking lots it's
usually exploited individuals from the
global South who are promised jobs in
foreign countries and then have their
passports taken away the point is when
we single out a type of bad person and
cast them as an inhuman scary monstrous
threat it's not just the fact that we
are likely wrong about the quality and
identity of that type of person it's
also the fact that we are being
encouraged towards constant fear a kind
that isolates ourselves from one another
to no end other than to reinforce our
own righteousness the book folk devils
and moral panics was written in 1972 by
sociologist Stanley Cohen and was
specifically written about a moral panic
in 1960s Britain surrounding youth
culture but it's since been revised
several times and really is relevant
even now Cohen describes the production
and replication of moral panics in
eerily familiar terms for instance in
Cohen's case study this process involved
exaggerating isolated behaviors and
incidents until they were perceived as
widespread routine dangers one fight
between some youth rockers in the 60s
became the kids are out of control and
are making our daily life unsafe to live
the public response became
disproportionate creating a narrative
that these deviants were omnipresent
threats similarly narcissists are
portrayed as lurking everywhere waiting
to manipulate and drain the emotional
energy of empaths relative ly extreme
actions are elevated to the status of
emblematic and ubiquitous behaviors this
then justifies extreme consequences
whether social emotional or even legal
against those deemed to be the shadowy
threat as Cohen puts it if one conceives
of the situation as catastrophic and
moreover thinks it will happen again get
worse and probably spread then one is
Justified in taking elaborate and
excessive precautionary measures this
sort of relationship between belief
systems and social control is
Illustrated nicely social policies
towards drug addiction Cen is saying
that fear leads to disproportionate
actions because we'd rather overreact
than risk not reacting enough after all
if something bad does happen someone
will have to take the blame even if an
individual recognizes that the threat of
narcissistic energies is relatively
unfounded the constant chatter around
this phenomenon can lead to distrust and
paranoia I'm going to include one more
quote of his here which is how he
identifies the targets of a moral panic
I want to note that the construction of
the everpresent energy sucking
narcissist checks every box the objects
of normal moral panics are rather
predictable so to are the discursive
formula I used to represent them for
example they are new but also old they
are damaging in themselves but also
merely warning signs of the real much
deeper and more prevalent condition they
are transparent anyone can see what's
happening but also opaque accredited
experts must explain the perils hidden
behind the superficially harmless de
kotto rock songs lyrics to see how they
led to a school massacre I can't look at
videos about the distinctive narcissist
smirk or how you know someone in your
life is Evil by their body language
without remembering this book and
feeling my skin absolutely crawl as with
any other moral Panic this type of
belief also shifts the conversation away
from self-reflection one key commonality
in the narcissist Panic industrial
complex is the idea that anyone who is
worried they might be a narcissist or be
toxic is not a frequent saying is if you
are worried about whether or not you are
a narcissist it means you aren't because
a real narcissist would never be worried
about their potential to do harm you'll
truy worried that you might be you're
not narcissists lack empathy and they
certainly lack the concern to do
anything about it so are you finding
this right now let me tell you and
reassure you you are not a narcissist if
you were a narcissist you wouldn't be
thinking so deeply about not being a bad
person narcissist can't self-reflect so
if you're self-reflecting on whether
you're the narcissist or not you're
probably not for instance r/ raised by
narcissists has a rule that narcissists
are not allowed to comment or post there
but has also claimed that worrying you
are a narcissist means you are not a
narcissist I'm still not sure who the no
narcissist allowed rule is intended to
actually exclude then in other words
these spaces will regularly affirm that
you do not need to critically examine
your own behavior the fact that you have
begun to self-reflect is taken as a sign
that you should stop self-reflecting you
could could never be the problem the
problem is the Sinister other by
positioning harm as something that only
other people do those with a disorder a
moral failing we absolve ourselves of
confronting our own potential for it the
construction of the empath as innately
good further entrenches this mindset as
if good versus evil is just a onetoone
sliding scale of all empathy to no
empathy this binary leads to a dangerous
Distortion of moral responsibility if
narcissists are inherently evil then any
harm done to them becomes Justified even
celebrated entire Industries are built
around telling people they are
fundamentally good that their empathy is
what separates them from the monsters
around them finally much like these
other moral panics this tends to harm
the most vulnerable people first our
Vibe detectors are not socially and
morally neutral machines I talked about
this with my West Elm Caleb video where
people ended up being completely sure a
random Tik Tok user was a literal serial
killer when in fact she was just a
transom who appeared impoverished
similarly when Society is given cart
blanch to dehumanize anyone it decides
is a narcissist it is probably going to
dehumanize the people who it doesn't
respect in the first place trust your
gut is often touted as safety advice to
women but a lot of the time your gut is
going to confirm your pre-existing
biases what if you live in a society
where racism is institutionalized as we
all do and therefore your gut is racist
or you just happen to assume someone
with a visible disability is scary
because your instinct says so I can say
that as an autistic woman I get a lot of
people telling me their gut says that I
just have bad vibes for a reason they
can't articulate but are positive is
true I get a lot of oh I bet you're so
mean or oh you must think you're so much
smarter than everyone else type comments
when I'm just existing because they're
picking up on little ways my tone might
be inexplicably off in a more clinical
context we can see that many people who
are labeled as having cluster B
personality disorders are more likely to
have psychiatrists decide they are
dangerous and this can have real legal
consequences for those folks for
instance someone labeled as dangerous
based on a personality disorder could
face restrictions on their freedom such
as being placed under involuntary
commitment or have their legal rights
diminished in court proceedings but in
fact many of those predictions are
completely off sing at Al in 2014
actually did a study on this they
analyzed 47 databases containing over
13,000 people across 13 countries
labeled as high violence risks including
based on professional judgment and
followed up on future violent crime
rates among those people and what they
found was that the odds of people
labeled as violent actually doing any
violence was incredibly variable they
found that in particular these studies
tended to overestimate the risk for men
and underestimate the risk for women
that the characteristics of the people
being assessed can make the validity of
any predictions highly inconsistent and
that people who are assessed using
professional judgment tools tended to be
more likely to have false positives for
being labeled as violent risks a lot of
the time being labeled as dangerous to
yourself or others serves a punitive
purpose rather than a preventative one
you're often forced into a system rif
with abuse in order to correct a crime
you have not committed yet and when
these tools are frequently wrong and
Vibes based this becomes all the more
problematic as the authors put it the
rate of violence in patients judged to
be at high risk by structured risk
assessment instruments is not constant
varying considerably and systematically
within and between instruments this
raises the question of whether if
practitioners cannot make a reasonable
estimate of the base rate for the popul
in question and hence cannot estimate
the likelihood of a future violent act
for a member of a category they should
be using high-risk categorizations at
all in other words predictive warnings
like the narcissist Vibe detector are
unscientific and often discriminatory
because humans are often unscientific
and discriminatory the same harm exists
interpersonally social media is filled
with infographics and advice columns
that promote not only emotional distance
but outright cruelty often under the
guise of self defense from narcissists
for example take a look at this viral
Instagram post from the aformentioned Dr
Annie PhD in English literature don't
worry about hurting The Narcissist they
don't have a heart to break remember I
simply am not there best sociopathic
game to play with a narcissist is hot
and cold use their abandonment issues to
control them four ways to torture The
Narcissist if you want to create
distress if you want to create anguish
uncertainty insecurity and Paran
you must reduce their significance this
kind of rhetoric is not just reductive
it actively promotes the dehumanization
of others we have created a society
where any action no matter how harmful
is Justified as long as the target has
been labeled a narcissist once someone
is marked as Beyond empathy or
Redemption it becomes easy to
rationalize treating them as less than
human a narcissist is anyone we don't
like anyone who has harmed us a
narcissist could never be me but it
could always be you even beyond the fact
that the labels can be harmful
discriminatory ways to view the world
they're also often actively
counterproductive indeed this narrative
makes it harder to look into the larger
reasons why abuse can occur in the first
place the narcissist that is to say the
fairy tale archetype of the narcissist
is often portrayed as a universally bad
character willing to harm anyone and
everyone indiscriminately this portrayal
implies their evil is non-specific and
apolitical a kind of inherent rottenness
of the soul but this over looks the
reality that abuse doesn't occur in a
vacuum the reason there are Myriad cases
of parents abusing children but we don't
see an epidemic of children abusing
parents is because abuse is enabled by
structural power imbalances children
have very few rights in most parts of
the world barring severe extremes
they're essentially treated as property
with unfortunately limited recourse even
in those extreme situations and now you
might be thinking that yes this is true
but this isn't mutually exclusive with
the idea that some people are just evil
and broken and it is perhaps true that
some people just enjoy power making
other people feel small and weak and
will Lord it over anyone they can but
while that might sometimes be the case I
think this narcissist narrative being
the primary story We Tell ourselves
still omits things in a way that
actually makes it harder to address
these problems I would Hazard that a lot
of child abuse doesn't actually happen
because parents are deeply mentally ill
or are setting out to be evil people yet
regardless there are legal and social
structures in place that can lead to
these things happening anyway when you
take a look at the after mentioned r/
raised by narcissists one of the things
you'll see come up consistently is
constraining and controlling Behavior
things like my parents forced me to have
my hair cut in this exact way until I
was old enough to live on my own
physical punishment was extremely common
my parents use technology to track my
every movement in any context this is
unacceptable but these behaviors often
specifically stem from particular
ideological places that transcend any
one individual's personal pathology for
example one of the things you'll notice
is that child abuse is more common in
very conservative and very religious
communities I will note that most of the
research I was able to find was in
English from Mostly us sources and thus
was more heavily sampled toward
Christianity so I can't make definitive
claims about all conservative religious
communities but what I was able to find
showed a clear correlation Jackson at
all found that religious ideology was a
significant predictor of holding
attitudes that devalue children so
claims like children should be be seen
and not heard they also found that heavy
religiosity was positively correlated
with verbal abuse of children as well as
some other factors like age of the child
Ellison and Bradshaw in 2009 studied
conservative Protestant communities and
noted that while simply being religious
was not a risk factor for physically
harming children social conservatism
biblical literalism and a strong belief
in hell were similarly Rodriguez and
Henderson in 2010 found that both social
Conformity and again bibl literalism
increased the risk of physical abuse of
children moreover there's a particular
cultural emphasis in American
Conservative Christian communities on
breaking a child's will perhaps the most
notorious example is the millions of
copies sold of to train up a child by
Michael Pearl a book link to several
deaths as a result of the methods it
encourages are all the millions of
people who would torture a child because
a man suggested in a popular book that
they do so mentally ill it seems
farfetched all this to say not all
religious conservatives abuse their
children and not all child abuse comes
from religious conservative households
but this particular set of beliefs and
family structures makes it significantly
more likely look at communities like the
quiverful movement they're a strongly
Conservative Christian sect that places
emphasis on large families traditional
patriarchal leadership in the home and
heavy obedience and of course they are
rif with abuse of various kinds women
and girls in particular are often
treated like livestock queerness is
anathema and children of all genders are
forced into AB abusive and constraining
childhoods is it probable that every
single quiverful parent just happens to
have a bad brain or is it something else
about these belief systems and family
structures that leads to abuse happening
regardless when you exist in a culture
that prioritizes absolute obedience and
rigid hierarchical structures more
specifically a culture that believes
women should unconditionally obey men
and children should unconditionally obey
parents power imbalances are entrenched
it cultivates a mindset where
controlling and punitive behaviors are
seen as valid even necessary there is a
cultural emphasis on parents rights that
is meant to be all-encompassing from the
right to monitor every action of the
child to the right to treat that child
however they please it's in fact the
same cultural belief behind sads of book
bands sweeping North America right now
men are taught that a heavy control of
women and children and a demand for
obedience is not just acceptable but
fundamental to what it means to be a man
women are taught the same these roles
are reproduced over decades and across
Generations these structures often
further lack mechanisms for
accountability or redress abuse is
viewed as a private family matter
external intervention is minimized and
victims are left without support the
combination of dehumanizing ideologies
entrenched power imbalances and a lack
of accountability creates a fertile
ground for abuse irrespective of
individual intentions the same applies
albeit to a lesser extent to the way
families are set up right now in general
families are not just personal
relationships they're also economic
units the nuclear family is also a means
of organizing labor and resources so
when we look at gender obviously
traditionally men were seen as the
Breadwinners while women were tasked
with unpaid domestic labor and child
rearing so wealth and power remain
concentrated in the hands of men which
marginalizes women to men and
marginalizes children to both of their
parents children meanwhile are not only
economically dependent but also legally
and socially subordinate even in
Progressive families made up of kind
people they are largely expected to obey
adults follow rules without question and
conform to social norms when they don't
there is a very extreme amount of leeway
as to how a parent can treat them in
response and even if a parent would
never dream of using that power in a
harmful way that power is always there
and that affects how the entire social
role of a child is constructed and
perceived women in family relationships
are often even still in a subordinate
position for children and family
relationships they are virtually always
subordinate these deeply entrenched
systems are I would argue vastly more
responsible for widespread harm than
narcissism the system isn't just set up
to protect Bad actors it's also set up
to turn people into Bad actors because
of what these roles are for instance on
top of conservatism religious literalism
and high control hierarchical societies
we also see this manifest in a lot of
cases where a woman is consistently put
down gaslit or otherwise abused by a
male partner it's become very common for
women to refer to an ex like that as a
narcissist but almost every time this
term is being used what isn't being said
is the word misogynist even when that
might be more appropriate often times
when a woman in particular is is
consistently mistreated by a man he will
to some extent hold the belief that
women are lesser that same mistreatment
won't manifest in how he speaks to his
male friends and colleagues but he will
be consistently dismissive to the women
in his life and misogyny is not
individual brain poison or something men
are biologically predisposed toward
instead it's steeped in the material
conditions of our outside world
patriarchal beliefs are reinforced by
economic and social structures that
benefit men now obviously this does not
mean that abuse doesn't occur in
traditionally Progressive places or that
a woman can't abuse a man or anything of
that sort but when you start to look at
Trends there is clear linkage between
ideology power and harm to others it is
not by and large the result of
individual pathology but of Social Power
this isn't just true for gender are we
so sure that politician we hate is a
narcissist or is she just a racist is
your boss a narcissist or is he just a
capitalist is Donald Trump mentally ill
or is he a generationally wealthy white
man who was grown up since birth being
told by others and shown by his own
wealth that he can do whatever he wants
and is better than other people when we
describe narcissists as the bulk of
abusers in society and as
indiscriminately evil we're actually
actively obfuscating the real solvable
problems that enable these Dynamics time
and time again how are we going to fix
these problems if we don't even name
them I want to acknowledge something
here The Narrative that those who abuse
others do so because of their individual
pathology because they have evil and
broken Souls can absolutely be a
validating one to survivors and it's not
hard to understand why people who have
experienced abuse find themselves
isolated and struggling to be believed
harmed by people who are often outwardly
charming and likable to the folks around
them being able to hear and articulate
no they were a bad person has a lot of
psychological value after you have been
made to feel like nothing was wrong with
them and furthermore that something was
wrong with you it's sympathetic
understandable and profoundly human the
problem unfortunately is that something
feeling emotionally validating to people
who have survived serious harm is not
the same thing as that thing being true
or leading to meaningful change it might
help me in the moment to believe that a
person who was terrible to me simply had
a broken soul and that's that but what
does this narrative exclude what does it
lead to indeed recognizing that there
are social reasons this happens on a
large scale doesn't make these problems
any less important on the contrary it's
a necessary first step to proposing
actual solutions to resolve them every
time have this conversation while
shutting out important aspects of how
these systems occur We are failing to
address important root causes moreover
if this narrative is true how do we
begin to prevent abuse when the root
causes go no deeper than a given
individual the only solutions we can
begin to conceive of are one reactive
two individualistic and or three
carceral that means we can't prevent
these things on a large scale only react
after it happens that the only change we
can hope for is fixing ourselves and not
society and that some people are just
just rotten and ought to be thrown out
of society entirely in fact this
pathologizing approach to discussing
abuse doesn't just fail to address these
systemic factors it can also actually
make them worse once again the
narcissist narrative promotes the idea
that you are surrounded by a number of
humanlike but not quite human monsters
who are out to get you and that all of
the harms and evil comes from within
them and not from anywhere broader and
what this promotes is a culture of fear
and isolation from others the world is
separated into empaths and narcissists
and if you are a truly good person
person then harm and abuse doesn't come
from you but from a danger that lurks
outside you and it is in fact this exact
isolationist and fearful culture that
can enable abuse in the first place
journalist Janet heick an author of
breaking their will shedding light on
religious child maltreatments discusses
these specific types of conservative
religious culture that are particularly
posed to enable abuse as follows there
are three Perfect Storm factors that
identify a religious culture or
Community as
authoritarian one the culture has a
strict social hierarchy two the culture
is fearful and three the culture is
separatist the more intense these three
factors are the more authoritarian the
culture is the more likely children will
be harmed which is as good of a time as
any to talk about the real root cause
behind this bulk of social media
narcissist content
one of the things you might start to
notice with narcissist content online is
that it almost always follows a very
specific pipeline you start watching one
or two videos about narcissists and
sociopaths and often these seem
relatively measured and then you start
to get recommendations about demons like
actual biblical demons and at first it's
like why are these two things connected
and then you start to notice the
hashtags on a lot of these narcissist
videos also include phrases like
spiritual warfare demonic narcissists
narcissist black eyes and then it's like
oh that's what this
is that's what this is the connection
between narcissism and demons is not
random it is deeply rooted in a very
specific very conservative worldview the
concept of spiritual warfare is
absolutely Central to this belief system
this is basically a narrative that
posits that the world is a Battleground
between good and evil forces where
demons and angels influence human
behavior narcissists in this context are
not just psychologically difficult or
harmful individuals they are literal
vessels for demonic forces so for
instance as you start watching the more
explicitly religious ones one idea that
you'll see talked about a lot like a lot
a lot is the idea of the Jezebel spirit
which narcissists supposedly have this
is a term used by some Christian
influencers and Ministries to describe a
demonic entity that they believe
influences individuals especially women
who exhibit controlling manipulative or
seductive behaviors people with the JZ
of Spirit narcissist do this they're
controlling they're manipulative they're
Charming they're sexually impure and
selfish they'll push their victims to
have sex before marriage the trick of
the enemy to get to stop you in your
journey in your walk in life just
because he hates you so much because
you're a child of God is to send a
narcissist which has the spirit of
Jezebel right Jezebel hates God's
prophets someone with the Jezebel spirit
refuses to admit when they're wrong or
take responsibility when they make a
mistake that is a demon in that person
that person has a Jezebel spirit ever
heard of The Jezebel spirit it's named
after Queen Jezebel from the Bible she
was manipulative controlling and Oho
Charming kind of sounds like a
narcissist right as a note most of the
accounts I've seen promoting this
narrative are Christian though not all
I've also seen similar narcissist demony
content both from Muslim and generally
psychic essential oil Pagan type
influencers but the bulk of popular
content that I've seen appears created
by and geared towards specifically
conservative Christian viewers hence the
fact that this whole Jezebel spirit idea
is obviously deeply sexist and the idea
of human but not quite human people that
are wandering the Earth who look like us
has also been used as a vessel for
anti-Semitism in the past many survivors
have reported seeing the narcissist
turning into a reptile likee creature
with dead or flat eyes with very dark
huses or eyes that appear black with a
soulless piercing stare to be clear this
is not a fringe idea this is a cottage
industry in of itself and is an
incredibly common end point for this
type of narcissist content you've got
counseling services influencers and
online Ministries explicitly using this
connection to advertise themselves this
normally smallish Pastor account got
over a million views by pivoting to
focus on narcissism and claiming they
are demons more largely you have
accounts like spiritual whistleblower
with half a million followers focusing
heavily on narcissist content and in
fact she's one of the first people who
popped up for me just searching
narcissist even the more benign videos
have hashtags like spiritual warfare on
them though most of the videos
themselves are largely just about abuse
and then the further into her videos you
look yeah it's demons demons all the way
down what they did was take orders from
Satan to destroy you and many of the
most popular videos about narcissists on
online platforms at the very least
include some kind of sneaky demon
related tagging so for instance one of
the most common Gateway tactics to sneak
demon stuff into these videos is through
mentions of narcissists having black
eyes this is incredibly common when I
look up narcissist right now literally
one of the First videos you will find is
about how you can identify a narcissist
by looking at their eyes and how they
have scary black eyes their eyes will
literally turn black in a matter of
seconds oh my God this is dangerous oh
my God there's a reptile in the room
sometimes there's a pseudo scientific
explanation for why this happens their
pupils are dilating because they're
angry the uniquely narcissist trait of
being angry that one has over a million
views by the way but you keep watching
stuff from the same creators and it's
demons again narc abuse coach the uh
grandiose eyebrows guy with over half a
million Instagram followers yep demons
even outside the apps we can also look
at places like above and beyond
Christian Counseling they describe
narcissism as being driven by a range of
demonic entities such as the spirit of
insanity which causes confusion and
Chaos love honor and respect is another
anti-abuse service which explicitly
claims narcissism is demonic possession
this is not a rare notion and I would
argue this gradual shift from
psychological analysis to spiritual
warfare appears intentional in many
cases influencers and Ministries use
these narratives to attract and retain
followers who are seeking answers to
their difficult Relationships by Framing
narcissists as possessed by demons or
The Jezebel spirit they offer a clear
albeit extreme explanation for the harm
these individuals cause I think it's
clear why this narrative is both popular
and harmful it plays well with American
Conservative Christian influencer
audiences because is an American
Conservative Christian way of viewing
others that has gotten a few either
feminist or scientific sounding rebrands
and what's worth mentioning here is that
this undercurrent of spiritual warfare
content colors the entire way narcissism
online is discussed it also bleeds into
how legitimately secular creators talk
about narcissism like let's look back at
the dark empath or super empath content
right in this framework empaths are
portrayed as almost Angelic figures with
heightened sensitivity and moral Purity
while narcissists are cast as inherently
malevolent it's the exact same binary as
the traditional spiritual warfare
narrative but with the language
modernized to fit a secular audience
clinical language legitimizes it but the
underlying message Remains the Same
there are fundamentally biologically
good people and fundamentally
biologically bad people and they are
locked in a cosmic struggle it is a
seductive and dangerous narrative
regardless of the form it takes it
reassures viewers that they are on the
side of the righteous reinforcing their
sense of moral superiority and
justifying Their Fear and distrust of
others unfortunately this narrative and
the undertones that come with it have
consequences that extend far beyond just
discussions about narcissism when we
step outside of this pseudo
psychological pseudo religious framework
we start to notice the same pattern
emerging in various other communities
and ideologies one common thread AC Ross
These spaces is the idea that I am a
real fully-fledged autonomous person and
you are not so for instance look at the
consistent need for funny ironic
internet users to separate themselves
from normies whether we're calling them
co-workers or locals or NPCs in the case
of the latter it is literally
dehumanizing them look at the way
conspiracy theory communities talk about
sheeple being almost robotic look at the
way misogynistic communities of Alpha
and sigma males talk about betas as if
they're homunculi with brains made of
cottage cheese blue pilled and redpilled
unenlightened and enlightened
narcissists and dark empaths in some
ways all of this is a reflection of the
exact same dehumanizing rhetoric we see
in these watch out for narcissism
communities in all of these cases we are
looking at a reductionist view that
exerts control over how we relate to
others casting ourselves as the
enlightened individuals in a world full
of automatons or demonic entities all of
these Concepts reduce complex human
beings to one-dimensional caricatures
stripping them of their Humanity all of
these ideas are appealing partly because
they are very simplistic fairy tales
that absolve the believer of
responsibility while reinforcing that
they are complex and virtuous and all of
these narratives erode genuine
compassion solidarity and understanding
instead encouraging suspicion
condescension and fear you should be
suspicious of any narrative that tells
you you have a power that makes you a
fundamentally good person and it is your
duty to detect and combat fundamentally
bad people of course the one exception
to this is if you're immed gray empath
with a hint of lime the most important
thing I wanted to get across with this
video is that people aren't caricatures
or one-dimensional figures by labeling
others as inherently good or bad we
oversimplify their humanity and lose
sight of the Nuance that make each
person unique Lindsay Ellis has a
fantastic video on guy FTI that explores
how he was unfairly caricatured and how
public perception has shifted over time
it's a great example of reimagining our
preconceived notions about someone and I
highly recommend it you can find it on
nebula similarly if if you're tired of
ads interruptions and waiting around for
my videos to hit YouTube then good news
I also publish all of my videos early
and adree on nebula nebula is a
streaming service that's been built by
and for creators like me it's a space
where we can share our videos ad free
publish them early and even create
exclusive projects you won't find
anywhere else for me there's debater
theater where I examine how the world
tries to persuade us in various ways and
we also have tons of other amazing
projects from creators You Love Like
Jesse Earl's SFI Thriller identities and
Abigail Thorns play the prince nebula is
increasingly producing a ton of amazing
highquality Originals you can only find
on the platform we have the getaway a
game show where six creators are trying
to find and vote out a mole with the
twist being they're all the mole we just
released Dracula's ex-girlfriend a film
produced by Abigail Thorne about the
relationship between two women who have
become entangled with Dracula there's
also Patrick H Willams sci-fi musical
comedy night of the coconut which I
actually have a cameo in nebula is
enabling creators like us to make
thoughtful enjoyable high production
value movies and series and I can't
recommend it enough right now you can
get 40% off an annual subscription to
nebula that's just $36 for a whole year
or $3 a month by visiting go. nebula.jpg
on top of a big thank you to all my
patrons I'd like to give a special thank
you to my $20 plus patrons Matthew
sample James Dugan 124 mm10 Robert
Valentine Allen and infelicitous rips
thank you all so much
when
I
you
B when I
we Bell s
when
I you
we
