hello this is Perry Marshall and I'm
here with Dennis Noble and it's a real
privilege to have Dennis here
dennis is one of the most eminent
scientists in the UK he's on the
evolution 2.0 judging panel for the
prize and he organized a very very
important meeting at the Royal Society
in 2016 which was probably the most
revolutionary evolution meeting
certainly in the last couple of decades
if not longer and I was there and I kind
of felt like Forrest Gump
you know witnessing history when it was
happening there and I wanted to get
Dennis on the line here because he's
published a very interesting paper in
physiology science journal called
central dogma or central debate and
we'll probably talk about that paper a
little bit today but I wanted to
introduce you to Dennis and and have him
share his thoughts with you and just
just a little bit more about Dennis
Dennis is known around the world as
being the guy who figured out the
cardiac arrhythmias possible and he he
was the first human to model a human
organ on a computer which he did on
punch cards at University College London
in the basement of a lab in 1960 so
that's uh well I just think that's
pretty interesting he's also a very
active musician and he founded something
called voices from Oxford which is a
video interview series at Oxford
University has professor Doc's furred
for pretty much all of his career so
very distinguished scientist very
important voice and the evolution in in
the new evolution that's happening now
and so Dennis welcome I'm glad to have
you here today
okay
you very much Perry I my ears are
already ringing or my face is blushing
whichever you want to say but thanks for
that introduction well what would I so
so I'm not very much not an evolutionary
biologist and you're not an evolutionary
biologist either you're a physiologist
but but what I could observe as a
entrepreneur as a consultant is that
almost all Reformation zuv Industries
come from the outside Martin Luther was
not a Catholic priest and Bill Gates was
not a mainframe computer guy and Larry
and Sergey who started Google were not
search engine guys and and and the guy
who started Federal Express was not a
shipping industry guy and I mean you can
go you can go up a long list of of
revolutions that have happened in
various fields and and it's almost
always the outsiders who say hey wait a
minute
you know we're really missing something
here and you're a physiologist and for a
very long time
you have felt hey guys we are missing
some something here and and there are
things here that you're saying or true
that cannot possibly be true because I
know that I know that I know this
because I'm a physiologist and Denis I
would like you to just as however you
wish to can you take us inside the mind
in the skin and you know the shoes of a
physiologist and help us understand well
what is a physiologist maybe not
everybody exactly knows and and just
kind of tell us how you you kind of
stumbled into this it's not like you
started out with a plan but tell me tell
me about that Denis absolutely right
very um the way in which I got on to the
issue goes back
to a period during the 1980s when we
were working out the more complete
details than I could do in 1960 of how
the hearts pacemaker works and we found
something quite extraordinary which is
that it seems initially to be
unnecessarily complicated in fact I
remember people asking that kind of
question as I lectured on what we were
finding one mechanism after another but
the point made was but you only need one
of these then we did a very interesting
experiment both in terms of using a drug
to do the actual experiment on the heart
but also to run the computer model which
was this take one of those mechanisms
out on a computer model you can do it
easily you could do it with a drug to
knock out a particular mechanism we did
that with a mechanism that was
contributing 80% of the functionality it
made only a 15 percent difference to the
frequency of the heart if you take it
out now to an engineer like you and to a
physiologist because in a sense of
physiologist is an engineer of the body
yeah is the ologist like me that said
the following first if you do gene
knockouts you do not necessarily get a
good quantitative estimate of the
function the difference between 15% and
80% is well equal for biologists that's
pretty big pretty bad in fact you know
the story doesn't end there because
actually the pacemaker of the heart is
backed up as we would say in a number of
ways not just two so I then thought
about that and I asked myself the
question if you can't actually relate
genes to function by doing knockouts
what are we doing now I'm not saying
that knock
never reveal function of course you get
spectacular cases where with rare
genetic diseases a particular change
will make a disastrous consequence for
the person but what do we find generally
what are people found with all the
genome-wide Association studies that are
going on now there are so many genes
involved exactly as in the cardiac
pacemaker but what is happening is that
Nature has created robustness so you
have so many mechanisms involved that
you have to ask the question why are
they involved they're there to make the
system or a bus to make it safe just as
you have a double control system on an
aircraft but then you move further on
you see you ask the question does that
mean that the control networks lying if
you like above the genome a really
dictating what the genome does and I
think that's the right way round to
think about it but once you start going
down that road you start questioning the
very basis of all gene-centric theories
of evolution including no terribly
notably of course including The Selfish
Gene yourself well so let me let me
feedback to you what you said and
engineer language right so so you know I
have a digital watch here you know it's
it's the analog hands but it's
electronics inside it's got a quartz
crystal and the crystal vibrates right
yeah and and and a little circuit
divides up the vibrations and and sets
the pulse of the watch and so the the
second hand ticks each sex is second and
and what I think you are saying is that
people initially said well I just figure
the heart has a little quartz crystal so
to speak and then and then it gets
subdivided and then the heart beats and
and then oh my goodness it turns out
well there's another quartz crystal and
there's another one and then
another one and when I take out one of
them I don't get an 80% change I only
get a 15% change so they're actually
redundant okay but but furthermore
furthermore what you begin to suspect
was that there was a mutual almost
circular relationship between the
mechanisms and the genes the code for it
not a one-way like it wasn't just gene
to quartz crystal it was the but each
affects the other
am i correct yes and moreover for quite
a long time the network which is
producing the rhythm can function
whether or not the genome is there wait
wait a minute okay that's interesting
you can take mount the gene oh yes the
genome is required only when the cell
wants to make more protein that's an
absolutely crucial point this applies
generally there are mechanisms in the
body that enabled us to know or the body
to know when he hasn't got enough
calcium transporter protein or muscle
contracting protein and it goes and
tells the genome to do so you see the
direction of causality I think we have
got it usually the wrong way round it's
actually the networks and the cell and
the tissues and the organs that tell the
genome how much to make of each protein
now that leads on to a very clear
understanding of why a liver cell heart
cell phone cell and so on are all very
very different in terms of the proteins
that they contain but they use exactly
the same genome what's telling the
genome to make a bone cell liver cell
heart cell is the cell itself so the
causality is that way around well this
is what you're describing is a complete
total
conceptual change from the way most
people have been talking about genes and
evolution for a hundred years
well certainly since vice Minh came up
about a hundred and thirty years ago
with the idea of his barrier that is
there was no connection between the soma
changes as the body changes and the so
called germ line that is the sperm and
egg and so it really goes way way back
and that incidentally of course was the
foundation of what's called the modern
synthesis which is the standard theory
of evolution so challenging that and
challenging in particular the
misconception that the central dogma of
molecular biology which is that you go
from genes to that is DNA to RNA to
protein but never the other way around
challenging that is to challenge the
very basis of the modern synthesis of
the evolutionary biology so I think it
is fundamental it's not just a minor
change it's a major one well when I
begin investigating evolution I
concluded yes evolution did happen but
there's no way the normal explanation
could possibly be correct and I came to
that conclusion as an engineer because
what they were telling me in biology I
had never encountered an engineering
school and I most people following that
line of reasoning would have just become
some flavor of creationist but I said no
I think there's something more going on
here and what I found was no that
actually the cells change the genes now
can you give a couple of examples of
where we have clearly documented that
the cell modifies genome and it's not
just the genome building the cell
because I think we have to be very clear
about this otherwise we can't move
forward
absolutely so well of course the the
classic
example of that is the immune system you
see we can resist an absolutely
fantastic number of different invaders
viruses bacteria and other foreign
bodies invading our body because we have
the ability to make vastly more keys to
fit the lock imagine the invader is a
bit like a lock and you've got to get a
key to it Jose Eber neutralized it now
we can make many many more of those than
could ever have been put into the genome
as sequences how do we do it the
organism effectively has a feedback
mechanism which operates when a foreign
body arrives which it is not met before
and it says to the genome pls mutate at
a very high speed
now don't you Tate everywhere that would
be disastrous it does so in a pinpoint
fashion it goes straight for the
variable bit of the protein that it has
to make in order to fit that lock and
then it creates absolutely millions of
different new keys it finds one that
works it says to those cells reproduce
the rest die so we already have an
example of that mechanism moreover if
you ask the question what's happening to
those bacteria that are now evolving
very quickly to resist antibiotics
they've got the same mechanism we call
it hyper mutation that is the cell
effectively or a population of cells
because it's obviously not a single cell
that does that it's a population of
cells in the case of the bacteria a
tissue or organ of the body in the case
that is the immune system in the case of
our bodies that says to the genome
please do the following we now know as
physiologist exactly how that can work -
because we can show the mechanisms by
which a
then right up at the surface of this
cell can be transmitted all the way down
into the nucleus where the genome is and
to target that in a specific way in the
case of the immune system to say please
mutate this bit very rapidly in the case
of the bacteria doing the same thing to
its genome knowing it's got defined as a
population a solution to the challenge
of a new antibiotic and is it the case
that that cell can now transmit the
immunity to its progeny yes exactly
because that's why the in the case of
the immune system that's precisely why
the body tells those cells to reproduce
it tells the rest to die there's a
specific process which we happen to call
that proptosis but that's just a nice
Greek word which means in effect kill
yourself yeah right it's remarkable and
it's so effective because you see that
as I said at the beginning of this part
of our discussion the total number of
new challenging invaders that we could
encounter is vastly greater than could
ever be encoded by our genome now the
obvious question about that though is
this could that be passed on to
subsequent generations the case of the
immune system the answer is no each
generation has to start off with its
immune system with the number of
different locks and keys that it's
already got and then as it were learn
again so in that case that is not passed
on but many other things are passed on
and what we've discovered is that there
are many particles in the sperm line and
in the egg line which enable what we
call paternal and maternal effects to be
transmitted down through the generations
again as a physiologist we all find this
very straightforward
I tell you Perry in my field of
physiology internationally I find very
little opposition to the
ideas that I'm expressing everything
I've told you in this little discussion
would be regarded by most physiologist
is damned obvious what's the argument
about right right but but it's met with
hostility by evolutionary biologists
well in a in a curious way and I I still
don't really understand this I mean I
I've got here you see the issue of the
Royal Society Journal new trends in
evolutionary biology now for many
evolutionary biologists what you might
call standard even loser apologist that
was like the red rag to a bull they
didn't like it yeah I just looked on the
internet before our discussion I find
new trends in cardiology comes out every
year we in in physiology we discuss new
trends all the time we've welcomed the
new trends so what is going on and I
think what is going on is very
interesting the problem I think is that
so much is at stake in relation to the
arguments in evolution it's an area
which is hotly disputed not just by
scientists but also by the general
public as we well know of course
particularly in the United States so
it's a very very hot area and big
reputations are at stake I feel that
what is going on is that people are
shifting the goalposts to avoid having
to admit that some major assumptions in
the original theory as it was formulated
to give us the modern synthesis having
that been shown to be wrong simply first
one the fact that it is possible for
what we call changes in the body during
life to be passed on to subsequent
generations that's been now shown in
many many different species including
the human point too
could it be the case that what we now
call the central dogma of molecular
biology which is the point I made
earlier on the DNA creates an RNA that
creates a protein this only one way
could that now be as it were the defense
of Iceman's barrier the original idea
that the germline was carrying something
which was not influenced by the rest of
the body the answer is there's no way in
which that can be the case just to be
technical for a moment but I'll try and
keep this simple if I represented a
molecule let's say a bit of DNA as the
size of my fist here I'm in Oxford in
England the edge of the cell that
contains that molecule that DNA would be
way up in Scotland that's about 800
miles away that's the difference of
scale that we're dealing with now the
vitamin barrier is about a cell the
central dogma is about a molecule and
there's no way in which those can be the
same now what I find I can I just try to
maybe clarify what you just said so so
the central dogma in its most simplest
form says you have a strand of DNA and
it gets transcribed into a protein and
proteins don't turn back into strands of
DNA that's the simplest version of what
that says molecular cutting mechanism
yes and you agree with that that is true
yes and proteins don't get turned back
into DNA however there's a whole there's
a higher level architecture question
which is is DNA edited or rearranged by
the cell yes or no
vice Minh said absolutely not it only
goes one way you start with the genes
and you build an organism and what you
started to discover in the 1980s and
what has now been become abundantly
clear is genes are out
absolutely edited and changed by cells
and in some cases not just your skin or
your heart or your liver cells genomes
get changed but it can actually go to
the sperm in egg yep that's right
yeah and let me also just to clarify
that in case we've got some good
molecular biologists listening to this
sued want to say hey wait a minute being
changed a variety of ways are now known
one of those of course is the mechanism
by which the genome that is those
sequences in the DNA can be marked we
call that epigenetic change there are
other mechanisms too but I don't want to
complicate this one will do those marks
can go down through the germline and
that means that it's possible for
changes that occur during the organisms
lifetime to be transmitted down through
the germline so that's just one example
of the kind of process I'm referring to
it's not that the cell has a sort of
cell version of CRISPR a--they this new
technology enables you to cut and paste
DNA which is being used to
extraordinarily important effects in
modern biology but it is the case that
the cell can through its experience
include information in what goes down
through the germline that enables it to
be the case that the DNA code in itself
is not enough so you wrote a book called
biological relativity and you wrote this
paper that in the physiology journal
that you tease out these distinctions
between the vs man barrier the central
dogma and and you've you've pointed out
that from a system-level point of view
this is a complete conceptual shift and
how evolution works it's a radical
like you can't this is as different as
it well this is different as Catholic
and Protestant or it says it's as
different as Newtonian mechanics versus
quantum mechanics and you you you can't
just say oh well you know that was
always there and we just didn't talk
about it enough it's a complete reversal
it is a reversal that's right it is not
just a minor modification no I think
there's a way of explaining that to your
listeners and Watchers if we transcribed
on a keyboard what we're just saying we
would use a qwerty keyboard now the
important thing to note is that it
wouldn't matter if we used a different
keyboard the point I'm making is when I
type my paper out on a keyboard
whatever keyboard a QWERTY one a French
one whatever I be and it is not the case
that the QWERTY keyboard is responsible
for what is typed I am in a similar way
the cell is responsible for interpreting
the genome and that code between the DNA
and the protein which is a very exciting
discovery no question about that in
biology is absolutely fundamental not
challenging that at all but it no more
determines life than the QWERTY keyboard
would determine what I would write if I
write down what we're just discussing
well so now you're introducing the idea
of the cell as an agent yes of its own
evolution and organisms as agents of
their own evolution precisely and of
course that smacks of another forbidden
word which is their mark now is history
too but don't worry too much about that
but it's another respect in which the
agency
is at higher levels than the gene in
fact I would go further and say DNA on
its own cannot have any agency it is a
passive molecule if I took the DNA out
of one of your cells and I put it in a
petri dish with as many nutrients as you
like
give it glucose give it goodness knows
what to keep it happy for ten thousand
years it would do absolutely zilch so
the agency has to be at a higher level
and again I come back to what engineers
and physiologists readily understand the
agency process lies in those interacting
clever networks not in a bunch of
molecules it lies in what we would call
the software and of course it needs a
hardware that's good enough for that
software to be able to be implemented
but clearly the intelligence lies in the
cleverness of those networks well so
this so so let's talk about I think
we've probably explained the basic
science adequately so tell me about the
family dynamic the politics the
profession you you wanted to organize
this meeting at the Royal Society and
you're a fellow of the Royal Society and
you're a very eminent scientist and you
have some clout so what happened when
you tried to do that well first of all I
I use wrote to the president of brain it
was actually both the Royal Society and
the British Academy the British Academy
is the humanities and Social Sciences
the Royal Society is what we call the
hard sciences yeah I don't know whether
that distinction I should I find the
humanities pretty hard but that's
another whole nother conversation isn't
it well I play music you see as well
anyway the fact is that what I did was
very simply to write to the president of
both of those societies and say that I
thought that the implication
of some of the new trends in evolution
biology were of much greater importance
than just in biology it relates to
economics you know the equations that
people use in economics they're the same
equations the price equation and things
like that as are used in evolutionary
biology it relates to economics for
another reason - which is that a lot of
economic theory centers on things like
selfishness and cooperation and what's
the balance between the two if you start
to question some of the basis of for
example selfish gene theory then my
goodness yes you have implications way
outside the realm of biology so that's
why I wrote to both the president of the
British Academy and the president of the
Royal Society
they simply responded saying sounds a
good idea put it to our committee in
each case committees passed it no
problem at all and he got to the point
of advertising the meeting which
occurred towards the beginning of 2016
and that was the point at which a large
number of eeveelution biologists thought
this didn't sound a good good idea at
all now I I think the intent there was
clearly to stop the meeting or to get it
transformed in one way or another and
probably they had not really thought
through the care and careful's with
which I had worked with four other
collaborators in putting the meeting
together with consultation widely around
the world to try to produce a good
program
moreover we tried to produce a balanced
program because we actually invited
several of the Orthodox if you might
want to call on that evolutionary
biologist to talk only one of our
original invitees actually agreed
initially we had to we had to appeal to
the Royal Society to try to convince
more than one to come
now what did they do at the meeting
itself what they said in effect was well
we've known all this for a long time you
produce the question of candid organism
be it a plant and or an animal or human
ultras genome Barbara McClintock showed
that over 80 years ago working on Indian
corn and watching how the chromosomes
changed as the core was challenged in
its environment jumping genes as they
were called and the ability of cells
therefore to signal to their genomes
what I was discussing earlier on about
bacterial signaling to their genomes our
immune system signal to our genome to
rearrange the genome that's been known
for a long time
course it has but the point is that is
fundamentally incompatible with the
central thesis which is there's just
random variation in the genome
followed by natural selection and that
is all that is necessary now I will say
this Perry
there are many evil apologies whom I
respect that have understood that there
are major changes that have occurred
many of them now while claiming to be
standard Orthodox evolutionary
biologists will say ok yes we accept the
inheritance of acquired characteristics
well my goodness and fine if they do I
don't have any quarrel with that
obviously but that was the key
difference between Darwin and vice Minh
advisement introduced his barrier he
says so his 1883 lecture reproduced in a
book published by the Oxford University
Press at that time translated from the
German into English he says Darwin
included Lamarck's idea my idea is that
we can get rid of it so it wasn't
intention to get rid of that so if you
change the goalposts as it were and you
redefine the theory to be something
different from what it was originally I
think it's much more honest to say we
changed and my goodness what is
what is shameful about that nothing well
you know if I can if I can just speak to
that I I think there's a very subtle
thing that is going on here which is the
old evolutionary theory that Vaisman
espoused was very very friendly and
simpatico to a reductionist view of the
right and to making it sound as though
we have this all figured out get out yes
when in fact really if you if you look
at how evolution works the universe
becomes much more amazing than you ever
conceived it to be before it shows that
there's vast regions that we just have
no idea how this stuff works
I I personally I don't know I'd love to
know what you think my opinion is we
understand about 5% of how evolution
actually works in detail I don't know
what would you have a number that you
would throw out like how much you think
we just curious well the trouble is of
course that evolution occurs normally
over such a long time scale that any of
our experiments have difficulty coping
with that in any organisms other than
the very tiniest of organisms which of
course is why much of the work was done
has been done on extremely simple
organisms like bacteria on the fruit fly
and and so on and I wouldn't be able to
put a percentage on but I think we've
got a long way to go I'd agree with that
I think the difficulty is not so much
identifying what the mechanisms are in
addition to the standard one of random
variation in the genome and then
selection between the results of those
random variations there are so many
other mechanisms that occur including
incidentally one that I'm very keen on
which is that the variation is not just
the cause of differences between
different organisms in the progeny on
natural selection can then act it is
also something which is used by
organisms to create novelty now come
back to agency why have we got agency I
don't know if that's the right way to
put the question but if we have agency
that's extremely important because that
is what enables us to be creative
whether it is as scientists as writers
of literature as musicians or whatever
it might be you can't have a Beethoven
without there being the possibility of
doing something completely new from what
anybody else had done previously and you
don't have an Einstein if you stick with
the idea there can be no novelty but how
do you get novelty you get novelty in
exactly the same way in an analogous way
that the immune system gets the novelty
it's got a new challenge it needs a new
key to that new lock and it goes down
into the stochastic level of the
molecular processes and asks for the
wheel to be turned very rapidly and to
produce the answer and I think that's
what organisms do generally there's the
agency that is what partly drives
evolution so it's interesting to ask the
question as you did
what percentage do we yet know I think
you're right it's small but there's a
huge amount that we're going to have to
look into in the future as we work out
how the different mechanism that could
be involved have interacted with each
other lovingly even includes the study
of the icon of Darwin's evolutionary
theory the birds and the tortoises and
the Galapagos Islands the birds have
been studied and the interesting thing
is that there are as many epigenetic
changes that's those changes that have
to do with changing the genome with
genome marks as there are genetic
changes the people who've studied that
simply come to the conclusion that
probably both
processes the epigenetic and the genetic
have occurred together and the one
naturally leads to changes in the other
these processes therefore interact and
we're very very far from understanding
all the details of how they interact and
incidentally for young scientists
listening to this it's an area to get
into you know the frosting yes of
biology is here that's where it is and
the frontier lies not in making more
discoveries as with molecular biological
level though my goodness we do need
those
I'm not against the molecular biological
discoveries they've been fantastic it's
largely going to be at a level of
understanding those networks of
interactions that lie above the genome
and which give organisms agency and
therefore the ability to choose and the
implications of that for history for
literature for economics for I don't
know you name name the area of human
interest it's it's everywhere
well Dennis you gave a talk in Oxford to
a bunch of students and you raised the
question of what if someone committed a
murder and his defense attorney used The
Selfish Gene as a defense could you
could you elaborate could I don't want
to I don't want to steal your thunder
could you don't tell me what you said
are you - welcome to steal the Thunder
that's what I did was to pretend to be
as it were on the one hand a charge
judging this and also to be the poor
criminals the the what we call the
suspect yes that's right I was also
pretending to be the poor poor suspects
lawyer so I was played two parts in the
talk and what I was saying was you know
your honor in in here in England we
called the judge your honor and you know
my client says that he doesn't think he
really did this Murray doesn't challenge
the fact that he did it in the sense
that yes he he used the gun that killed
the first thing that was murdered that
wasn't him doing it because he's no
every system was created by his genetic
system which means that he wasn't
responsible now we both know of course
that no court of law anywhere in the
world would accept that as a defense now
the question I actually there was a
court in the United States that did
accept it for reducing the sentence it
didn't tear reverse the sentence but it
was used I found this out after I gave
this to now there are two reasons why we
would never accept that as a defense the
first is a society would fall apart if
we did none of us are responsible for
our actions you know that is not the way
to create a working society but a much
more important point and the deep point
is that we are active agents we are
responsible and there can be no way in
which our genes or our nerves may just
do what we do now that gets into some
very deep issues of biology and its
overlap with philosophy but I think we
can perhaps leave it there that was that
was the speech I made exactly well this
gives you an idea of what's at stake
because there's a whole bunch there's a
whole posse of scientists and public
figures like Sam Harris or Susan
Blackmore I think Richard Dawkins
although I'm not sure who believed
well Richard Dawkins said we are
lumbering robots that's Howard by our
genes okay and I think that is a very
disempowering view it gets kind it's
contrary to the axioms of every society
in every civilization again and and I
would just say look just because you
can't explain agency doesn't mean it
doesn't exist and personally I I view
organisms and and in animals and humans
as III they're they're free to to a
degree
make choices and this is why evolution
happens it's because we live in a in a
universe of free choices and and and if
we if we I think it's really interesting
to watch materialists try to carry this
all the way to the extent I mean I I
listen to an interview with Susan
Blackmore in Jordan Petersen and she was
saying no I I don't really have choices
I'm just a product of my biology and he
said he said to her he said well if I if
I were to treat you that way you would
really resent it
you know people want to be treated as
though they have choices well but you
know you can also demonstrate in another
very simple way and in fact Richard
Dawkins himself showed this he took a
Shakespearean quote it's from as you
like it and it's simply the phrase is 28
letters long he thinks it is like a
weasel now um he asked the question very
interesting question how long would a
monkey on a typewriter take to produce
that phrase just that 28 letters by
chance it's more than the holes the
billions of years of the existence of
the universe now then he went and I
think spoilt his argument because he
started to produce programs that would
somehow get there much more quickly we
don't need to go into the detail of that
he was right with the first thing that's
what he should have stuck with which is
what it's impossible now what
evolutionary standard evolution
advantages would say well yes but it is
possible if it's just incremental but
there's a major difficulty with that and
I pointed this out in another article
recently which we called was the
watchmaker blind to deliberately raise
that question and the problem is simply
this that if you think you could get
there incrementally for example by
holding every letter that the monkey had
got right and as it were making the
keyboard stick at that point
how'd you get there much more quickly in
fact Richard calculated it would take
any about 40 generations of typing away
to get there but who is providing the
information that tells the system it's
getting closer to the goal yes that's a
problem now I think there is something
that is getting there and it's you and
me and is the other organisms we have as
you say agency and they are therefore
capable for example of choosing their
meats what does that do
why do women look beautiful to men and
why do men look handsome to women is
because we chose them that way and we
bred with them that way and that's why
they end up being as they are it's so
damn simple Darwin you wrote a whole
book on sexual selection selecting my
genes don't do that selection my genes
didn't love Susan my wife I do brother
well so when when we introduced agency
to evolution it completely I think
changes and I agree very and I think
this is the fault line with the Stanley
eight-story reductionist don't like
agency because it's very difficult for
them what you have to then admit is that
the causation comes from a high level
that of course is putting it simply the
whole idea of biological relativity that
causation can come from any level within
the organism and again engineers don't
have any difficulty with that it isn't
your Mac or your PC that does everything
you make them do it's you who types away
on the QWERTY keyboard and whatever it
might be to create the functionality and
the great novelty that is in your
computer
and so in a similar way it's not
difficult to understand that it's the
higher level of the organisms that will
determine what they do and that's what
we're talking about that is agency and
then this you bring up computers which
brings us right to the doorstep of the
biggest question in AI which is agency
right right now algorithms are just
algorithms I mean even Siri in an Alexa
are as dumb as a box of rocks you only
have to compete five minutes to figure
that out right yeah if they had agency
and AI and evolution are there they're
converging together yes and I would make
the following prediction for it being
possible which is that the AI people
would have to reproduce what organisms
do when they harness stochasticity
because what do we do again use the
immune system as the model but then it
you can you can transfer that to all
aspects of organism and human behavior
what it does just to repeat is to go
down to that stochastic molecular level
and turn the wheel of chance to produce
trillions of possible solutions to in a
case of the immune system how you
produce a new antibody to deal with an
invader what do we do and we've got a
problem just thinking of human choice
when we are dealing with a difficult
issue we say better sleep on that I
think is going on is that within
plumbing down into the stochastic level
wherever that might be
in neural discharge in cellular activity
whatever it might be and then we have
some sort of a filter which is the
rationality filter does it fit or not
it's a bit like the immune system asking
is this key good to deal with this
particular lock but it's the same kind
of thing I think the AI people will have
to put in that kind of very clever use
of stochasticity then I begin to believe
that they might
create intelligent full gems which are
silicon rather than protein III agree so
so here you are in Oxford in you did the
Royal Society meeting you've published
you know it is the blind maker
watchmaker blinder does she have one I
was very interesting paper right you're
you're challenging the vice Minh barrier
and you know you've been reaching out to
colleagues all around the world and in
England so what's what's going on in
these conversations that you're having
and and you're you're winning you're
wanting to debate the issues what what's
going on yes very very willing indeed
but I'll tell you what I think is going
on within my own church if I might call
it that me of physiology the physiology
is the biochem is the the the
pathologist's and the whole is a medical
science community the great majority of
what I'm saying you know they they might
say well Dennis you're putting it in a
funny way I'm not used to that because
that isn't what I read in my textbooks
well that's true but we generally won't
disagree what I'm saying
so there's a whole swathe of biological
and physical science and mathematical
scientists out there I go a lecture to
Congress is all over the world in a
whole range of such disciplines the only
time when I find any degree of
resistance to what I'm saying is when I
have a bunch of zoologists who've been
taught a classical theory and then they
will say well professor Noble what new
discovery who made in evolutionary
biology which is a very nice challenge
to be given because I then go through
the story that I went through with you I
said well you know I looked at the
question of would a knockout tell you
what the gene does and then I say just
think that through once you channel
and whether there is a clear simple
relationship between the genes and the
organisms function you're undoing the
basis of saying that it's all down there
in the genome and once you start
questioning that you find if you search
enough legal question much else beside
but that's the only kind of community
within which I find a serious resistance
to what I'm saying but there is another
thing I want to add I've put out the
challenge to debate with me it's not
been replied to nobody has taken the
trouble from the standard evolutionary
biologists to review the new book it's
now out for nearly two years in for
example the New York Review of Books
London Review of Books now wherever you
want to put a serious analysis what is
going on is interesting it's as though
there's a kind of silence out there well
as it what disappeared
I don't know where they are and it's
serious because like I can't name names
I have been through the process of
interacting with an organization that
wanted to arrange a debate with me for
major new Darwinist in turn turned it
down for a variety of reasons I don't
really think they've got an answer you
see if on the internet as you'll find
very easily by searching you have a
simple misunderstanding
like that the vitamin barrier which
remember is about the germline cells is
now embodied in the central dogma of
molecular biology which remember is
something about coding at the molecular
level if somebody can say that and think
that that justifies us the original
theory based on Diceman and then on it's
more
interpretations then they've got a big
problem because there's absolutely no
way in which the vitamin barrier can be
embodied by the central dogma the naked
apology I'm not challenging the central
dogma I think it's absolutely correct as
a coding mechanism but coming back to
the point I made about the QWERTY
keyboard that keyboard which is the C
g80 code which then gets typed away as
it were by the molecular mechanisms in
the cell to produce this protein off of
that protein no more determines life
than the QWERTY keyboard determined what
I wrote in my articles it's very simple
actually
there's nothing complex about the idea
at all so why people won't come out and
debate it I really don't know well it it
seems pretty clear to me that when you
when you realize that the cell and the
organism control the changes of DNA and
that it's not just random and it's not
just selection then a whole bunch of
books a whole bunch of scientific papers
and a whole bunch of careers become
obsolete overnight I mean to just to
just come right out and say it I mean
isn't that true Dennis yes I think it I
think it is but it's a bit more
insidious than that because of course
that nobody's career is actually going
to collapse
sorry many of the evolutionary
biologists are actually doing damn good
work it wasn't me interpreted within a
theoretical structure that I think is
faulty but I mean they'll continue to do
their epigenetics they'll continue to do
their field work and and so on that
that's fine but I think the insidious
thing is that it teaches through the
standard teaching process a theory which
I think has got things upside down that
problem and that's a mindset it's it's
not so much as it were
the facts of epigenetics different of
course they're not our the facts of a
genome reorganization in response to
challenge any different all the way from
Barbara McClintock to modern studies on
Hydra mutation of course they're not
those those scientific facts are still
the same it's just the way in which you
view it but why is that important we
come back to the other thing we were
discussing earlier on it's important in
economics is important in ethics it's
important in legal processes it's
important in almost every walk of life
because once you've accepted the
determinist reductionist agenda you have
a very different view of the nature of
humanity that is what is at stake it's
the nature of humanity and of course of
monkeys of cats dogs of Paramecium and
of viruses yes well I think it's it's
very disempowering
to say that I am a lumbering robot
controlled by my genes it is very
empowering to say you are an individual
with agency and choice and furthermore
your eating choices you're exercising
choices your moral choices all of these
things actually in some maybe small way
they even affect your children and your
grandchildren genetically so at every
crossroads in life you better make the
right decision I think that's
tremendously empowering yes I absolutely
right imagine a mother with a pregnant
mother with the child as it were slowly
growing in the womb and realizes that
what she eats what else she does how
much exercise she takes and so on we'll
all have an influence on the health of
that child in the future and the health
of the child children of that child and
so on
there are beautiful studies of that we
call these the maternal effects in
physiology nobody in the world of
physiology even questions whether those
occur it's just that you don't it's not
normally seen in the context of
evolution but it should be
you're right it's empowering and I think
that's another reason why I find in
addition to the communities that I spoke
about the medical science community is
the computer science communities and so
on where I lecture and get very little
resistance there's another area and that
is the humanities I talk a lot with
people in the humanities and people who
are interested in evolution from a
humanities perspective they also don't
seriously challenge the great majority
of what I'm saying well I want to
commend you for your work I think it's
very important that you're doing this it
as far as I can tell you're you're the
most credentialed scientist who is
challenging the Orthodox view and you
know what people have been challenging
this view for a long time yeah but but
what what seems to be the case was
nobody could really get away with an ad
hominem attack on you or or say that you
didn't know what you were talking about
or that you were a lousy scientist where
other people they they could get away
with saying that but but they couldn't
say that about you and so and so it's it
seems that if nothing else you've gotten
them to quiet down quite a bit I think
they've had to go quiet because I don't
think they know how to answer the basic
argument I would put out a very simple
challenge anybody reading the little
article it's only three pages long so
you don't have to spend long reading it
which is central dogma or central debate
anybody reading that who thinks of
something wrong in it
I would love to debate with them there's
the challenge fantastic
well I'll well I'll just personally
invite Richard Dawkins Jerry Coyne
Daniel Dennett or anybody in that crowd
Dennis would be happy to debate with you
folks and I I'm sure I'm sure Dennis can
arrange for for the debate to be held in
a perfectly
um large venue with with crowds and
cameras and everything again and you
know and Dennis I know you I know that
if you're wrong about anything you'd be
what you'd welcome to be called out on
it so you can be corrected exactly if
one's wrong you just changed your mind
you know some really brilliant people
change their minds
Jack Eccles they've got the Nobel Prize
for his work on the nervous system
changed his mind
critically about the role of synapses
and you can go through a large number of
people who through the observations they
made came to the illusion they were
wrong if I'm wrong I'd love to be shown
to be wrong that's the way science
advances excellent well I'd like to
encourage your listeners and viewers to
check out Dennis's book dance to the
tune of life biological relativity look
at his lectures on YouTube there's one
on the evolution to site that's really
wonderful take a look at at some of
these papers will include links to them
and dentist thank you for being a
champion of of self-corrective science
and you know in truth-telling
and and thanks for organizing the Royal
Society meeting thanks for helping me
the way that you helped me and and I
hope everyone will will will lend a
listening ear great Perry is great
talking to you
