big thank you to nebula for sponsoring
this
video this is John Roth he's the CEO of
a company called Nell he's about to be
smug deservingly so uh let's move on to
Lucent the big competitor SS of the
Border um what do they do better than
you uh not much um pretty good at
marketing um but if you look at the
results we grew 43% in the carrier space
in the US last year well this last
quarter I think that's double their
numbers at the time of this clip nto was
the second highest Canadian company on
the global Fortune 500 list at rank
266 but he doesn't plan on stopping
there just one year from now Nortel will
be the ninth most valuable company in
the entire world 75% of North America's
backbone internet traffic travels
through his company's networks an
achievement that will earn him the title
of Canadian CEO of the Year this is all
so John Roth or rather it's a comedian
impersonating John Roth not particularly
well mind you there's no genuine attempt
at his voice and the mannerisms are way
too high energy and yet the audience is
eating it up now final question Mr Roth
where will Nortel be say a year from now
uh Linda Nortel is strong I guarantee
investors I will continue to generate
profits for them now if you'll excuse me
I have to get back to work spare some
change in this moment however brief it
was John Roth was maybe the most hated
man in Canada Nell had been the most
widely held stock in the country and it
had just cost them their pensions Nell
had broken an entire country's
economy how did it happen three words
it's ancient
history
here's a statement the telephone was
invented in Canada it's a statement that
could be true so long as you don't look
too hard at the several footnotes that
are necessary to justify it but let's go
ahead and do that Alexander Grell was a
Scottish immigrant who moved to Canada
with his parents in 1870 later on he got
a job as a teacher and began
experimenting with sending voices over
metal wires as electrical signals over
the years he would develop this idea
with his partner Watson and in 1876 Bell
said his famous words Watson come here I
need you over a working telephone
prototype in Boston the Canadian claim
to the telephone is frankly very silly
Belle supposedly wrote about the
underlying mechanism of a telephone at
his parents' home in Branford Ontario
but he wouldn't get a working prototype
for another 2 years you can't even
really argue it based on citizenship
either because Belle was never
technically a Canadian but a
self-identified Scotsman who was
actively applying to become an American
of course this isn't even the biggest
elephant in the room Bell was beaten to
the invention of the telephone by at
least one person maybe more there's
Antonio miuchi whose telephone prototype
predates Bells by almost a decade his
lawsuit against Bell was headed to the
Supreme Court until he died in 1889
Alicia gray famously submitted a patent
on the exact same day as Belle there are
disputes over the exact timeline here
but it's a bit of a moot point because
neither man had made a functioning
prototype yet Belle did get one working
a week later but the design of his
receiver had been altered becoming
suspiciously similar to the one in
Gray's design info he shouldn't have
known about unless he had somehow seen
Gray's application hm as you're going to
see many times in this story the history
of industry is not about the first to
invent but the first to Market Belle got
the patent for the telephone because he
hired a better lawyer simple as that the
most lucrative patent in history led to
a factory the factory led to a company
and the company became a behemoth
through Decades of aggressive expansion
brutal boardroom takeovers underhanded
back alley sabotage and the Limitless
funding of JP Morgan that single patent
evolved into the most ruthless
Corporation in American history AT&amp;T a
terrifying Beast that gobbled up
hundreds of independent phone companies
a monopoly that at its peak once
controlled 82% of America's telephone
lines footnotes or not the history of
the telephone is an American one but why
then have I seen this statement at least
in part claimed by some Canadian sources
why is this a hill that some Canadians
seem willing to die on because the
Canadian identity if there is such a
thing is one defined in opposition to
the United States if you want to be
dramatic and I do sometimes Canada is
just a slightly more autonomous 51st
state both countries descend from a
combination of English and French
colonies built on territor stolen from
its indigenous inhabitants lands divided
by a border so arbitrary most of it is
literally just the 49th parallel why
some of the colonies rebelled against
the British and why others stayed loyal
came down to language religion local
economies and proximity to the British
Empire the settlers in these two
colonies always had a lot in common and
due to their Geographic proximity
there has always existed an uncommonly
close relationship it just so happens
that that relationship is more than a
little lopsided Pier Trudeau one of our
more outspoken Prime Ministers summed it
up like this living next to you is in
some ways like sleeping with an elephant
no matter how friendly and even tempered
is the Beast if I can call it that one
is affected by every twitch and grunt
America is simply a much older and
densely populated Nation America's first
colonists arrived almost two centuries
earlier than the bulk of Canada's and
the Americans had gone and finished
their Civil War before modern Canada was
even created in the 1860s couple that
with a colder climate and harsher
terrain for almost the entire time the
two countries have existed Canada has
had one tenen the population and on10th
the economy of its Southern neighbor
even just California despite having
roughly the same population has an
economy 50% larger ever since the War of
1812 ended in a stalemate Canada has
never had to worry about being
militarily annexed by the US instead
Canada has spent most of its existence
fending off another more indirect form
of control economic subservience the
company that owns the majority of our
newspapers is 2third owned by an
American hedge fund most of the media we
consume is American and the basis of our
economy is ripping natural resources out
of the ground shipping them off to
America and then buying them back for
twice the price in the form of fancy
toys we're America's biggest customer
but they're not ours and that's
precarious position to be in Canada's
first prime minister Johnny McDonald had
just returned to power in the election
of 1878 Canada was in the midst of a
deep depression that was partially
brought on by the Americans canceling a
trade agreement in the middle of their
Civil War McDonald was keenly aware of
the Public's distrust of American
Business and although behind closed
doors he was in favor of free trade with
the Americans he knew they would never
sign a new agreement and so he used
anti-American rhetoric to call the Rival
Liberal Party quote veiled trait
and managed to win both the 1878 and
1891 elections by stoking fears of
American annexation McDonald's platform
was called the national policy the
centerpiece of which was an aggressive
import tax on all American products the
Tariff was designed to keep cheap
American Products out of Canada to
promote a strong homegrown manufacturing
industry the national policy and
anti-americanism dominated Canada's
political agenda for decades and a later
attempt at a Free Trade Agreement
similarly defeated the government of
Wilford Lauer in 1911 where it was once
again painted as an act of treason
however the national policy whose stated
goal was to keep Canada British had
arguably backfired it had only made
Canada more reliant on American industry
take for example AT&amp;T having secured the
Canadian patent for the telephone their
original plan was to Simply make
telephones in America and ship them up
to Canada the new tariffs made that a
complete nogo so the company hatched a
plan they hired a former Confederate
ship captain sent him off to Canada with
a boatload of money where he proceeded
to execute a series of business moves so
rapid that in just a few months he owned
almost all telephone lines in the entire
country alongside this purchase was a
single telephone Factory in Montreal a
necessary condition to retain the
Canadian patent Parts would be shipped
up from the US assembled in Canada
completely negating the import tax this
was the birth of the Bell Telephone
Company of of Canada and how Canada
became a branch plant economy and as of
1895 that little Montreal Branch plant
was given a name Northern electric and
Manufacturing limited we've got about a
century to go still but the family
resemblance between these two names is
clear Northern made a bunch of stuff
fire alarms sleigh bells gramophones
telegraphs kettles toasters lighters
stoves washing machines radios if it ran
on electricity they could probably make
it but their bread and butter was all
always telephones although legally they
were separate entities AT&amp;T was always
in the background pulling the strings of
Bell Canada with its endless Monopoly
money Western Electric was cranking out
telephone Tech like there was no
tomorrow and Northern electric got
access to technology that no one else
did without having to do any R&amp;D they
just took the designs that Western gave
them made their tweaks and sold them to
Canadians sometimes the only thing that
would change was the logo on the phone
always the branch plant never never the
brains this symbiotic relationship was
just a microcosm of the larger Canadian
economy even in the 1910s When AT&amp;T is
forced to sell off its foreign Holdings
due to anti-rust reasons it's allowed to
keep its stake in Canada because the two
countries were so interlined Canada had
spent its first 50 years relying on its
Commonwealth parent of Great Britain but
by the 1920s Canada was now trading more
with the us as productivity began to
rise as America modernized its factories
Canada's were quick to follow then out
of nowhere the market crashed ushering
in the Great Depression across North
America the 1930s saw 80% of northern's
employees laid off and then it's World
War 2 yanking the country and the
company out of its depression Northern
becomes a dedicated supplier of military
equipment for the government Canada like
the US emerges from the war in a
relatively prosperous position compared
to Europe Northern now had a backlog of
nearly 100,000 telephone orders it had
to fulfill dragged there by the US
Canada had achieved the second highest
adoption rate of phones per 100 people
in the entire world going from just
28,000 phones in 1895 to almost 1
million
1942 and then suddenly the elephant
rolled over for years AT&amp;T had been
accused of running a vertical Monopoly
by owning its manufacturer Western
Electric desperate to keep its prize
possession AT&amp;T settles out of court and
makes a trade on two conditions the
first is to stay out of the computer
business considering that Bell labs just
invented the transistor they were really
going to regret this one in about 10
years the second is more relevant to our
story AT&amp;T now had to offer the same
licensing deal for its patents to anyone
who asked but because AT&amp;T owned Bell
Canada and was sharing its patents with
them for free that meant that any other
us company would be entitled to that
same deal so rather than give away its
patents for free AT&amp;T said you know what
Canada is on its own the CEO of Northern
at the time described it like this we
are the child of wealthy parents this is
the boot that kicked us out the door a
Canadian subsidiary of a US company
lives a very comfortable life this is
the tragedy of Canada we've made a
virtue of imitation but he also said
this I'm confident history will say this
is the best thing that ever happened to
us would you believe me that in a little
more than half a century the mouse would
be trying to eat the
elephant
everywhere in the 1950s the Canadian
government contracted the company AV row
to build a stealth Interceptor jet
called The Av Arrow it was widely
considered to be one of if not the best
in its class in the world costing around
2.2 billion Canadian dollars in today's
money the arrow had been the single most
expensive R&amp;D project in Canadian
history and it put Canada on the map in
the global Aerospace industry but there
was no one to sell it to the American
and the British militaries wanted to
produce their own Jets and in fact
America turned around and said hey why
don't you buy our Jets instead in the
most controversial move of his career
prime minister John debaker fell in line
with American defense policy he canceled
the project ordered all prototypes
destroyed and left 14,000 Canadians
unemployed although you can argue over
the merits of the AV Arrow itself the
real failure here was that the
government refused to support a
transition for the facility it had
already spent Millions on a facility
that could have been converted to
civilian aircraft and given Canada its
own equivalent to Boeing it's ironic
that de Baker is remembered for
capitulating to American influence just
days before the election that made him
prime minister de Baker had declared
that if the Liberals were reelected
quote Canada will become a a virtual
49th economic state in the American
Union you see anti-americanism never
truly disappears in Canada but rather it
comes in waves the stretch of time
bookended by the two World Wars was a
notable period of cooperation between
the two Nations but now in the era of
the Cold War Canadians were becoming
uncomfortable with the idea that they
were simply a sidekick to the US 1956
saw the government release the results
of the Gordon commission an economic
panel which had spent the last year
researching the rapid Americanization of
Canada
first there was Culture by the mid1
1950s 80% of magazine sales were from
American brands Canadian newspapers were
still canadian-owned but any
international coverage was usually
borrowed from American papers the
Canadian film industry was almost
entirely non-existent even if we did
have films to show film distribution was
owned entirely by Hollywood and they had
no interest in showing Canadian films
Even our education system tended to be
biased towards America there's a
particularly Infamous textbook on
Canadian politics that for some reason
had Abraham Lincoln on the cover the
real heart of the issue though was
economic in 1967 58% of Canada's
manufacturing industry was owned by
firms whose headquarters were outside of
Canada and 80% of that fraction was
American and the more specialized you
got the higher the fraction went
transport Electronics chemicals all
extremely American The Worst by far was
cars can you name a single Canadian car
brand you can't because there are none
left natural resources which had formed
the Bedrock of Canada's economy for
decades were lining American pocketbooks
Pulp and Paper smelting Mining and oil
and gas Alberta's pride and joy was
nearly 2third owned by Americans This
was such a touchy subject that there was
once a debate in Parliament over whether
to allow an American company to build an
interprovincial oil pipeline the debate
got so heated three MPS were
hospitalized and one died of a heart
attack Canada was a branch plant economy
and that was scaring people all across
the political Spectrum on the left wing
you had labor organizers who feared that
the US would simply set up Branch plants
in Canada extract natural resources and
then ship them back down south where
Americans would get to reap the benefits
from any newly created manufacturing
jobs on the rightwing the complaints
tended to focus on how Canada should
instead be reestablishing ties with
Britain and the monarchy and that a loss
of economic power to the Americans could
eventually lead to a loss of political
Independence but between these differing
sides there there was one common shared
concern American Technology was a crutch
Canada had a huge technological deficit
that's one of the key features of a
branch plant economy Branch plants tend
to supply jobs that require less
training like resource extraction or
assembly Lines jobs that are easily
moved elsewhere if the cost of Labor
gets too high jobs like Finance
marketing and critically R&amp;D are Best
Kept centralized in the home country in
1959 if you looked at dollars per capita
spent on r R and D in the private sector
the US was spending almost four times as
much as Canada here's an even more
shocking stat a government Commission in
the mid-60s looked at every patent
registered in Canada
95% of them were held by someone outside
the country and 2/3 of that number was
in the US that meant the Canadian
industry had to spend Millions each year
licensing out patents from Americans or
costly Imports of high-tech equipment
case in point Northern electric in 1956
the year that AT&amp;T had to divest itself
Northern only made 1% of its revenue
from its own designs all the rest were
American for over 60 years Northern
operated mostly on autopilot assembling
American Parts using American blueprints
the company atmosphere was described as
sleepy and complacent the CEO at the
time joked that you could only get fired
for quote screwing the boss's daughter
and then only if it was on company
premises Bell Canada was so unsure of
Northern that there were multiple times
where they considered only two options
sell it or shut it down but there was a
third option break the branch plant
cycle make a Canadian company
self-sufficient and as we've just seen
the political climate at home had never
been more supportive it's not that
Northern lacked smart employees they
just hadn't been in charge of the
decision- making until now in fact
northern's Engineers were likely some of
the most capable in the entire country
because of their prior connections to
AT&amp;T and Bell Labs the engineers at
Northern electric were some of the first
outside America to be able to reverse
engineer and learn about the transistor
by the end of the 1960s they were the
single largest microchip supplier in
Canada they helped build the world's
largest microwave Comm system the Trans
Canada Skyway and they managed to
develop an antenna designed to track
satellites but the' 60s were still a
slow period for Northern when they began
the decade only 1% of their products
were Canadian designs by 1969 they had
only managed to increase that number to
6% the switch over was going too slowly
the only way to get ahead would be to
give Canada its own Bell Labs
BNR Bell Northern research founded in
Ottawa in 1971 it mimicked Bell labs in
every way it could there was a bounty of
$500 for every patent you filed the
atmosphere was like that of a University
campus and there was even a signature
Color Purple that the employees rally
behind even its first president Donald
Chisum had been poached from the real
Bell Labs look I'm going to be candid
for a second here BNR is the reason I
live in the city that I do my
grandfather was one of the founding
Engineers hired to work there and he
moved my dad's family from Montreal all
the way to Ottawa BNR is not a name most
of you would have heard of and it sadly
doesn't have any Nobel prizes but so
much of the modern Communications
landscape the technology that powers the
video you're watching right now was
invented in Ottawa BNR was about to
gamble everything to leap frog Bell Labs
telephone switches are the most basic
building block of a telephone Network
back in the days of Gran Bell they were
originally just sold in pairs phone a
and phone B and you put them wherever
you needed with a giant wire running
between them obviously that's not super
scalable so people decided to designate
one building in town as an exchange
where human operators would physically
move wires around to connect different
phone lines this too was phased out in
favor of electromechanical Contraptions
that were the size of entire rooms this
finally gave way to fully electronic
switches which had fewer moving parts
were much less noisy and overall more
reliable this was the state of telephone
technology as the' 60s turned into the
70s telephone calls had been analog for
as long as they had existed an
electronic wave with smooth curves but
since the Advent of the transistor
electronic signals could now be sent in
binary enough ones and zeros could
encode any analog signal with enough
Precision that barely any information
would be lost that was how computers
operated through massive processors
crunching thousands of bits and bytes
people realized fairly quickly that if
you could combine phones with computers
the possibilities would be endless costs
would go down reliability would go up
you could send multiple phone
conversations over the same wire signal
degradation and noise over long
distances was Far easier to correct you
could also expand into what we now
consider basic features like call
forwarding or a busy line notification
and maybe in the far future you could
even use phone lines to send data
between two computers can you imagine
that sending something other than voice
over telephone lines that'd be like some
kind of inter Network I don't know maybe
there's a better name for that the
problem with this idea is that digital
signals can't talk to analog signals at
least not directly you need to convert
them using a codec Bell Labs had figured
this out in 1963 but the process was so
complicated and expensive that it was
only worthwhile to do for giant
longdistance cables and the connections
between huge Central offices there was
still no fully digital switch at the
local level there was a full-on race
between at least seven countries to
break this digital barrier and Canada
was way in last when it jumped in with
BNR so how did Canada come from behind
and win it all it's because AT&amp;T had
become too complacent despite having a
huge technological Head Start AT&amp;T was
telling customers that digital switching
wouldn't be available for several more
years see this is the inherent
contradiction of monopolies their
endless resources allow them to develop
the best technology and offer the best
service but because they have such a
strangle hold on the market they
sometimes stifle innovations that
threaten their business model case in
point answering machines Bell Labs
invented the technology to record phone
calls sometime in the 1940s but AT&amp;T
suffocated it worried that people would
stop using phones for business if they
knew they could be recorded answering
machines wouldn't catch on until the
1970s it was the same with cell phones
Bell lab's first demonstrated a wireless
phone in the 1970s but again AT&amp;T
refused to develop it why would they
create a competing type of phone that
didn't use the billions of dollars worth
of infrastructure that they had taken
decades to establish cell phones
wouldn't catch on until the 1990s it was
the same thing with digital switching
AT&amp;T would be required to update its
entire technical ecosystem system at a
huge cost not to mention they'd be
making their older switches completely
redundant this was an attitude echoed by
some Executives within B Canada they
were certain that a digital switch would
kill sales of their just relased sp1
model but his future CEO John Roth would
later say if you're going to be
cannibalized it's best to be
cannibalized by yourself in 1976
Northern unveiled their newest switch
the SL1 at a trade show they called
Digital World which they hosted at none
other than Disney World the time timing
was everything by committing when
everyone else was too hesitant they had
caught the rest of the industry by
surprise because it was the only one of
its kind for nearly 2 years the SL1
became the bestselling switch in the
world after that the size of the
switches just kept increasing the SL1
became the sl10 then the DMS 10 then the
dms1 100 Northern could handle up to
100,000 phone calls through just a
single switch last time we checked in
Northern made just 6% of their own
designs by 19 1975 that was 50% and by
1977 they were up to 70 this was an
unrecognizable company from just two
decades ago in fact this new found
success was worthy of a name change
Northern electric was far too generic
everything was electric these days how
about Northern Telecom it was also a
perfect time to go public in 1973 they
go live on the Toronto Stock Exchange
and a couple years later they made it
into the big leagues wal street during
the 70s Northern had gone from having
earnings of $5 million to 111 million
and the workforce grew to 33,000 people
if Northern was an American company it
would have been ranked 160 on the
Fortune 500 northern's CEO during this
time was a man named John lob and
there's a quote from him that has pretty
much become company folklore he would
often go around asking employees what
the company made hoping they'd take the
bait when they inevitably answered with
switches he'd hit them with the real
answer we don't make switching godamn it
we make money look I'm a sucker for
unsettle metaphors northern's first
president was a literal former sea
captain for almost a hundred years
Northern was shielded from The Perils of
the open market only ever sailing close
to Shore by going public on the stock
market this was Northern setting out to
sea taking a risk that a Canadian
company could go
Global and lucky for them the hammer
Came Crashing Down at at the perfect
time helping you stay on top of change
today and
tomorrow that's the power of
networking buying a phone buy the one
that phone companies have relied on for
over 100 years Northern Telecom a voice
you'll recognize from a name you know Co
Rex the breakup of of AT&amp;T is the
picture perfect definition of hubris
AT&amp;T was the biggest corporation in the
world employed around 1 million
Americans and provided the cheapest and
for many decades the best phone service
in the world for many Americans they
were the only company you could get a
telephone from and it did so through
absolutely crushing business tactics
although the days of literal sabotage
were in the past now it resorted to
brutal boardroom takeovers political
lobbying and fighting tooth and nail to
prevent third part party companies from
tapping into its Network it had done all
of this with the tcid approval of the US
government which granted it the right to
exist as a regulated Monopoly one that
had an immense role in the US defense
industry the maternalistic image of Ma
Bell however had been slowly
deteriorating for decades for some
people AT&amp;T was a brute a bully whose
arrogance had gone unchecked for far too
long service quality had slipped in
recent years and yet foam bills
continued to go up AT&amp;T finally
overstepped when it tried to crush a new
rival and later attempted to ram a bill
through Congress a bill that once and
for all would Crown at the One telephone
company to rule them all this pissed off
just the right people in the Justice
Department which initiated an
excruciatingly slow and complex legal
battle that played out over a decade and
four different presidents although it
initially looked like AT&amp;T would walk
away with just another slap on the wrist
to the horror of the executives they
gradually realized that their Behemoth
wasn't nearly as Invincible as they
thought it was the breakup agreement in
January of 19 1982 is perhaps the single
most impactful and controversial event
in the history of American industry
unlike the 1956 settlement which saw
AT&amp;T make a few small concessions this
new ruling was a devastating defeat and
it left a massive power vacuum AT&amp;T had
been desperate to keep Western Electric
under its control but in exchange they
had to watch the rest of their empire be
smashed into 22 pieces the local phone
companies the baby bells as they were
called can now buy their equipment from
anyone they wanted and of those 22 baby
bells Northern snatched up 21 former
Vice chairman David Vice said this when
the divesture took place we found that
our customers embraced us in a bloody
bear hug they've been with AT&amp;T in
Western Electric all those years and had
been taken for granted in just a couple
years Northern Rockets up to become the
number two Telecom company in North
America right behind Western Electric
it's much bigger but now extremely
depressed cousin previously Northern had
negotiated an unspoken deal with AT&amp;T
that they would stay out of their Turf
they would only sell to The Independents
who despised AT&amp;T but now the big bad
mob boss had been whacked the impact of
this ruling is obvious on Northern stock
price you can see in 82 when it becomes
clear that AT&amp;T is going to have to give
in that Northern begins to slowly tick
up by the time the breakup becomes
official in ' 84 Northern stock price is
three times what it was it had broken
the curse of the branch plant as of ' 82
Northern was officially making more
money in the US market than in Canada
this was always bound to happen the
market in America is 10 times as big the
real question was how much of it they
could capture the expansion was rapid
Northern began setting up plants in
California Texas Georgia North Carolina
soon there were 13,000 Americans working
for Northern when it came to Grand
marketing gestures nothing was too
expensive Northern charted a cruise ship
the SS rdam filled with members of The
Fortune 500 community and whed and dined
them for days when an elaborate trade
show in Europe was almost shut down due
to concerns over poor ventilation
Northern paid to have an expensive hole
cut in the roof with the financial
backing of Bell Canada behind them
Northern was Unstoppable which raises an
interesting point why did AT&amp;T get
broken up but Bell Canada was allowed to
live on Bell Canada although it tried
very hard never quite maintained a true
Monopoly like 18 T had managed to down
south although at the peak of its power
in the early 1900s it had steadily lost
ground ever since in terms of sheer land
mass the US and Canada aren't that far
off but the vast majority of Canada is
extremely remote maintaining a presence
in the less populated regions proves so
costly that service was often unreliable
angering the locals in the maritimes
Bell itself had been pushed out by some
local rivals in the Prairies the
residents were so fed up with the poor
service that the provincial governments
bought Bell out and turned them into
provincial utilities easily the second
coolest things the Prairies have done
for us after giving us universal
healthcare and BC was so far away that
Bell never even bothered to try and get
a foothold on the west coast if Bell
Canada had a monopoly it was restricted
to the Windsor Quebec City Corridor the
home of over half the population Bell
Canada had achieved the ideal size The
goldilock Zone big enough to dominate
the market but small enough that the
politicians left it alone the few
attempts at cracking down on Bell's
Monopoly fizzled out as Canada's
Regulatory Agencies were undermined and
overruled by the government and if I had
to Hazard a guess I think Pierre Trudeau
and his cabinet were happy to sit back
and watch the American Telephone Company
implode so Canada could pick up the
scraps The canadian-american Divide of
the 50s continued to Surge into the 60s
and 7s JFK hated Dean Baker for his
flip-flopping over the quean Missile
Crisis LBJ hated Pearson's guts for not
backing them in Vietnam and then you had
Nixon and Trudeau two men who could not
have been more different in both
personality and politics whether it was
because of Trudeau's open diplomacy with
China and Cuba or Nixon abruptly
announcing a 10% tariff with no warning
the Canadian US relationship truly hit a
low point in the 70s it was in this
climate that Trudeau's minority
government with a push from the leftwing
NDP created Thea the foreign investment
review agency was on paper at least a
way to block foreign takeovers and
Screen foreign investment that didn't
bring quote a significant benefit to
Canadians F was never very popular the
rightwing called it overreaching the
left wing called it Toothless and the
left wi of the left wing were over in
the corner chanting the words
nationalization over and over Trudeau
himself had not been much of an economic
nationalist he'd been pushed into
creating fura by a minority Parliament
and by the 80s the Liberals were
desperately trying to woo back the
private sector Pier Trudeau had served
one of the longest ten years of a PM in
the country's history and his later
years had been dominated by issues of
national unity and an economic downturn
the eastwest divide that had always
existed continued to widen Trudeau's
nationalization of the oil industry had
made him a pariah in the oil Rich West
Trudeau a longtime opponent of Quebec's
growing separatist movement had become
increasingly unpopular in the province
after he pushed through a new
constitution without their approval and
the practice known as the 60s scoop had
continued well into the 1980s where
indigenous children were forcibly taken
from their parents and placed up for
adoption with white families others were
placed in residential schools where any
and all semblance of indigenous language
culture and Heritage were forcibly
Stamped Out this was not a United
Country for a multitude of reasons there
were and still are millions of people
living within Canada's borders who do
not identify as Canadian who do not
identify with this flag if there had
been a strong nationalist movement in
the 70s it had fractured into pieces by
the'80s Bell and Northern were among the
leading voices in Canadian Capital that
were demanding a Changing of the Guard
high-tech they said was the industry
that would yank Canada out of its
recession they wanted the government
that would lower their taxes and reduce
trade barriers for expanding into the
newly vulnerable US market they would
get their wish in Brian Mal M and his
Tories delivered one of the most
lopsided electoral wins in Canadian
history he was cut from the same
ideological cloth as Ronald Reagan and
Margaret Thatcher deregulation
privatization and the free market 23 of
Canada's 61 Crown corporations were
privatized under F which was
already a rubber stamp machine at this
point was dismantled even further and
renamed investment Canada its oversight
over new investment was completely
eliminated and its ability to block
foreign takeovers was scaled back so
much the ACT has only been invoked a
handful of times since morun declared
that Canada was open for business he
didn't see American money as a threat he
openly welcomed it as public polling
around free trade began to shift he
believed that by adopting it as his
party's key policy plan it would carry
them through the next election
critically though he would never have
considered it if not for his extremely
close relationship with Ronald Reagan
Regan's advisers feared phone calls from
Canada because quote he could get the
president to do anything he wanted
was the only Foreigner to speak at
Regan's funeral without this close
relationship free trade between the two
countries may never have been adopted
we've only seen small glimpses of it but
the US has a long history of its own
economic protectionism several times in
the past Century and a half American
tariffs have sent the Canadian economy
spiraling when it pulled out of a trade
deal in 1850 the smooth Holly tariffs
during the Great Depression the Nixon
shock of the 70s and most recently
Ronald Reagan had been promoting a made
in America policy that threatened to
block companies like Northern from
America altogether Canadians weren't
necessarily afraid of free trade what
they were afraid of was getting the
short end of the stick in negotiations
with a country that many perceived as a
bully this was the message of liberal
leader John Turner he considered
considered himself a proponent of free
trade but not a bilateral agreement
directly with the US it's one thing to
negotiate in the context of dozens of
countries coming together it's another
to try and negotiate one-on-one with a
country 10 times your size thanks to TV
ads like this one free trade became the
defining issue of the 1988 federal
election since we're talking about this
Free Trade Agreement uh there's one line
I'd like to change which line is that
well this one here it's just getting in
the way
just how much are we giving away in the
 free trade deal it also culminated
in one of the most explosive moments
ever to happen in a Canadian political
debate I happen to believe that you've
sold us out I happen to believe that
once you Mr Turner just just one any you
do not you do not have a monopoly on
patriotism and I resent the fact that
your implication that only you are a
Canadian I want to tell you that I come
from a Canadian family and I love Canada
and that's why I did it we built a
country east and west and North we built
it on an infrastructure that
deliberately resisted the Continental
pressure of the United States for 120
years we've done it with one signature
of a pen you've reversed that thrown us
into the north south influence of the
United States and will reduce us will
reduce us I'm sure to a colony of the
United States because when the economic
levers go the political Independence is
sure to fall this moment resuscitated
what many had been calling a dead
campaign there had been talks of replac
Turner as leader mid campaign but the
Liberals surged into first ultimately
Turner's past record weighed him down
and the Tories would eventually clinch
the election the Free Trade Agreement
would be enacted soon after and that was
that with the exception of a few Staples
like Lumber or dairy the playing field
had been wiped clean it was time to get
in the ring and start throwing some
punches Northern success in the80s was
dependent on entering the Hostile
American market after having a pair of
Canadian CEOs at the helm it became
clear that Northern needed a CEO with
Connections in Washington that's how
they landed on Edmund Fitzgerald a
former US Marine part owner of the
Milwaukee Brewers baseball team and the
descendant of a wealthy Wisconsin
shipping family Fitzgerald was perfect
for the job as a republican with
extensive lobbying experience he rallied
hard in Washington against new bills
that threatened northern's Southward
expansion although still Canadian
Northern spoke with a fluent American
accent when it needed to the sales
numbers spoke for themselves but the
symbolic victories also helped the
telephone switches in the white house
which had previously belonged to AT&amp;T
were now made by Northern although
America was the main target of
northern's expansion the'80s was the
decade that Northern went Global they
expanded into Europe the Caribbean the
entire Pacific Rim they truly made
history in Japan becoming the first ever
non-japanese company to install a
telephone switch there and in 1987
Northern had an almost perfect marketing
moment fall right into their lap an
earthquake hits just outside of Tokyo
all the switches in the building break
as their mechanical parts are torn off
The Only Exception was northern's DMS 10
which was fully digital the trend of
American CEOs continued as Edmond
Fitzgerald sought out a successor he
chose Paul Stern a former IBM exec who
he had met while serving on Regan's
Telecom committee one former VP
described Paul Stern as quote arguably
the most bloated ego of anyone I've ever
met he insisted on being referred to as
Dr Stern which is one of those things
that he can technically do but is also
one of the most annoying things anyone
can do he also assumed the three top
jobs of President CEO and chairman of
the board at the same time and embarked
on a companywide PR Tour on the
corporate jet reminiscent of a political
campaign all the while he began hacking
and slashing budgets shutting down
factories and firing VPS who looked at
him the wrong way the 90s were a new
decade Northern Telecom had pretty much
just been shortened to Nell by this
point by 19 91 they had pulled even with
AT&amp;T in the US switching Market with a
40% share the new Russian president
Boris yelson even found time to visit
the BNR Labs on a visit to Ottawa in
1992 where he jokingly tried to pocket a
microchip BNR meanwhile had spent the
last few decades working on a new way to
send phone calls the pipes that humans
have used to send phone calls hadn't
really changed much since the 1800s they
started out using iron cables which
although functional were highly
sensitive to noise Distortion early on
many companies made the switch to copper
cables and the world mostly stuck with
those for over a century but now they
were hitting their upper limit and
something better was needed although
they didn't invent the concept Bell
Canada published one of the very first
papers on fiber optics in 1966 using
Ultra Pure strands of glass you could
pulse lasers to send digital ones and
zeros at incredible rates unveiled under
the name fiber World Nortel showcased a
line of fiber optic nodes that could
achieve transmission speeds of 2.5
gigabits per second once again they had
achieved a multi-year head start over
their Rivals as the '90s began nto was
on the top of the world here's a former
employee explaining how they did it the
company built great phone systems and
when I say they built them they really
did they developed their own CPUs wrote
their own operating systems manufactured
all the boards and Sheet Metal and
whatnot these customers moved slowly
products were installed and then
expected to run for a decade or more
with nothing but backwards compatible
upgrades provided during that time you
charged an arm and a leg for what you
delivered and it was very profitable
when you've been at sea for this long
riding the waves of the market the
previous highs and lows begin to feel
insignificant what was once the Pinnacle
of success is now just a small Crest the
halfway point to a bigger and better
wave Nell had built a 13,000 ton tanker
optimized to serve telephone companies
and the sheer momentum of that looked
like it would carry them for the next
decade
but that momentum would turn out to be a
critical
flaw the age of the telephone company
was coming to an abrupt
end our lives are
busy and now from northern Telecom a
solution 1993 saw a big shakeup in
leadership for both Nell and Canada Paul
Stern's abrasive personality and budget
blood lust was tolerated up until 93
when Nell's biggest custom customer
Atlanta Bell dropped Nell following a
string of reliability concerns Paul
Stern's Cuts had reached the R&amp;D centers
and product lines weren't being updated
as much as before customers were
noticing and they began to lose ground
to AT&amp;T again previously heralded as a
genius Paul Stern's tactics were now
seen as shortsighted and he was painted
as a tyrant Bell Canada intervened by
blocking the appointment of Stern's
close friend as president instead
slotting in one of their own Jean Monty
furious at being undermined Paul Stern
resigned in protest the Paul Stern years
are not remembered fondly at Nell and if
he had any lasting Legacy it was
beginning the tradition of lucrative
golden parachutes when he resigned in
disgrace he left the company with 5.4
million in compensation Jean Monty
quickly promoted to CEO had his work cut
out for him 1993 was the middle of a
deep recession in Canada and Nell's
stock price reflected that speaking of
the recession oh boy did people hate
Brian Mone plagued by scandals and
unpopular policy
minini resigned from politics just
months before his party suffered the
worst election defeat in Canada's
history forever dooming the PCS to
irrelevance the pendulum finally swung
back to the Liberals seeing former
cabinet minister Jean cret Ascend the
PM's office if M was our rean then cret
was our Clinton a liberal yes but a
liberal who had been pushed to the right
by a decade of conservative rule the
cret years would be defined by an
obsession with cutting the deficit
housing healthc care nothing was off
limits as long as the number went down
ketang had also partially campaigned on
renegotiating NAFTA a revised free trade
agreement that would now include Mexico
but he didn't try very hard negotiations
had been pretty much finalized by Bush
and morone and reopening the terms was
just as likely to kill the deal
altogether which was a political no-go
the asymmetry between the two countries
meant there was very little weight
Canada could throw around even then on a
personal level creten was not
sympathetic to the Canadian nationalists
as Finance Minister cret had once been
in charge OFA but he had always felt
that American money in Canada was a
necessary pill to swallow years earlier
he had said that there were quote a lot
of places in Canada where people don't
give a damn who owns what they want a
job and years later he said
protectionism is not leftwing or
right-wing it is simply passe the free
trade debate had effectively been
settled this new political Paradigm was
followed by radical changes in Canada's
Telecom policy and by that I mean
massive deregulation it was a burning
down of the entire playing field in the
name of increased competition Bell
Canada's Monopoly on long-distance calls
was broken their preferred supplier
agreement with Nell was torn up phone
companies could be TV companies Now TV
companies could be phone companies cell
phones were a thing now too and everyone
was welcome to take a crack at those to
survive you could no longer be just a
telephone company you needed the thumb
in every pie the US underwent its own
version of this with the Telecom Act of
96 the Telecom Act is mainly remembered
for flooding the tech Market with a
bunch of new capital and planting the
seeds for the eventual Doom bubble but
it also initiated a wakeup call at AT&amp;T
the last decade had been brutal for them
more specifically Western Electric was
weighing them down all the new baby
bells and independent telephone
companies refused to buy from them
because their money would still just be
going to their biggest rival and so atnt
said fine we get the message we'll just
spin it off Western Electric was no more
it underwent a makeover and adopted a
fancy new name longtime fans might
recognize this one Lucent Technologies
Nell and Lucent mirrored each other in
the same way that the US and Canada
mirrored each other the difference was
just size and Prestige Lucent was the
industry's 900lb gorilla over twice as
big as Nell BNR was respected sure but
Bell Labs had six Nobel prizes and their
latest hot shot physicist was bound to
win them another Nortel going public in
the' 70s was a success by Canadian
standards but lucent's IPO it shattered
the world record for most money raised 3
billion in 1996 Lucent would quickly
become one of America's most widely held
stocks if you were betting on either of
these two companies Lucent would be the
logical choice but both of them at their
core were telephone companies neither
was truly prepared for the technological
upheaval that was going to define the
1990s something more radical
unrestricted and unpredictable able than
the telephone you see there's this new
thing called the worldwide web a network
that brought together text images Voice
Even video albeit heavily compressed all
of it viewable on personal computers
that were beginning to pop up in middle
class hoses the telephone took 50 years
to reach around half the US population
the internet did it in five as it turns
out the copper wires most people had in
their houses to receive phone calls
worked just as well when it came to
delivering internet traffic telephone
companies like Nortel were remarkably
well positioned to gobble up this new
internet Market or at least they would
be if they weren't stuck in their old
habits if Lucent represented the Old
Guard The Establishment then Cisco
represented the Next Generation a
relatively new company it was an
internet startup fresh out of Silicon
Valley it had blazed a trail in the 80s
as the brainchild of four Stanford
professors and quickly ate up a huge
share of the Telecom Market whereas
Lucent had Decades of AT&amp;T's Legacy
behind it and a massive scale CIS was
small maneuverable and adaptive its CEO
was a cool guy he raced speedboats and
most importantly it had picked the
correct side in a civil war being waged
by a bunch of nerds the two factions
were called The Bell heads and the net
heads and they each had a competing
vision for how the internet should be
transmitted the Bell heads were most
often Legacy telephone Engineers who
worked for companies like AT&amp;T and Bell
they championed something called ATM
switching asynchronous transfer mode on
the other hand you had the net heads
fans of Ip or Internet packet switching
net heads were likely to be open- Source
nerds working out of universities or
Maverick Tech entrepreneurs working out
of Silicon Valley startups desperate to
try and disrupt the AT&amp;T's of the world
the Bell heads loved ATM because it
built off the same principles of
telephone switching when you set up a
telephone connection you want a live
continuous conversation no buffering you
set up a length between points A and B
and shut out all other traffic it's fast
and high capacity it's not so great
though if one point along the Route
breaks down now you have to re-root and
set up an entirely new connection that's
where packet switching excelled packet
switching is like mailing someone a
jigsaw puzzle but each individual piece
can get split up and take a different
route to the destination it doesn't
matter because once they all reach the
destination they just get assembled into
say an email IP by its very nature is
decentralized immune to single points of
failure and notably very hard to track
customer billing with which frustrated
the Bell heads to no end ATM was ideal
for the high capacity optical fiber
networks that Nell and Lucent
specialized in whereas IP was best used
with ethernet cables and routers that
Cisco had built its Fortune off of in
the 80s it wasn't super clear who was
winning this Civil War but by the mid 9s
it was it was the net heads IP was King
and by the end of the decade ATM was
just going to be another forgotten
technology like betamax was to VHS if
you wanted to use the internet you had
to enure this
sound and hope that no one else at home
was expecting a phone call no one wanted
on demand real-time video calls in this
era they were happy with emails slow
loading websites and if they were
feeling fancy downloading software from
the internet activities were buffering
and latency didn't matter ATM was on
paper the better technology but the
market had committed to IP Nortel needed
to course correct as soon as possible
this is when we meet John Roth he's what
you'd call a company man a Canadian he
grew up in Lethbridge Alberta and joined
Nell in 1969 although he went to school
for electrical engineering his true
talents were not in design during his
entire career at Nell he never made it
onto a single patent he was instead
destined to climb the corporate ladder
and at just 35 years old he became a
general manager the youngest person ever
in that role he break that record again
when when he became a VP next he hopped
on over to president of BNR Nell's
beloved Crown Jewel and later he pushed
for Nell to get into the Wess Market but
his Ascension up the corporate ladder
was far from over and by the end of the
Paul Stern years he was president of
Nell North America by 95 with Jean
Monty's remodeling well underway Roth
was made his Heir Apparent taking on the
role of coo for 2 years before finally
getting to wear the big boy pants in
1997 with Monty heading upstairs to
become CEO of B Canada Enterprises the
model Canadian CEO is like a Canadian
Supreme Court Justice the average
Canadian probably doesn't know your name
certainly something that can't be said
for their American counterparts John
Roth was no Bill Gates and he wasn't a
Steve Jobs his first ever interview as
CEO he seemed deeply uncomfortable with
the attention he was boring the business
press was confounded by him the globan
male unable to find something
interesting to say about him instead
described his body as lanky and weird
feels uncalled for some people compared
him to the nebulous cigarette smoking
man from the TV show The xfiles in other
words an enigma he also had big shoes to
fill Monty had been named Canadian CEO
of the year in 97 after he turned the
company around following the disastrous
Paul Stern years as you know from the
intro John Roth will win the same award
but the road he takes to get there is a
little bit
bumpier let us introduce the John Roth
threshold this is the stock price on the
day he assumed the title of CEO if he
leaves the company above this line he
was a success let's see how he does just
2 months in on December 3rd 1997 John
Roth sent out a now iconic email to all
74 4,000 employees of Nortel it was
entitled the right angle turn Nortel
needed to Pivot if you asked him John
Roth could tell you the exact moment he
realized the internet was the future
like many millionaires he's an avid car
collector one day he was trying to find
a replacement liner for the glove box of
his 1966 Jaguar e type but he couldn't
find one in Canada but as he says here I
started poking around and within 5
minutes I'm in a little garage north of
London a fourman operation
and he's got my parts how would I have
ever found this person if he wasn't on
the web truly a man ahead of his time he
quickly got addicted to online shopping
and bought a 1950s jukebox and a pool
table John Roth made it clear Nell was
an internet company now how they were
going to do that was a serious question
this is a point of contention and I've
heard two sides to this John Roth
supposedly went to his technical people
and asked them how long it would take to
get a foothold into IP he was told
around 2 years which was too slow for
him on the other hand I've heard
firsthand accounts that Nell's Engineers
had a good grasp on IP and had even
published some papers on it in their
in-house Journal one of those papers
even described a device extremely
similar to the iPhone a Whole Decade
ahead of time there appears to be a
disconnect John Roth and the executives
he surrounded himself with did not trust
their own Engineers that they were
dinosaurs who were stuck in their ways
this is perhaps the reason that Nell
made the controversial decision to shut
down BNR in 1996 BNR and its 177,000
employees was dissolved and absorbed
into the rest of Nell the Bell Labs of
Canada no longer existed the name BNR
beloved by those who worked there was
erased unceremoniously in the span of
just one weekend the corporate logo cops
paid a visit to Ottawa and had removed
every Trace that the name BNR ever
existed for some longtime R&amp;D folks it
felt like quote a dagger to the heart
why BNR was dissolved solved is a bit of
a mystery it's possible it wasn't
profitable on its own viewed as a
multi-billion dollar sinkhole That
Couldn't exist in this new era that saw
Bell downgraded from its longdistance
Monopoly by some bn's culture was viewed
as arrogant they saw themselves as
better than the rest even down to their
insistence that they use Macs instead of
PCS they needed to be reigned in brought
into line with the same cost controls
and accountability as the rest of the
company Executives began to place less
emphasis on nor as a hardware company
and more so as a software company that
specialized in networks if John Roth
needed R&amp;D he would have to find it
elsewhere and thus began the intense
speculation of a merger for months in
1998 there were rumors swirling in the
business press that two of The Big Three
May pair up any partnership that emerged
would almost certainly be able to crush
the odd one out Nell and Lucent would be
massive complete domination in the
telephone market and their combined size
could easily fund the R&amp;D to catch up up
to Cisco in IP a combo of Lucent and
Cisco or Nell and Cisco would be the
perfect marriage of Legacy telephone
Tech with Cutting Edge IP technology how
far along any of these talks got is
unclear Lucent and Nell had a huge
product line overlap any merger would
make huge sections of the new company
redundant and rumors of a merger between
Lucent and Cisco caused the FTC to jump
in and say hey uh we might block this
cuz this is maybe a monopoly there was
also a fair amount of personal animosity
between the three company's CEOs that
made any deal with Lucent highly
unlikely Richard mcin CEO of Lucent had
infamously hung up wanted posters of
John Roth and John Chambers inside
offices as a way to motivate his
employees a move that the other two
found tasteless furthermore Lucent had
recently poached three top Nell execs
and then they went on to sue Cisco over
patent infringement by this point the
only merger that made any sense was
between Nell and
Cisco and so in June 1998 John Roth
makes an announcement that would forever
change the trajectory of the entire
industry a decision that would set Nell
on the path to become the most valuable
company in Canada John Roth announces
that he is buying the IP switching
company Bay networks for $9.1
billion he's buying Cisco's biggest
competitor John Ro had set off a
threeway arms
race do you know that sound of course
you do it's the highspeed wireless
internet it can reach all kinds of neat
stuff oh cool want to see live video of
the
accident no thanks if you ask a dozen ex
Nortel employees what killed Nortel I'm
willing to bet a third of them would say
bay networks not because it delivered
the killing blow but instead because it
was the first of many increasingly bad
decisions it just took a while for
everyone to realize the mistake when
Nell acquired bade networks it was
anything but ordinary it cost $9.1
billion staggering for the time Cisco
had acquired around five companies in
the Years leading up to it but each had
a price tag that only ran into the
millions Bay was not a small company and
in fact had been the product of an
earlier merger they had around 7,000
employees most of them in Silicon Valley
all of whom were immediately added to
Nell's Workforce Bay networks was such a
huge ad that Nell even got one last name
change becoming Nell networks the
company's CEO Dave house was immediately
made Nell's new president right under
John Roth the two went on a worldwide
press tour where they were scen by some
as quote Batman and Robin yet despite
all the Fanfare the purchase was greeted
by the markets with a resounding thud
people honestly thought John Roth had
blown it Bay was way over the hill their
product line had already matured too
much and they had way overpaid during
fall 1998 the stock price tanked and
many thought that John Roth would be out
the door far sooner than
expected but then Lucent blinked see
Lucent had actually been one of bay
Network's biggest customers the Nortel
purchase had completely locked them out
of the IP space and management began to
panic and so in January 1999 Lucent buys
Ascend Communications the next biggest
company comparable to Bay networks
except they paid a much steeper price
than Nortel did a whopping $20 billion
if people thought Nell had overpaid then
Lucent got fleeced Ascend had been doing
so poorly Brokers jokingly called it ass
end following this example Cisco which
had already been buying companies at a
frantic Pace went into absolute Pac-Man
mode and gobbled up 18 companies in just
1999 the next year Cisco's grand total
would stand at 64 acquired companies and
Lucent was no slou either bingo bango
bongo John Roth had every reason to be
smug and he took a shot at Cisco saying
we can learn to spell IP faster than
Cisco can learn to spell reliable look
you got to hand it to the man he's got
sick Burns so you're happy with the bay
purchase absolutely and you feel you
paid the right price well this looks
like a bargain now in retrospect
compared to some of the other deals are
going down okay uh feeling Vindicated
now John Roth had permission from Nell's
board to go on a shopping
spree
between the years of 1999 and 2000
Nortel bought a new company at an
average rate of 1 per month some were
small firms with just one exciting R&amp;D
project others were well-established
industry names Bay networks would remain
their most expensive purchase but more
than a few of them crossed over the
billion dollar threshold Alan web
systems was grabbed for almost $6
billion yet another big player in the
ethernet and IP space chyos went for 3
billion with just 90 employees they were
developing a cuttingedge technology that
would enable Optical switching using
tiny microscopic mirrors this shopping
spre was indiscriminate and at times
appeared to lack a clear Focus one of
Nell's other major purchases was clarify
an e-commerce firm acquired for 2.1
billion exactly why John Roth wanted to
take his Telecom firm into the world of
customer relations software is unclear
frankly some of these purchases were
made entirely so that Lucent and Cisco
couldn't have them with every new
acquisition came hundreds and in some
cases thousands of new employees nto
balloon from 74,000 employees up to 95
in some towns like Richardson Texas and
Maiden head in Britain nto was the
single biggest employer the right angle
turn was a full-blown corporate makeover
employees would walk into the office and
see a giant right angle Arrow decorating
the floor this was a company that was
fast from 1997 nto went from spending
Just5 % of their R&amp;D on internet to over
60% in 1999 n's fiber technology went
from 2.5 gbits per second up to 10 four
times faster than anyone else in the
world nto used to plan its projects in
years with full life cycles often being
decades because that's what telephone
companies wanted Roth insisted on a new
time frame web years really just fiscal
quarters because that's how fast the new
economy was moving and he wasn't wrong
internet startups had exploded in the
last couple years in 1995 Netscape had
an IPO that raised almost $3 billion in
just one day it seemed like anyone who
could code a website in their garage
could become a millionaire overnight and
Nortel had to accommodate that just look
at the way its marketing evolved in the
past decade this is a sales video from
the 80s Meridian 1 communication systems
are leading worldwide with over 50,000
digital voice and data systems installed
ranging in size from 30 to 60,000 lines
now whether you need 30 lines or 200
lines the new Meridian 1 option 11 will
enhance your business success without
the
nightmares and this is a new employee
training video from around Y2K and in
joining us you are instantly connected
connected connected so here's what you
get advanc technology now the world is
your college research and development
shape the way that people would
communicate in the future pretty tight
cohesive teams this is where the action
is you are now instantly connected this
is how you connect this is where you
connect welcome to Nell networks welcome
to Nell networks welcome to Nel
networks even promotions were fast Tim
Dempsey recalls that he spent on average
18 months in any given role quote we
sometimes counted bosses per year
instead of years per boss another
employee I spoke to mentioned that they
had five different managers in the same
year some of them they never even met in
person even John Roth the person was
fast the business press had latched on
to his obsession with fast cars finally
there was something interesting they
could write about are you still buying
used parts for your 66 66 Jag over the
net well it's it's in pretty good shape
now so I moved on to other things uh
last last day my wife and I bought some
oil paintings over the net meanwhile in
the background of all of this the rest
of Canadian high-tech had undergone what
can only be described as a gold rush
throughout the ' 70s ' 80s and '90s
Engineers who first got their started
Nell had been leaving to found startups
and then those startups led to startups
creating a multi-generational family
tree that led back to Nell Mel Carell
Newbridge mosaid Cen gandal MCH epitech
lumonics ctronics Nabu orchit norpac
Canadian astronautics JDS by Y2K in the
Ottawa region there were over 1,000
companies employing 75,000 people and
one in five of them belong to nto
ottawa's Tech scene in the 1990s
actually grew faster than the real
Silicon Valley earning it the nickname
Silicon Valley North city council even
tried to Rebrand with a new slogan which
did not go over well you ready for this
the city of Ottawa technically beautiful
I'd make a joke here but a city
councelor already beat me to it if I
called my daughter technically beautiful
she'd hit me Nell was proudly Canada's
single largest spender of R&amp;D in 2000 it
spent 5.9 billion which no exaggeration
is more than and every other company
combined the Nell recruitment process at
universities was so robust some likened
it to hockey talent scouts at one point
one in five engineering grads in Canada
were being hired by Nell one in five if
you had a master's or PhD that Rose to 1
and three from everyone I've spoken to
every interview I've read Nell in the 9s
was one of the best places to work in
Canada you were paid well and if you
wanted to take a training course they'd
pay to send you the job wasn't just here
do this task it was more like what can I
do to make your job easier a local car
dealer told a newspaper that if Nortel
didn't exist half of his customers would
disappear overnight dress code was LAX
no time clock an in-office gym and they
threw legendary parties every other week
one recruiter called it a corporate
Disneyland and this next bit sounds like
a fake fact and I I can't confirm this
but I want it to be true Nell may have
hosted North America's largest recre
softball league with six different skill
tiers and thousands of players Nell had
transformed the image of an entire
Capital City it had helped to Rebrand
Canada as more than the place where you
got Lumber Dairy and maple syrup nto was
a company that was defining what
tomorrow looked like and nowhere was
this more crystallized than in their
latest ad campaign Nell had splurged for
the rights to use the Beatles song Come
Together and on the- noos slogan about
their new networking Focus now now you
might wonder why does a company like
Nell even run ads in the first place
most Nell products aren't something the
average consumer could walk into a Best
Buy and pick up off the shelf no these
ads weren't trying to sell you on the
tech they were selling you on the brand
the average person may not buy a Nell
switch but they could certainly buy Nell
stock strap in you're about to witness a
once in a-lifetime phenomenon I like to
call the Toronto Stock EXP
explosion ntown networks is changing the
Way businesses
communicate hi I've got a package for
Germany and with the internet that's
going to
explode it's been a hot minute since I
updated our little stock tracker back
here and that's because to truly
appreciate what you're about to see
unfold you need to take a peak behind
the curtain in the year 2000
approximately 75% of North America's
backbone internet traffic was carried
through Nell equipment Naro is bringing
in revenues in the hundreds of millions
but that's not how the stock market
works the stock market by its very
nature is speculative people are paying
prices based on what they think a
company should be worth in the future so
although you can look at things like
sales assets business deals Acquisitions
a lot of it comes down to guesswork in
1993 Nel was bringing in 25 times as
many sales as Newbridge networks and yet
Nell was only worth 1.5 times what
Newbridge was in market cap share price
is not a reflection of some Universal
value there's no formula you can punch a
bunch of numbers into and get a single
objective number sometimes the people
trading a stock have no idea what
they're talking about other times people
know a little too much about a stock and
in some cases the mechanics of the
market are just plain being exploited
due to its peculiar position in the
Canadian economy Nell had hijacked the
rules of the game and had found a way to
print money this is how they did it
stocks are traded on stock markets
whether that's in person or through a
computer doesn't matter a company like
Nell trades on a lot of different
markets London Tokyo New York they sell
their shares wherever they're allowed
same product different stores some
markets are more competitive than others
your company needs to be a big deal to
get listed on Wall Street for example
and even then you're probably going to
be a small fish in a big pond Nell did
well on Wall Street in 2000 Wall Street
listed its top 20 foreign stocks and
only four were Canadian three of them
were baric gold alcane aluminum and
Placer dome in other words Mining and
resource extraction Nell was the only
Tech stock but where Nell truly shined
was in its home arena back on Bay Street
at the Toronto Stock Exchange on the TSC
Nell was the MVP first things first is
the currency issue although Canadians
often invest in American companies every
every time we make a trade we're taking
a small hit due to the currency
conversion which can add up over time
but on top of that Canada actually has
laws that puts a cap on the percentage
of foreign Securities you can have in
certain Investments mutual funds R rsps
you're generally capped to somewhere
between 20 to 30% for foreign stocks
these two factors explain why Canadians
were biased towards Canadian stocks but
it doesn't explain why there was a
sudden surge of investing in the year
2000 for that we can look at two recent
changes the first was a change in
pensions I'm very sorry I have to do
this this is actually necessary the two
main types of Pensions are defined
benefit and defined contribution a
defined benefit pension is when both you
and your employer pay into it but it's
fully on them to manage it when you
retire they are obligated to pay you an
agreed upon amount per month this is the
type of pension that most Canadians had
at this point but by the late '90s there
is a big push to transition over to the
the other type of pension in a defined
contribution pension you and your
employer both still put money into it
but now it's on you to manage it you are
responsible for your money low risk high
risk whatever you want but the amount
you get at retirement is now entirely on
you the liberal government was eager to
transfer over huge swaps of its
employees over to Define contribution
pensions that included the workforces of
Canada Post the armed forces the
mounties and the gargantuan public
servant Alliance
that was hundreds of thousands of
Pensions and tens of billions of dollars
that was going to be sunk into the
Canadian stock market even the Canadian
pension plan the old age social safety
net for almost half the country was
about to invest its surplus of $2
billion right into the market this was
on top of the Pension funds that were
already heavily invested in the market
35 billion from Ontario's civil servants
and 68 billion from Ontario's teachers
the second big increase in investment
was due to the C capital gains tax a
capital gain is any profit you make on
an investment which includes stocks at
the start of the year 2000 the capital
gains rate was 75% meaning 75% of any
profit you made would be considered
income and taxed according to your tax
bracket but by February it had been
lowered to 66% and then to 50% by
October anytime the capital gains taxes
lowered it leads to a surge of new money
flowing into the market you saw the same
thing happen in the US when they cut the
capital gains rate in 1997 with more
upside to potential trades the average
Joe was willing to try their hand at the
stock market and this was the late '90s
too technology had made trading more
accessible than ever before in the olden
days if you wanted to invest you had to
go to a bank get a broker call them on
the phone and then tell them to make a
trade for you that's so P people were
quitting their full-time jobs to sit at
home on the computer and trade stocks on
the internet you can see here the
beginnings of what might turn into a
feedback loop Loop Canadians need to
invest in Canada so they invest in the
latest big name Nell which goes up in
price which then generates positive
media coverage and so on and so on but
we're just getting started here the
wheels are still firmly on this wagon
the last piece of the puzzle here is
something called an index fund stock
exchanges employ a lot of metrics stats
it's useful to have just one number to
track an index that represents how good
the exchange is doing now you've
probably heard of the Dow Jones or the
S&amp;P 500 essentially they try to boil
down the entire Market into just the top
30 or 500 stocks some like the Dow Jones
use what is called price waiting where a
company's fraction of the index is their
market cap divided by the total number
of shares others like the S&amp;P 500 use
what is called float weighting for a
given stock their contribution to the
index considers both their total market
cap as well as the total number of
shares available to the general public
that's two variables if you were to put
this into a pie chart today's S&amp;P 500
looks a bit like this the Behemoth Tech
firms like Microsoft Apple Google Amazon
take up big chunks because of their
billions of shares but most of the pie
is made up of tiny slices an index fund
is a type of investment that tries to
track a piie chart just like this if I
put in $1,000 and Google is 5% of the
pie then 5% of my $1,000 goes into
Google every time the index updates so
does my investment in the ultra
competitive market of the US no one
company has clear dominance resulting in
a nice and diversified portfolio I won't
see a huge chunk of money disappear if
one company goes under but what if you
add a smaller less competitive market
could one company with a particularly
massive number of shares take over the
index this is the tsse 300
it's one index that combines the
performance of top 300 companies listed
on the Toronto Stock Exchange in October
1998 Nell's share of the TSC 300 was
less than 5% lagging just behind its
parent company BCE but by September of
1999 it had taken the top spot grown to
8% 1 month later it was 10% by November
it was 11 and by the end of January it
would be
16% what is going on here well for one
Nell's share price is going up but
that's just one half of the picture you
see nortel's total share count was
rapidly multiplying where had all these
new shares come from normally the number
of shares a company has is fairly
arbitrary a company with 100 shares and
a company with a million shares could
have the same market cap simply because
one has a much higher share price
sometimes companies undergo what is
called a stock split they multiply the
total number of shares Say by two and
divide the price of each share by two
keeping the total market cap the same
Nell in its history had undergone four
stock splits two of them under John Roth
a fact he was happy to brag about
however a stock split in a vacuum is
neither a good nor a bad sign it's just
an attempt by a company to draw in new
investors by making a single share more
accessible it's not like John Roth could
just keep doing it like an infinite
money glitch the market would be quick
to punish him and take Nell's stock
price he could go and print new shares
as part of Employee Stock options and in
fact he did this many times Nell was
Notorious for handing out stock options
like candy even the janitor got some
over just a few years he had printed a
hefty 161 million new shares this too
though wasn't something he could do over
and over many of Nell's largest
shareholders complained that their
shares were being diluted if Nell wanted
more shares they would have to get
creative enter the butterfly plane so by
this point Nell's parent company Bell
Canada now renamed BCE owned the largest
chunk of Nell shares 39% so John Roth
although powerful couldn't unilaterally
make decisions without first getting the
approval of his boss Jean Monty and the
rest of the board without Bell's
Monopoly money and a preferred supplier
agreement Nell would likely have gone
under decades ago but BCE wasn't a
monopoly anymore and Nell had quickly
outgrown its parent in the year 2000 BCE
stake of Nell made up 70 8% of bce's
total value think about that this is the
country's largest telephone internet and
TV provider nortel's revenues had grown
26% in 1999 the entirety of bce's other
Holdings only grew 5% only Nortel right
now seems like a good problem to have
but John Monty wasn't entirely pleased
with the situation Nell distorted bce's
numbers so much that the market was
likely undervaluing bce's stock price
and because they no longer had a
majority stake he was fine with simply
divesting their shares that would mean
more autonomy for both BCE and Nell
which would allow Monty to pursue his
goal of creating a domestic media Empire
thanks to the deregulation of the past
decade later that year BCE would go on
to acquire the country's largest private
News company CTV as well as a major
newspaper in the globe in mail as well
as dozens of local news stations selling
off Nell would allow both companies to
divide and conquer with BCE taking on
media and Nell taking on Tech the
question was how to give away the shares
you would think that they would just
sell them make a killing and pocket the
cash but the resulting tax cost would be
immense so they decided to instead push
that onto the shareholders they came up
with a plan known as the butterfly
distribution where for every BCE share
that you held you'd keep that share but
also gain 0.78 Nortel shares and the
total amount of Nell shares would be
split double in number if you're lost
that that's honestly okay but the bottom
line here is that there were now an
additional
52 million Nell shares on the open
market before this BCE was the most
widely held stock in Canada now it was
Nell this immediately increases Nell's
waiting on the TSC 300 the butterfly
plan brought Nell from 16% up to 26 one
quar of the entire country's Premier
Stock Exchange was simply Nell but we're
not done here we've got room to keep
going up the butterfly plan was a
one-time thing if John Roth wanted a
license to print shares he needed a
repeatable strategy he found one in Bay
networks I said earlier it cost Nell 9.1
billion to acquire them but I didn't
mean 9.1 billion in cash no Nell had
paid for it with shares John Roth had
gone to the company treasury with the
permission of the board and and printed
134 million new shares which were handed
over to the executives and employees of
the newly acquired company now there was
a little worry about share dilution but
so long as the share price continued to
go up John Roth was able to keep his
investors happy the ts300 immediately
accounts for all these new shares in
Nel's waiting this in turn causes all
index funds in the country to go out and
purchase more Nell shares which has the
cyclical effect of raising Nell share
price which also again factors into
nortel's waiting can you see where I'm
going with this Nell acquired 18
companies in 2 years and of the $30
billion it had spent 22 billion was paid
for with shares the shopping spree had
injected
972 million new shares into the market
and here's another thing not all of
these shares printed for these
Acquisitions were actually available on
the open market if you print a bunch of
of new shares and give them to employees
they're getting a gift for free
understandably they don't know if the
stock price is going to go up or down
and it's in their best interest to just
sell them immediately and make a profit
millions of shares being dumped right
after a buyout looks bad on Nortel hence
the buyouts usually included an escrow
Clause the employees of the acquired
company are given the Nell shares but
they can't sell them until the end of an
escrow period which could be anywhere
from 6 months to a year and a half and
yet even though these new shares aren't
technically public the TSC 300 still
increases Nell's waiting this triggers
another round of index funds trying to
buy shares except there are fewer shares
available to actually meet this new
demand this artificial scarcity drives
Nell's share price even higher which in
turn increases its waiting and around
and around we go are you following
starting in 1998 Nell had gone from
having around 500 million shares to over
3 billion Nell had exploited the
intricacies of the Canadian stock market
so badly that by the summer of 200000 it
made up
38% of the entire Toronto Stock Exchange
38% does this make sense does this seem
fair I promise you it shouldn't and then
things got worse so those index funds we
were talking about with Nortel
continually eating more and more of the
TS Pi index fund managers had to buy
more and more Nell to fill up their
clients portfolios but sometime around
late 1999 they ran into a snag see
there's actually a law in Ontario that
prevents mutual and index funds from
having more than 10% of their value in
one stock maybe you see the issue here
Nell was now more than 10% of the pi it
was illegal for index funds to match the
TSC 300 and that was a problem problem
see the reason people go to professional
investors is that they're supposed to
know better than the average person but
with the market being anywhere from 15
to 25% Nell unless your investment
manager was a savant or a psychic there
was no reliable way for them to
outperform the market thanks to
aggressive lobbying efforts on January
28th 2000 the Ontario Securities
Commission introduced what many people
called the Nortel rule Nortel was not
explicitly named in this change but it
was the only company the rule in
impacted index funds were now allowed to
go over the 10% cap mutual fund managers
were out of luck and they were still
stuck at 10 the tsse 300 throughout most
of the year 2000 was mockingly called
the Nortel index because all it really
told you was whether or not Nortel had a
good day or not at some point you would
think that someone in charge would step
in and say hey this is kind of like
passing a law where you don't have to
wear a seat belt if the car is a
convertible and you have the roof down
safety regulations are optional so long
as you're trying to do something cool
but no remember the Canadian pension
plan 80% of it was an index fund
tracking the tsse 300 retirement funds
pensions personal portfolios all over
the country were packed to the gills
with Nortel Canadians were bombarded
with Nell everywhere they looked it was
on the news it was in commercials maybe
they knew about it because their uncle
worked there and his stock plan was
paying for his new kitchen or maybe
their buddy made 3K off of Nell thanks
to a good trade the other week now
they've got fomo they want to get in on
the bandwagon too they want to make
money obviously but you know deep down
there's probably a little part of them
that's you know patriotic they're happy
they're supporting the home team maybe
Canada doesn't make its own cars or make
its own movies and you know what we
don't even make switches what we do make
is money in March 2000 at the
very height of the Doom bubble Nell had
finally surpassed Lucent market cap the
mouse had eaten the
elephant
and on July 26th Nell set its all-time
stock price record of
$124.50 with a market cap of $400
billion it was the ninth most valuable
company in the entire
world but there was a leak in the boat
maybe some of you caught it I certainly
glanced over it see paying for a company
with shares instead of cash is not some
infinite money glitch of course not if
it was why would anyone ever pay with
cash despite what the headlines on
Nell's press releases said Nell was not
doing so hot the truth was always out
there hidden in the fine print Nell
hadn't turned a profit in 4 years an
Enterprise that had existed for over a
century would not make it out of the
next decade this is Nell and this is how
it broke Canada
hey are you dying to watch part two like
right now well you can watch it early
right now on nebula nebula is the
creator-owned streaming service I'm a
part of alongside some of the best
educational creators on the internet
there you can watch my videos and many
more completely ad free not only do I
post my videos 2 weeks early there but
you can also to find dozens of nebula
originals not found anywhere else if
you're in the mood for more failed
business ventures then I'd highly
recommend Lindsay Ellis's video on the
rise and fall of kid-friendly Las Vegas
or if you want to check out some
fantastic 3D animation Neo has a series
that takes a close-up look at topics
like the bin Laden raid or The
Disappearance of Malaysian Airlines
flight 17 maybe you're looking for
advice on making your own videos well
for that there's nebula classes courses
by some of the best creators out there
on everything from the base of video
editing to elevating your videos with
great audio and here's one more major
reason to support me on nebula earlier
this year I was able to make all of this
my full-time job and frankly it's the
only reason I was able to tackle a topic
this massive signing up to nebula using
my link is one of the best ways to help
me out with it you get a 40% discount on
an annual subscription and access to
nebula classes all for just 250 a month
and a significant chunk of that money
goes directly to me for as long as
you're subscribed which will help me
make bigger and better brentar support
me and many others by signing up for
nebula today as always thank you for
watching
