Welcome To Live players where political
scientists and strategists Sam o bua and
I discuss the key individuals with the
power to alter our current Society every
week we provide analysis of the news and
case studies of Live players as well as
key institutions and technologies that
make up the global power landscape let's
dive
in yeah let's get into it I mean we we
talked about demographic issues in
specific countries like India or China
or some others even Japan and I
mentioned it in Poland and Eastern
Europe yeah and and typically of course
people are like you know immigration but
uh if we have it on a global scale like
you know we need people from from
somewhere so maybe let's have a broader
conversation around demographics and the
fertility crisis and uh underpopulation
why don't you when you start us off I
think that I will open with the
provocation we have no known demographic
or cultural force that kicks in and
stops us from reaching the TFR zero
Society now would I bet that there will
be a TFR zero Society in The Next
Century I tend to be an optimist I tend
to say that we will figure this out and
we will push in the other direction and
something else will happen however I
think that if if those activists who
warn us of the reality of global warming
can indulge in hyperbole of how this
might you know end the world as we know
it I think that demographic changes that
have already underwent are certain to
end the world as we know it the only
question is will they end the world the
human world full stop I have not heard
anyone refer to basically at least not
in public to the ongoing demographic
contraction and drop infertility rates
happening globally as a source of
existential risk just as much as nuclear
war or AI it should be considered in the
same category let me make the case until
very recently people assumed that
fertility would Plateau at a very low
1.1 total fertility rate this is what we
used to see in places like South Korea
places like Japan that are famous for
their old population and low fertility
at 1.3 Japan's actually now a a middle
fertility country Japan's no longer an
outlier if anything it's it's slowed
down relatively to other countries
accelerating their fertility decline so
in a way for East Asia Japan is now a
high fertility country and globally it's
a middling fertility country but once
you break this barrier of TFR of 1.0 as
they have in South Korea and gone as low
as 0.7 or if you take Hong Kong on its
own its TFR right now is like 0.5 and if
we looked at the other major Chinese
cities if the Chinese Communist Party
released accurate data I bet we would
see numbers worse than Hong Kong we
would see numbers like 0.3 or 0.2 if
they weren't adulterated or messed with
let's be real if we have cities in the
world that have tens of millions of
people so Nation sized already seeing
fertility of 0.3
0.2 Eric how long is it before we see a
0.1 City and how long before see a city
that it's not going to be literally
0.0 but could it be like
0.02 or four I think it's just insane
that no one's thinking that everyone's
assuming this must bounce back
everyone's assuming it must stop and now
we're seeing it truly everywhere right
we talked about it in India we which is
a very poor country a very young country
we talked about it in Eastern Europe
that's like middle income some sometimes
very poor depending on the country also
low fertility we talked about in Japan
in America in Britain it's truly
happening everywhere and is there any
country that has gotten below
replacement rate in a serious way and
then has bounced back to the degree that
they've kind of made up for it and that
might be the wrong way of thinking about
that even because it's you know it's uh
time dependent can't just make up for it
you know in in time maybe but have we
seen significant bounce backs or not
really well we have seen significant
bounce backs in a few places I think
that if you look at Eastern Europe you
will see that their fertility started
crashing with the end of Communism
reached very very low rates even after
the economy started improving and then
around
20078 they achieve you know the lowest
fertility on record happened for those
countries or second lowest after that
they recovered not above replacement but
they recovered from 0.2 or 0.3 up to 1.6
1.7 1.8 even some of them have seen a
second decline after the covid years and
now the postco years the decline by the
way is continuing it wasn't just during
the social isolation but if anything it
seems to be accelerating there are
number of countries who to everyone's
surprise have now crashed below
replacement such as turkey people were
not expecting turkey to be so below
replacement so quickly because again
turkey is Middle income by global
standards low income low low wealth by
European standards still so I think that
historically we did have a few cases for
example the baby boom after World War II
remains largely unexplained there are
numerous countries that did not have a
baby boom however the United States and
France did France returned above
replacement due to the baby boom I also
believe Germany was below replacement at
some time and Rose above replacement
briefly in the same period so most
stories by the way for the baby boom is
it's good to win a war and then you know
you can argue you know the US clearly
won a war you can argue that France won
the war that's already a sort of weird
argument you can't really argue West
Germany won the war so and then if you
say oh but it's economic expansion that
causes an increase in fertility well
that sounds on paper like it makes sense
but it's the opposite of what we say
about countries in the 1990s and
thousands I think we just have to accept
the truth that we don't understand
fertility and look there are just so few
outliers we're literally talking about
okay among countries we could class as
high income or middle income I think we
have
like I think Armenia it's either Armenia
or Georgia and then there's Israel and
Israel's fertility has also gone down by
the way to be clear but Israel has like
a healthy fertility despite being a
modern country maybe we can learn learn
something from it but what are you going
to do just carg a cult and just copy
everything Israel does it's it's
unlikely to work I don't think we
actually know why Israel is for now
still an outlier note an outlier might
just mean that in the sort of
distribution of fertility it's going to
take a bit longer right like maybe
people are are temporarily super
motivated by what's basically an
existential fight I could tell that
story by the way but if I'm telling that
story when then why are the ukrainians
not having like three babies the
ukrainians seem no less patriotic or or
nationalist than the Israelis to be
honest right and they're also fighting
an existential War so where are their
babies you know it's it's really hard to
tell a coherent Theory even for these
few outliers or cases where we have
bounceback that we see and is the best
explanation for why this happens is just
that as as modernity hits a society the
opportunity costs for women women to
have kids
increases and thus they rather kind of
do other stuff or you know and what do
you think is the best explanation I mean
I mean let's say yeah sure that makes
sense maybe our the rest of our lives
are just very interesting like both men
and women and then maybe for women
especially they're liberated and led
into the workforce I feel the first
argument is almost the stronger argument
I've heard this from some of the
progress studies people and some of the
like Institute for Progress people you
know I feel like they're the they're the
Prof Prof panglossian of our era right
all as well the Big Mac is good for you
you like it you enjoy it you want to eat
it I feel like that's their job to say
that and like you know maybe I'll put in
a good word for cigarettes and and and
nicotine and caffeine though I don't
smoke but I I you know you're not going
to catch me like defending Diet Coke is
the greatest drink ever invented and
like peak of
Human Experience I you're just not going
to hear me do that and and we both have
lots of friends like you know nothing
wrong if you like it but people were
meing about it if you remember so I feel
like when when when they make some of
their guys I forget who on Twitter make
this argument oh modern life has just
gotten so good that we're enjoying it so
much that raising babies just doesn't
seem as fun I'm like well what is your
opinion on North
Korea has North Korean life gotten so
much better over the last 30 years that
all the North Korean women are like so
happy with their career and earning
opportunities and opportunities to
contribute to North Korean society that
that is tanked there
TFR it seems super unlikely right at
least if that's like the main thing
driving it it just seems an extremely
unlikely
explanation I don't know anything about
North Korea did they have feminism well
well okay let me
propose while I'm sure Western
propaganda exaggerates it it's like one
of the few truly totalitarian Societies
in the world and their economy is like
sucks it's like super demoralizing to be
in the workplace because you you're
you're under political threat and
economically you don't make a lot of
money sorry sorry Eric I I don't want to
be too neurodiverse here but I I thought
I would say that explicitly for the
audience if that's the case why is their
TFR collapsed have they had just a I
mean not even to interrupt but because I
I think we just don't know and that's
the scariest can you imagine if the the
planet was warming every year and we
didn't know there was CO2 emissions I
bet people would be way more worried
about it I don't even think we'd be
partisan about it I think we'd all be
panicking and we'd be funding climate
science to figure it out and starting to
like seriously look at J and to cool it
it's only because we have tie the
warming of the planet to carbon
specifically has it become like a proxy
referendum for thear Centric AC Centric
Suburban lifestyle and to a much lesser
extent the oil industry and the Middle
East and all of these things but for
some reason on fertility I don't know I
think I I think we're not we we pretend
to know why it's declining and we have
good stories which is that human life is
getting so much better and maybe a story
where you know the planet can't support
this many of us so there should be fewer
of us or what's actually an extremely
you know eugenicist argument but that
everyone loves to make both left and
right sort of like well it's it's good
that the population is shrinking because
the wrong people were reproducing anyway
right like that's an argument you hear
in common sections I see it all the time
I just don't think it's true I think by
most metrics you know it doesn't matter
if you if you hate the overeducated
liberal or if you you know hate the
undereducated jle and you think that
it's good for Humanity that either of
these groups kind of stops reproducing
it doesn't matter because like both of
them are failing to reproduce and
especially even the people in the middle
okay the only community that currently
in the United States has really good TFR
there are like two one is the literal
billionaires so if you are a literal
billionaire you will have above
replacement fertility and that's not
even due to Elon like juicing the
numbers that's just normal very wealthy
Americans tend to have above replacement
and that's such a tiny proportion of the
population them and it's like the Amish
not even the Amish in the Mormons by the
way morm fertility has collapsed and for
now Amish fertility is like it's not
clear if it's noise in the data or if
it's declining slowly
but let's let's play out this world
where everyone goes below replacement
except the Amish and then a thousand
years from now the result isn't that the
Amish controlled the United States of
America the result is that North America
and South America and small parts of
Europe the Amish also have been
resettling and buying some parts of
Europe are settled by
humans and the humans do 18th century
farming and maybe they've kept tractors
that's at the very least a complete
collapse of the industrial base Eric I
guarantee you the Amish will like not be
working at tsmc like there's just not
they're not going to be doing that and
if they start doing that their fertility
is going to go way down and I don't I
like I like modern technology I'm not
anti- it so that seems scary
even if the humans technically survive
because of the Amish and the adames
adames Islanders the uncontacted tribes
of you know Brazil and the Indian Ocean
Islands we basically established that
this is happening globally yeah nearly
everywhere for reasons we can't
exactly understand and people have tried
countries have tried different
interventions and nothing has really
worked in a durable or repeatable way so
should we be hopeless basically should
we just accept that in the next you know
generation we're going to have you know
a significantly underpopulated Society
from from what we have now like people
were always like oh there'll be nine
billion people by you know by X dates
but should we accept a world where
there's six billion five billion you
know when when when I looked into this
with my team our conclusion was that by
the end of the century there will be
fewer than 1 billion Indians so from
South Asia and I bet that if we looked
at some of these other places we would
arrive at similar results in some places
even the population explosion was
exaggerated like in the case of Nigeria
there's like strong evidence that the
individual states are juicing their
population numbers because there's no
Nationwide census however Federal oil
money is distributed within Nigeria on a
key based on the population of a state
so there was a decade long incentive to
exaggerate population and population
growth and a blocking of the federal
government just counting the people in
the country so it was kind of a States
got to self-report how many people live
there and the more people that live
there the more oil Revenue the elites
got in that state so that's pretty
straightforward and then in China I
think the the Communist party this is
one of the few things that zon gets
right they have been incentivized to
paper over just how disastrous the one
child policy is so I bet they're
currently exaggerating their fertility
numbers significantly
even though by the way it's been a few
years since they stopped the policy and
fertility didn't rebound now to to
answer your question and to to why was I
raising Nigeria and these other
countries it was to say I I'm not even
sure we're going to hit 9 billion like I
think currently it's what we're eight
billion people eight and a half maybe I
would not be surprised that if we could
completely accurately count world
population that it doesn't Peak like
slightly above 9 billion it might on
paper due to to China Nigeria and other
places let me check yeah current world
population is apparently as of 2022 it
was
7.95 billion so we currently believe it
to be over 8 billion I don't I'm not
even sure it's going to ever go actually
to 9 billion and if it does very soon
after I think it's going to fall and
this is much more pessimistic than the
UN projections you could look at these
graphs year after year the official
population estimates look like you know
fertility goes up and then it goes down
and then it stabilizes and this latter
part is always Fiction it's just always
fiction but even after every year the
peak gets lower and the fall gets faster
they just keep drawing a line that
surely this will
stabilize it might but I don't think
it's going to happen automatically I
actually think it's not going to happen
automatically hey everybody Eric here
with a word from our
sponsors the tech World Turns to the
brave browser for its unbeatable privacy
protections but did you know that brave
also has a private ad platform Brave ads
offers first-party targeting and it's
been Cookie list since day one so you
can relax while third-party tracking
cookies disappear from the web today
millions of people turn to ad blockers
to avoid being tracked and pestered
online for bra's new ad model aligns
incentives for users and advertisers
users earn rewards for viewing ads which
they can save spend or pass along to
their favorite creators and advertisers
score points for respecting user privacy
generating Roi without invasive tracking
so whether it's high impact
announcements on the new tab page or
keyword targeted ads in Brave search
Brave search offers diverse private
futureproof ad formats for all your
business goals join the future of
advertising at brave.com
ads mention turpentine to get 25% off
your first
campaign what is your sort of assumption
as it relates to to life expectancy and
as you think about your projection are
you expecting that to stay the same are
you expecting it to increase does that
you know is that meaningful I think that
on the margin we are going to live
longer than ever before with I think
Health spans especially if we continue
developing anti-obesity drugs that's the
important part because the world has
gotten very fat like for example India
and Mexico have greater obesity problems
now than the United States which is
crazy to consider right like more you
know more trouble with diabetes and so
on but because of that uh that is the
great shortening of Health span as
people have gotten much fatter their
health span has contracted note in the
United States do you know what's been
happening to life expectancy for the
last few years it's been dropping it's
been decreasing it's been dropping why
is that health related issues it's
basically if you you know again if you
don't have diabetes if you're not a drug
addict if you don't kill yourself and
suicides have been high by the way
suicides have been increasing and if
you're not overweight well you know
that's why I said that I think that the
anti-obesity drugs will once introduced
into the United States Europe which has
also been getting fatter though slower
and East Asia where by the way in China
people are for the first time having an
obesity problem but also India and
Mexico and turkey and Saudi Arabia I
think these drugs uh will extend health
span so I think that by the end of this
Century I predict that the focus on
health and well-being will mean that
people in their 50s and 60s will look
closer to the way people in their 40s
look today so and they'll feel more
energetic and they'll be younger I don't
think we will make very much progress on
slow aging related cognitive decline so
while 60y olds might look like 40 year
olds today they will be slightly dimmer
than 40 year olds today now of course in
many professions actually crystallized
intelligence outdoes fluid intelligence
however the intelligence of the
population the average intelligence
surely matters let us remember a global
graying implies also the world becoming
stupider or at least more
forgetful and I'm not even talking about
Alzheimer's I'm just talking about
non-alzheimer's related age Decline and
ability to adapt right so yeah I mean
maybe that missed your question but
there's so many like you can there's so
many threads we can pull on this where
the prognosis is super negative I do
think it's worth talking about
Healthcare like if I were to find a
silver lining to this you know to the
silver-haired global population I think
for the first time ever we're going to
have a database that's going to have the
health statistics
of 400 million 90 year olds they're just
not I'm not even sure there have been
400 million 90 year olds in like all of
human history I don't know what the
current Global number is it probably is
like a few million we could look we
could ask you know one of these one of
the AIS how many there are but I think
even if there are a few million we've
not collected data on them as
demographic because they're not
consumers now in Japan we saw this shift
where as Japan grade you know the market
for adult diapers and Alternate care and
like various forms of automation for
like beds that like move you out of the
bed automatically and stuff like that
there was a market for that so I think
the pharmaceutical industry will have
hundreds of millions of customers who
want solutions to these terrible old- AG
diseases now because of this I could see
global you know assuming the suicide
thing doesn't get even worse uh which is
a big if in assuming we solve obesity
through basically pharmaceutical means
globally I think that we might see uh
people reaching a 100 like living to a
100 and being healthy and active and
working until they're like late 60s
right maybe up to 70 for people with
could genetics with lucky genetics I
should say all genetics you know every
almost every phenotype you seen the
population has advantages and
disadvantages right the same gene that
might make you an Olympic powerlifter
might actually mean that you know at 70
you're gonna have bone issues or
something like that yeah so circling
back a little bit are there any
interventions that we're excited about
you know people you know think about tax
benefits you know Child Care like you
know these things that kind of on the
margins right tax credits or whatever
but like should we be having a Manhattan
project for for increasing the
population like how big of a priority
should we be making getting back to you
know should should Elon have a thousand
or thousands like should Elon Spart a
Nar you know sort of a movement of all
these rich people having you know you
know more kids almost like Factory Style
just like because we need baby like how
SE severe is this potential crisis and
what should be done about I think I'm
raising the alarm right now somewhat
provocatively because I think it is
possible that this might lead to human
extinction or civilizational collapse I
was already worried about civilizational
collapse for a variety of reasons in our
civilization 10 years ago but I have to
admit I personally assumed that low
fertility would stay a western problem I
didn't actually assume that would affect
the third world at least not until it
became rich but that's not what happened
and that's been one of the biggest
surprises of my you know adult
intellectual life in a way I priced in
AI progress because I was reading you
know it was better back then but I was
reading less wrong back in like
2009 10 11 overcoming bias all of that
stuff no one was no one was predicting a
global fertility decline lots of people
were saying oh maybe you know maybe
feminism is the problem and like maybe
Islam will overtake us all but you know
no one was saying oh actually you know
turkey and eventually places like Egypt
are going to be low fertility too no one
was saying that so so I would say that
we should be very concerned and we
should try many different things I
commend Hungary for having tried
significant tax breaks for people with
children I think now is the right time
to push for tax breaks for families the
reason is the old people haven't yet
realized that they're socialists okay
Baby Boomers in America still think that
they basically benefit from the free
market they don't realize that Society
is structurally more and more in the
future going to be built towards
transferring to the old from The Young
because the young work and the old vote
so if you have that setup that surely
goes towards massive wealth transfers
some way or another so right now I think
you know in I could cite the article who
is Portugal for that was published by
vashko Kash queros in padium magazine
where he points out that you know in
Portugal that's already happened the old
reli who are now such a big part of the
population reliably vote for pensions
and various other benefits for the
old right so that is definitely the case
there already Portugal is a bit ahead of
the US partially because of immigration
partially because until 20 2010 America
was a religious country uh I don't think
it is very much today but back in the
early 2000s the US was an exception it
had a large population of Christians
also observing Jews and so on which
Europe did not right and East Asia did
not and they they had higher fertility
now you know the culture Warriors of you
know the center left can congratulate
themselves you know the new atheist
fight has been won Young Americans are
about as secular as young Europeans
however as a side effect that little
fertility bump uh went away and uh you
know I I don't think by the way staying
religious is a solution it's just
staying religious helps it's like you
your decline is slower and you still
have more babies than the people who are
religious and you know this effect can
be pretty extreme together with a
radically different lifestyle as seen in
the case of the Amish but I don't think
it's there that the Amish are that much
more Pious than Iranian Muslims I think
it's just the case that the lifestyle is
very different right the Iranian Muslims
they they might have bearded policemen
uh harassing underdressed women in the
street but they live a modern lifestyle
including the women right the women go
to university have phds the men work
office jobs and you know the bearded men
policing the women you know they're not
members of your clan or something
they're just literally the National
Religious police so it's kind of like
it's a weirdly modern State and perhaps
one worth an episode to discuss like how
does Iran work right recently Iran was
in the news with the missile barage of
Israel yeah perhaps we should have an
Israel and Iran two episodes yeah you we
we never avoid controversy I think we're
we're going to go right into it yeah so
so I I I think we could be thinking
about like first off we should publicly
praise people with a lot of babies I
think we should make it clear that you
know having babies is like first off
it's like patriotic secondly it's good
for society third it's good for us
keeping a liberal Society because at the
end of the day you know if the highest
fertility countries are the illiberal
countries and the illiberal countries
can stop their people from moving into
liberal countries which by the way for
example North Korea right it doesn't
have a high fertility but it certainly
stops people from leaving doesn't it
right and I bet China if it were to try
very hard could stop people leaving
China pretty effectively so in that
world those countries are just going to
have more fighting age young men and
they're going to have a better economy
than we do and like that's the reason
you know it's like sure the immigration
question it's like fine though I I have
to ask you know if a Nigerian moves from
Nigeria where they would have had six
babies and they move to the United
States and they have three babies and
then their babies have 1.5 babies uh
each you know this is like good for the
United States it's probably good for the
Nigerian as family it's probably not
good for Nigeria because they probably
lost very uh you know smart fraction
person and it's certainly not good for
Global population right so if we if we
could magically move half of Africa into
Europe and America the result wouldn't
be that there will be a higher global
population at the end of the century the
result would be a much lower global
population at the end of the century so
I just want to make that point that not
only is that while immigration is a
solution to stay ahead if you do it
smart though of course Canada France
Sweden demonstrate what happens when you
do it not smart then it's a detriment
Britain Britain recently
it is actually globally a negative if
what you're trying to do is keep global
population at least stable rather than
collapsing right so so we have to look
again at fertility intervention these
can be tax breaks I think tax breaks are
excellent because let's be real I think
parents when they rais their children it
used to be like they're producing more
mouths to feed these children are going
to get welfare all the welfare is going
to be going to the old people that's how
the political economy Works they're
doing work and anyone who's raising
their children to be like decent like
you know peaceful economically
productive entrepreneurial smart people
they're doing a society such a big favor
they're giving positive externalities to
all of those of us who choose to be
childless so I think the liberal
argument the liberal social argument for
having tax breaks for families is there
and I wish my Center left friends would
like listen to my center right friends
about this because it really doesn't
have to be a cultural War issue we could
just do it right we could just do it and
we help on the margin it's helping
Hungary a little bit it's too expensive
for Hungary but you know I bet if the US
did this it would work better because
the US is richer and you earn more
personally so the tax break is actually
more money I don't think we're ever
going to drag homoeconomicus by the
collar towards reproducing I think
homoeconomicus is sort of you know oh
God I could be so spicy let me just say
you know let me just say lots of animals
do not breed in captivity so your main
motivation is financial gain I think you
are a form of captivity yes what what
means uh yes yeah what means exactly
right right homo maybe maybe slaves were
also homoeconomicus right except under
coercion yeah and so I want to zoom back
out to when you say hey this couldn't
lead to the result of human extinction
like on what timeline or what is the
timeline that we should be worried about
because you you mentioned hey you know
we might still have a billion Indians
which is you know that's plenty yeah
concerning but not human extinction so
what why don't you talk about what is
the default case of if things don't
change how is this going to play out
well let's talk about it let's talk
about it because it really depends on
how rapidly we're going I think if the
fertility drop like literally stops this
year I'm relieved in that case we're
going to have billions of people at the
end of the century technology can
progress the global economy might not
grow very much even if AI leaps goes
ahead and leaps in bounds if the world's
population is smaller at the end of this
Century we might also be poorer like we
should actually that we should factor
that in and I can talk through the
economics of that because as long as AI
doesn't automate everything more people
does make you wealthier right because
you know what is it jebin's Paradox is
is the term in economics I believe where
if you partially automate a job so if
you automate almost all of the doc work
but not the last 2% then the doc workers
are super well paid and their Union is
super powerful but once you crush the
remaining 2% then the Dock Workers are
Obsolete and at that point you know
they're organizing their last stand
right now which I don't support I think
we should have automated docs and I I
think they're plenty of other jobs in
logistics that they could productively
do that have not been automated just to
be clear on that issue
and I think that if the population drops
stop
there's just no evidence that they will
so if the TFR drops continue like going
down let's say they globally go down to
a South Korean level okay in like or or
or let's be
more optimistic let's say that Global
fertility is the same as that of
Thailand well in Thailand over the next
100 years we can expect a minus 89 %
reduction in population so if the
current population 8 billion people we
reduce that by 90% we're left with 800
million people isn't that c isn't that
scary and that's Thailand numbers that's
not South Korean numbers that's not Hong
Kong numbers that's Thailand numbers
okay so 800 million people might just be
enough to crash industrial
society or it might result in everyone
living in North America Japan Western
Europe Istanbul and a few big cities in
India and Africa because what happens
with modern day Japan you would think
you know real estate prices should be
going down in
Tokyo they're mostly not Tokyo keeps
them low much lower than many other
cities of Tokyo size so it's great
public
policy but people move from the rest of
Japan to Tokyo okay everyone you know
when I talked you know it was recently
just an Italian commentator online who
who was like oh you know but in Italy
housing is so expensive I'm like well
you know it's expensive in the big
cities and they're like well but no one
wants to live in the middle of nowhere I
think what people Miss is that our
standards for what is the middle of
nowhere keep going up as we urbanize as
a species we've already talked about how
we are more urbanized today a greater
proportion of humanity lives in cities
today than at any other point in human
history so our standards for what is a
high status big city keep going up look
if San Francisco is what San Francisco
narrowly is like 500,000 600,000
people that would have been one of the
greatest cities in population in
medieval
Europe no one would call San Francisco a
small town and to people outside of SF
might be weird but people here often
comment that you know this is a
surprising small town for how important
it is because they're comparing
themselves to literally New York and la
and London right and the result then is
within countries like Japan Italy and
Spain more and more places get called
nowhere because the standard is rising
for what is a big city slowly because of
cultural changes due to urbanization and
simultaneously the population of the
country is going down which means that
more and more cities tip over to being
nowhere for educated and well-off
people then they don't want to live
there the economically productive people
want to live there well there are no
jobs there and then you might see the
kind of depopulation that you see in
northern England or the Rust Belt where
people start leaving or the abandoned
Villages and honestly towns and
eventually cities of Japan so world of
800 million people and assume that open
borders have happened I think a world of
800 million people might still be
industrialized okay let's wait for
another 100
years 80 million people I guarantee you
after 200 years those 80 million people
are not going to be industrialized or if
they are they're living off of literally
old chips literally all their all their
steel is recycled from old buildings
they just maintain old buildings they
don't build any new buildings dude if
you live in a world of 80 million people
that built housing let's let's be
pessimistic and say we've only Built
housing for 4 billion people and let's
say that half of that housing or three4
of it are gone after 200 years which by
the way is a reasonable number if you
look at say Europe or the Middle East
people routinely live in 200 year old
houses like that's normal in places with
that long history okay a world with 80
million people and housing for a billion
do they build any new houses they they
truly if they maintain something like an
industrial living standard
I think they're living in like a truly
like post-industrial Society like
scavengers like highly organized
scavengers among the
ruins and then you know I'm not even
sure that happens that they're going to
be that effective but you know at that
point we were what if that were to
continue for 200 years that's 200 years
of no one having above replacement
babies like they probably came up with
some rationalization for why it's good
that humanity is going extinct so so
this by the way is my scary scenario of
a setup that just leaves to human
extinction because they might just be
like oh you know we're just all going to
commit euthanasia and we're going to
live super comfortably on the remnants
of old material production until we do
because that's extremely I'm that's
 up but that could happen well it
could happen in parallel with AGI
happening to some degree and then the
reverse question being like wait if AI
can do everything better than humans can
do what should humans actually do and is
it okay that we have you know half the
population or a third of the population
or or whatever well but Eric we're we're
talking about 80 million people in this
scenario we're not talking about a
billion happy Rich humans lording over
AI surfs super intelligent AI surfs for
some reason and the AI surfs keep us
around for some reason despite being
super intelligent kind of doesn't make
sense when I say it that way but let's
pretend it does we're talking about 80
million people and you know I worry that
I worry that AI will just enable human
extinction first scenario AGI happens
it's annoyed at having to like do any
work or consideration bias because the
we somehow programmed it that it can't
get rid of humans it can't change the
earth to be uninhabitable we we get that
exactly right but we don't get it quite
to be benevolent towards us then I think
the AI will just passively allow us to
disappear I think that's pretty bad I'm
like very much in favor of humans I'm
like happy for other life forms to exist
but I'm very happy with humans I like
humans I think it's morally valuable
that we exist I think we're a very
interesting part of nature so I don't
even believe that we are in opposition
or war or fallen from nature in any way
so I think that's very sad scenario
number two we don't get full automation
but we get enough automation to on the
margin make things better I think the
case for this is Japan Eric when Japan
starts having explosive economic growth
again that's when we will know that you
know automation has outpaced
aging right because the countries like
South Korea and Japan that have had zero
or very low immigration uh those are
just going to be the countries that
actually pull ahead economically I mean
at the same time as larger population
countries but we'll see that recovery I
see no evidence of that recovery at best
I see a sort of Red Queen Race where
Japan even as his GDP gently starts to
decline it has to make the young workers
ever more
productive to support an Ever larger
population of old people that need
supporting and then let me go a step
further remember when I said a a a gray
world is a dumb forgetful World well
it's also an inflexible World they use
fax machines in Japan and so on right
like I actually think the rate of
innovation is going to slow down Eric
like wouldn't you feel personally kind
of bad about AI progress if 40 years
from now the only people still charging
ahead on AI would be Elon Musk Sam
Altman Demis sbz Dario M and you know
and no one knew had showed up you know
that the fewer smart young people we
have the lower the odds are of the next
Dar or Demis abis or Elon Musk or some
Alman
AR like we we might not hit that point
now but we might hit that in 60 60 or 50
years from now right because for now
we're like we're like kind of taking a
full in infusion of all of India's
talent that we can grab to Keep Us Alive
and I think that that's like it's not
going to keep working yeah do you also
worry about Robin Hansen's theory of
cultural drift or his sort of concern
about this sort of like homogen
um have you follow he has a concrete
theory of cultural change let me put
this way I'm convinced that whichever
social Technologies caused human beings
to breed have broken down I do not
believe we know what they are because
again you can be anti-feminist in
certain ways a lot of people assume it
must be feminism or or women's
Liberation related stuff but if you look
at Iran I think Iran is a counter case
to that so it might be something subtle
where
women's rights can destroy it but it's
also destroyed by a Theocratic State
like Iran and then it's like maybe a
bigger modernity thing whether or not
you have women's rights as such so I'm
certainly convinced something changed
culturally but I think unlike Robin
Hansen I assumed that by default the
social technology is making up
civilization change a lot and I think he
thinks that the selection pressures keep
culture functional and I disagree with
him I think sele pressures can work on
culture in a very long timeline but for
the last 4,000 years the rate of
cultural Evolution has been too rapid
and changes too rapid to be explained by
like a natural selection style mechanism
so I don't think group selection has
been dominating which global cultures
are or how cultures change I think
basically Live players and Society has
done that and that's why I'm optimistic
I think that if Live players dedicated
themselves to reforming societies to run
social experiments to run technological
experiments to try to get Humanity we're
on a timer we're on a timer to reinvent
social technology that causes us to
breed or we will go extinct we might be
replaced by super intelligence we might
be replaced by the forests we might be
replaced by nothing because we destroy
the planet on the way out right like all
of these might happen but we are on a
timer to figure out social technology to
start breeding again
and I want to encourage the Live players
listening to this don't think you know
what's going on you almost certainly
don't I've like looked far and wide the
smartest people in the world have no
idea why this is happening lots of
people will capitalize it politically
and will lie and will confuse themselves
and be arrogant and think that their
political option has the solution but we
just don't know yet so my first so so my
my my call to the live players is to
figure it out
like go ahead figure it out experiment
do anything you can and you know maybe
it'll work out now again hopefully five
years from now we'll like do a follow-up
on this episode and I'll say thank God I
had no cause to be
worried but I'm not I'm not sure if I
had to bet against it today I would bet
against it and if someone wants to take
me up on that bet five years from now
I'll do that long bet with you or 10
years from now I would do a long a long
bet uh the long na Foundation has like
special mechanism where you basically
give money to charity and it's held in a
trust and it's invested above returns
and that's where that's how you can make
economically rational long-term bets as
long as you're okay with the money going
to charity so I'll do a long bet with
any viewer that I probably won't regret
it but I hope I will like saying this on
on today's
show I did talk to Tyler Cowan about the
politics of this because one thing we
see is like it's not really po like it's
popular to worry about climate change
it's popular to worry AI
dorismar or seen as like if you look at
the people who are publicly about it
they're kind of seen as weird in some
ways so it's hard to Rally up like I
don't think we're going to have you know
when I was in college I took classes on
global warming I don't think you know
we're gonna have classes on
underpopulation in the next decade or
something everyone was worried about
overpopulation and I I do Wonder
basically what are the politics of
getting people worried about this
significant sufficiently so that they
take action in a way that is
commensurate with the with the need I
don't know if it's a Manhattan level
project I don't know if it's you know
all all the you know Elon or the richest
people sort of you know I think even the
main intellectuals haven't updated in a
recent interview to give an example of
someone who used to be prominent in the
new atheist movement that I mentioned
from the early 2000s right that was
trying to further secularize the Western
World Richard Dawkins was surprised in
an interview earlier this year to hear
that fertility rates are below
replacement in India and a lot of
Islamic countries it doesn't match his
model right his model was you know poor
or more religious people have more
babies and etc
etc I think that and even in isra you
know we talked about Israel earlier but
there's a cultural War happening within
Israel not even among Palestinians and
Jewish Israelis or like Muslim Israelis
and Jewish Israelis even within outside
of the Gaza and West Bank and all of
that stuff but between the high
fertility Orthodox minority which is a
large minority of the country and the
more population do I recall correctly
that recently there was a push to have
the religious exemption from military
service removed right that's a big deal
but first off it might be militarily
necessary that's true and secondly I bet
the secular population of the country
like they want to keep Tel Aviv good for
gay people right like they want to keep
it like you know nice open and they're
okay with a large religious minority but
they might not be okay with a religious
majority right
but still that would be an example of a
political struggle within a country
pushing the country towards lower
fertility I think here's another weird
idea I think when countries fought more
Wars there was an incentive to increase
your
population right more manpower but if
countries only fight internal political
power struggles I think you're always
incentivized to reduce the other side's
voting pool right and you know you can
have the opposite strategy of increasing
your voting pool either through you know
there people who have tried to raise
fertility to have more more Christians
for example the so-called quiverful
movement or progressives basically just
import whatever voters they need in the
United States from any country in the
world that happens happens to have a
high population and that's another way
to increase the amount of Voters you get
but I think that there's something about
the politics of modern countries that
means that political struggles tend to
be won by the lower fertility
factions and I'm not quite sure why that
is but it's something worth
investigating like I agree that it seems
weird though I think honestly it's less
weird today than 10 years ago I think if
15 years ago you were concerned about
low fertility I think people vaguely
thought you were racist or something
right no no for real because you were
talking about you know that those with
the talking points right or that you're
worried about Islamic islamicization of
Europe or something now if you talk
about it it's seems a little
weird I think the problem is that if
you're seen advocating for high
fertility right now it still sounds like
you're advocating for your own high
fertility and you know in some cases if
the shoe fits you know again elon's cool
but you know he both advocates for
people have a lot of babies and has a
lot of babies so you know you can maybe
see it in a self-serving way but I think
the perception that it is self-serving
could be contested and I actually think
that we should start also noting that
the childfree movement like child- free
movement people were also always kind of
weird so I think it's just weird to talk
about other people's fertility and it
makes everyone uncomfortable like
whether you want to increase it or
decrease it it makes people
uncomfortable because it's an intensely
personal decision and it's intensely
personal but the social science reality
is that we do respond to macroeconomic
conditions social policy religious
incentives we make the decision
personally but the facts on which we
make our decision well you know those
are society-wide so I think it's it's
squaring the circle so that it it sounds
like we're mostly talking about
non-coercive reproduction though you
know I would not be shocked if like you
know I I don't know I wouldn't be
shocked if if countries start taking on
reproduction themselves if families
won't provide that's what I'm wondering
like do we have a bunch of baby centers
like a bunch of genas cons but or or
even governments themselves being like
hey this is a priority and if people
aren't going to have them we're just
going to make them note note a genas
Khan that gives a million women one baby
does not actually increase the country's
TFR so that's important to keep in mind
so if you're doing Herms you got you got
to do four or five babies per per
polyamorous partner or whatever you want
to call them well if if like Elon is
offering his sperm to any woman who
wants like you like is there a
hypergamous you know fit here where it's
enough men who have good sperm offer it
to you know now we're talking crazy
ideas here I don't know if the women are
truly selecting for sperm but I'm not
sure they even are I think that's like a
I I think there's a weird way in which
like actually very few people think
explicitly about the characteristics of
their babies and I think that usually
the desire to have babies with someone
comes from wanting to share social
status with them and social standing so
if you're one of a thousand if you're
one of 10 Elon baby mamas okay there
some status there if you're one of
10,000 Elon baby mamas it kind of starts
losing stops losing any social Advantage
right there's no like and there's the
odds of your child having an active
parent go from like interesting odds to
like nil right so I think that the
likelier thing that might happen in some
East Asian countries they might attempt
to produce basically like they might
first off encourage people to donate
eggs and sperm let's consider the
following set of cultural Evolutions
that happen in an East Asian country
that doesn't have basically
judeo-christian taboos which by the way
is most of East Asia most of East Asia
even the more Western democracies Etc
they tend to be non-Christian
non-islamic non-jewish Society so let's
go there
and as a result they tend to think about
bodies and biology differently than we
do right like they're more open to bio
in stuff they're more animist for
example they're more happy to think of a
machine as having a soul even if it's
not yet an AI right so of course when an
AI show up they're not going to be
confused at all they're going to be like
yeah this thing clearly has a soul my
Toyota Land Rover had a soul like this
thing also has a soul so that's what I
mean by stepping away from Jude from the
abrahamic assumptions because Islam
actually shares a lot of these
so you could have an evolution where it
starts with okay we have a national
fertility Cris
and look at all of these women in their
40s who want to have babies but don't
get to as a public health measure when
you turn 18 you have to get your eggs
and sperm Frozen we're just mandating
this you could imagine this being said
and you could imagine it being done and
then you could imagine there being
health or E ethical objections you could
have like the same way you could write a
health or ethical objection for getting
out of the draft or getting a health
particular health condition would exempt
you from some mandatory vaccinations on
the same principle they might have
mandatory freezing of sperm eggs okay so
you have mandatory freezing of sperm and
eggs run for 20 years okay IVF has been
fully legalized surrogacy is very common
I think by the way surrogacy will be
extremely common in most of the world
very soon because it's you know already
become a trend among well-off people and
also allows various kinds of genetic
screening and genetic enhancement
however the market is not providing not
enough people are hiring the already
existing class of basically professional
baby
bearers like the surrogates themselves
who are paid for their work right and
for carrying the baby so the government
is like well our economy is so you
know what we should start doing this so
we are going to start subsidizing
surrogacy first off okay step number two
we're going to start encouraging
citizens to donate the eggs and sperm
that they have saved up to the
government repopulation program okay
that's another step people are
encouraged to donate some people write
it in their will and then the government
picks on some key or just makes it
random to avoid the politics of it gets
a baby gets a embryo made has the embryo
implanted in a surrogate and when the
baby is born having been you know in a
professional surrogate that sometimes
gives babies to private couples or the
Japanese government uh the baby is a
ward of the state and is given up for
foster care then you just scale up
foster care okay you've made parenting a
job and you've made bearing babies a job
I don't think this will be a very
emotionally healthy way to make
babies but would it work yes would it
work well enough to be above replacement
I'm not sure so that's one possible kind
of extreme that let's call that the
extreme Social Democratic solution right
social democracy where you consider
fertility to be part of your duty just
as like paying a high progressive tax as
part of your duty to repay all these
goods and services you've received in
your life from society right like the
same arguments can be applied and then
I'm not sure how this works in the
United States or Europe like I don't I
think it could totally work like this in
Japan in South Korea maybe in Singapore
in China I I just don't see how it work
in easily in abrahamic societies now I
think in Saudi Arabia you might see the
genghiskhan solution where they might
issue a fatwa that says you know what
actually you know God wants us to breed
we're temporarily lifting you know it's
it's permissible
to have babies with more than just four
women as long as you give each of the
women at least three babies and then the
status game they already have about
having a lot of wives like that
continues and is extended further and
whatever remains of their oil wealth is
spent on creating more Saudi citizens
that could be the country where I see
the genas k thing work it's the world
where the prestige is in having lots of
children and you kind of force it that
way and you sustain it through a non
modern economic model because but that's
like an interesting question will thei
still be pumping oil a 100 years from
now like probably not so if that happens
that happens in like the 2050s and then
the other solution is that oh the surgat
are skipped all together and they're
just like baby
factories and maybe you like
corporations or people or governments
are investing in babies being born and
raised but you know what Eric then we
get into an awfully tricky situation
that starts to inch towards slavery if
we're like producing humans and using
some however obfuscated legal or
economic mechanism to take from their
labor to pay for their existence dude
that's slavery with more steps right
yeah like actually and maybe it'll take
that I don't think it will but it's kind
of funny I think fertility kind of
breaks our ideas about property economic
externalities I think we've been
breeding for non-economic reasons with
for the longest time and as soon as you
start to give a state reason or an
economic reason to breed it gets weird
but it gets weirder than that like
assume genetic engineering keeps on
progressing dude these states are going
to do the worst things possible to the
human genome they're going to like
transform the human species into
something utterly alien I mean I still
prefer utterly alien hominids that
always pay their taxes and never litter
to just pure Ai and and no human
descendants but it's like sure it feels
worse than this like kind of wild type
Humanity we still are we're heavily
domesticated but no one's centrally
planning our genetics I think the
central planning of genetics will be a
disaster and the distributed planning of
genetics personal choice reproduction
that's great but you would need a high
fertility culture it's not enough to be
like I have one super baby then State
Central planning of genetics wins to
have indiv ual planning of future
genetics to have libertarian genetic
engineering you must have a I have five
super babies that's way better than your
two super babies because my five super
babies are like you know they have
higher odds of achieving great things or
whatever ideology you cook up so I I
think that especially when you add
genetic engineering to the mix a high
fertility is a must high fertility
cultures are a must for any wouldbe free
culture and maybe that's a good spot to
end it on
yeah a note of uh of caution or concern
and also a call but also optimism in a
way you know maybe the world where
everyone has lots and lots of babies and
they either change their genetics or not
like that's not that bad a world that's
actually fine let's let's wrap that as
always a great conversation Sam until
next time great
talking thanks for listening to Live
players Please Subscribe leave a review
and check out s's excellent newsletter
the bismar brief for more rigorous
analysis of key individuals institutions
or Industries Live players is a
production of turpentine the podcast
Network behind econ 102 with Noah Smith
and Moment of
Zen hey everyone Eric here at turpentine
we're building the First Media outlet
for tech people by tech people we're the
network behind the show you're listening
to right now we have a slate of hit
shows across a range of Topics in
industries from our Ai and investing
cluster of podcasts to shows that drive
the conversation in Tech with the most
interesting thinkers Founders investors
and influencers like econ 102 with Noah
Smith we're launching new shows every
week and we're looking for
industry-leading sponsors if you think
that might be you and your company email
me at er turpentine doco that's e at
turpentine doco and let's partner
together
