hi welcome to Justin's morning coffee
all right so uh what I want to do today
is I want to take a step back and I want
to give a 30,000 foot view of what I'm
calling the ultimate story map um now
I'm going to link below the lectures
that I've been doing on Christopher
Booker's seven basic plots um I've been
plotting them out on the two mountain
system
which is kind of conceptualized by Carl
Young the mountain of success and the
mountain of Legacy um but that's only
actually one component of my
comprehensive uh theory of story or my
story map um so I want to give a step
take a step back and take a look at what
the other components are what I've been
talking about with all of this is just
the first one which is which is plot um
I want to make the point to for you
today I want to basically try to
convince you that that narrative or
story really has four parts plot
character atmosphere and
Viewpoint um and uh real quick that's
basically what happens on the timeline
the order of events who is in the story
where the story takes place and who is a
Storyteller from what point of view is
the story told um and I think that just
as much time and energy that we've been
putting in to the seven basic plots each
of these others warrant just as much uh
time and study and energy because I
think it's that fruitful um so I'm going
to I'm going basically go over my theory
of what these things what these four are
and uh give you a little bit of a road
map to where I'm going in this
comprehensive um study of story that
I've been doing I do hope uh someday
that it will be a master's level class
and a book um but this is basically how
I'm kind of how how I'm conceptualizing
the whole thing um okay
so the the different Origins for these
things I I just chose Christopher Booker
and the seven basic plots because I
thought that that was a good starting
point um it's sort of my theory that um
that stories get refined and refined and
refined over the years and they get
better and better and better the more
you retell it um the parts that don't
really work that don't really tap into
that mystical quality that whatever it
is that we need from story are the ones
that fade away and get forgotten and the
ones that get perpetuated and retold and
retold and retold get refined in that
retelling until it get very very Laten
and potent with u with meaning um and so
starting with the seven basic plots let
me go back to this starting with the
seven basic plots uh using a little bit
of the theory of Carl Young which of
course his students were Joseph Campbell
and Eric neyman and that influenced
Hollywood and so all the movies that you
see today are kind of really steeped in
and based upon this tradition here of
the seven basic plots Carl Young himself
was the son of a minister and so he was
steeped in the Christian tradition and
so it comes from the Western you could
say the judeo-christian Western
tradition it's all kind of this big
river and stream that has come down and
then when you go to the movie theater
when you go to the watch a TV show or
when you read book in our culture today
it's all kind of like Downstream from
that so the so following these is like
my attempt to kind of go upstream and to
uh really kind of look at what uh
stories do for us why they are the way
they are and what the repeating patterns
are that we do find meaningful uh
because like I said the ones that didn't
that didn't fit those patterns were the
ones that sort of fell away and we
forgot and they weren't very helpful or
meaningful to us um uh but now I think
that it's time I'm I'm going to finish
up those lectures on uh the seven basic
plots but I think it's time to now start
looking at those other components which
would be character and atmosphere and
Viewpoint
um so uh this is what we've looked at so
far the seven basic plots I'm I've
started with Christopher Booker I've
gone beyond Christopher Booker in in a
lot of ways um taking the best of what I
think he's done in laying out these
seven plots and trying to try trying to
go even deeper
myself um and then plotting them out on
the two mountain system the mountain of
success and the mountain of Legacy um so
it has to do as you can see here with
the flow of time plot really is um an
exploration of
how time moves forward and how it kind
of repeats you've probably heard um the
idea that history does not repeat itself
but it does Rhyme you know something
like that and there's this idea that our
lives have this cyclical these cyclical
patterns kind of like you've got spring
summer winter fall spring again you know
and then you've got Generations coming
and going young uh you know
adolescence uh midlife middle-aged old
you know you've got your your uh mother
uh maiden maiden mother matriarch cycle
of the feminine the feminine life cycle
and you've got your uh you know
Warrior uh lover uh patriarch side of of
maybe the masculine whatever words you
want to use you know these different
sort of ways of how these these plots
are kind of repeating these patterns and
um and so my my sense was let's let's
look at these and see how they kind of
plot out on a life cycle
and um I do think that the mountain of
success and Legacy uh is a very good way
of thinking about it in terms of of the
first half of Life questions and the
second half of Life questions the notion
of taking in at first and then breathing
out in the end and um what is the
difference between the Pursuits of the
first half of life and the Pursuits of
the second half of life now recently I
was reading a commentary on uh the work
of Carl Young and I came across
this little historical tidbit which was
that according to Carl
Young Freud never made it off of the
first Mountain the mountain success that
Freud was primarily preoccupied with
first half of Life questions which has
to do with success money and power first
half of Life questions you're trying to
get to the you're trying to find who you
are you're trying to gather in wealth
you're trying to learn success and
competency and you're learning how to be
a proper ruler you know these are all
the things that I've talked about in
these in these first half stories these
archetypal stories that take place
during the first half of life or on that
first Mountain but Carl Young actually
had older clients than Freud and a lot
of them were post midlife crisis uh
patients and what he noed noticed was
that their concerns began to shift the
other thing that he noticed was this
Universal pattern of death and
resurrection and so when you finally get
to the second half the second Mountain
Carl Young is saying that those are
actually different questions in the
first half different concerns you're not
worried about survival like you are in
in in overcoming the monster you're
worried about passing on your knowledge
to the Next
Generation and in a way
the
um I don't know I mean the really
profound part about it is that that he
he discovered this pattern of death and
resurrection that often times after the
king gets to the top of that first
Mountain then a real or symbolic death
needs to happen in order for them to
sort of be birthed into that second half
in in onto that second mountain and I do
think that that's fundamentally what the
quest story is about is about bridg the
gap between that first mountain and the
second mountain and then the rebirth
story is really you could say the
spiritual
component uh the spiritual concerns that
you have in life that become the primary
focus of that second mountain now it's
not that you can't have spiritual
concerns over here and it's not like you
can't have a ragster riches that happens
to an older person you know but I'm
these things these patterns are kind of
more you you you sit back and you squint
a little bit and you kind of look for
General things that are happening and
that's sort of what I'm seeing is that
oftentimes they'll sort of just click in
uh to these to these different U
repeating patterns and so Carl Young
said Freud never got off the first
Mountain but I'm now and of course in
his second half of life going to focus
now on the second Mountain questions and
what is the um essence of this notion of
a death and a rebirth that you see over
and over and over and over and over so
this is one thing that you're going to
notice in in you know I I I started
lecturing on a little bit with the
groundhog day but in doeski in Tolstoy
in um in in in all of these different
stories um you're going to see Dickens
with with uh with Ebenezer Scrooge
characters um this sense of dying to the
things on this first mountain in order
to be rebirthed into the second Mountain
so there's this shifting that happens
rather than gathering in the wealth as
in the case of eon or Scrooge you're now
giving the wealth away you know rather
than taking in you're giving it back um
so there's a real kind of inversion or
shift that happens um as you make this
transition um so so I think that's
that's that's a new a relatively new way
of looking at it I I don't think
I mean part of the reason why I embarked
on this whole thing was because I was
somewhat frustrated with the writing
instructions the screenwriting
instructions that I was
getting coming out of the books and and
instruction that you get from Hollywood
um most of the good writers it seems to
me were
intuitively tapping into some of these
Universal
things um but it
wasn't enough for me it was wasn't
spelled out enough it wasn't I still had
more questions you know so I think this
notion of archetypal plots and different
phases within your Life Path and and the
life cycle and these repeating sort of
fractal patterns
is is is a new way of thinking about it
and uh in in a way this is all just a
big experiment to see if it produces
what it what I think it should produce
which is better stories more meaningful
stories more impactful stories more
healing stories so
that's that's my goal with all of this
okay so we have been looking at um plot
so far now character uh you can you can
sort of see where I'm going it's this
it's a very similar uh
idea the idea of universal stock
characters or archetypal characters
prototypal characters very similar to
the idea of
the universal plot or a set of repeating
plots um okay so let's take a look at
this um I'm cutting off the the word
here a little bit but that's okay um so
what you'll notice is that you're going
to find you know Fairy Godmother figures
over and over and over you're going to
find the good version of the female from
the previous generation and the bad
version of the female from the previous
generation the this fairy godmother and
the stepmother the the the the one that
has your best interest in mind and the
um the devouring mother
archetype um if you watch Lord of the
Rings and you look at Gandalf and then
you watch Harry Potter and you look at
Dumbledore and you're like okay a
bearded old
man wizard who does magic who's a mentor
figure to the protagonist of course
you're going to see that all over the
place um the idea of the Animus um uh or
Ana I guess it is which is Thea is the
feminine version of the male psyche and
the Animus is the male version of the
feminine psyche this is another concept
from Carl Young but look at this in High
Noon like if you go back and watch my
lecture on High Noon you'll notice the
symbolism here that you're getting the
the dark clothes and the the white dress
and the black dress you know so your two
halves of the subpersonalities within
the protagonist um or you could look at
something in like in Groundhog Day where
you've got Rita who really is the
beatric figure she represents the
feminine ideal which is the notion of
the Muse or this feminine principle
that's not out there in the world so
much as it's in the head in the psyche
of the male protagonist which draws them
out of their um lower self and into a
higher self you know so be TR in Dante
and Rita in Groundhog Day that's a
Universal Character um now the question
is where do these where do these
character prototypes come from there is
a book by a a dep psychologist named
Clarissa pinkola Estes which is called
women who run with the wolves and she
noticed that all of her not or a good
number at least of her female clients
had a figure in their dreams that was
the same figure and she call it the
shadow man or the the dark man archetype
which is um the best way to kind of
describe it is the murderer in all of
the scream franchises the guy with the
scream mask and the
knife showing up in dream After Dream
After Dream After Dream in all of these
different
women so that's that's this
Shadow
version
of the Animus the the the the masculine
the shadow masculine within the within
the feminine psyche so there's something
going on here now of course I'm just
starting on this this journey just like
I was starting with the seven basic
plots a year ago um in trying to now
untangle and kind of give us a nice map
a nice good sort of list or uh or set of
some of these uh stock characters that
show up um another reason why it's good
to know uh if your piece that you're
working on for example or if you want to
just be able to interact with something
that you see if it's primarily plot
driven meaning that the characters are
there but they're not the thing that's
driving it Forward whether or if it's
character driven where the plot really
doesn't matter that much a good example
would be situation comedies so if you
look at you know Homer Simpson never
changes situation after situation after
situation all kinds of different plots
but that's not really what's important
about the show it's the figure of Homer
Simpson that
archetypal um the fool character the
same character is in the office in the
figure of Michael Scott so so the the
idea of
the uh authority figure who might be a
little pompous or unaware has a big
blind
spot and moving through the world and we
the audience can
see that they're not seeing the full
picture that they have these blind spots
and that creates the comedy that creates
it's the so whatever situation they go
into they're going to
retain those qualities and that's going
to generate the comedy um and so if you
were taking the seven basic plots and
saying I'm going to use this in my
sitcom that I'm writing I would say well
maybe that's not the universal part that
you want to look at maybe what you want
to look at is the characters maybe you
really really need to understand um how
that works now apparently in Italy they
uh you know around the time of the
Renaissance they would have these
traveling plays and they wouldn't have a
plot they wouldn't really have you know
scripts written out but they what they
would have are these stock characters
they would have the the beautiful woman
that everybody's always chasing after
which you know you see a lot in
Shakespeare Shakespearean plays they
would have the pompous old man which is
kind of very similar to Michael Scott in
the office um they would have the fool
or the jester um they would have all of
these different characters with their
masks and their costumes and then they
would just basically do an improv of
them interacting within different
settings and different scenarios um and
so in in that case uh yeah that that's
the the power and meaning of
it is in the character it's not in the
plot it's not the in the in the order of
events so that's what I want to do after
we're done with our uh exploration of
the seven basic plots is move on to
character and start I'm going to I'm
going to come up you know I'm I use
Christopher Booker to kind of categorize
some of these archetypal plots I'm going
to have something similar for character
I'm not exactly sure how that's going to
play out yet but that's that's my plan
okay so what about the atmosphere
because okay let me go back
here so remember I said plot that's what
we've been talking about with seven
basic plots character that's what I just
finished talking about and atmosphere
okay so that's what and who now we're
down to where which is the atmosphere
the setting of the
story all right so the one thing I want
to say here is that the atmosphere is
not or the setting you might say is not
as trivial as you might think um it's
not just are they indoors or are they
Outdoors are they at the beach or are
they at the forest some kind of a you
know a physical background in which it
takes place a you know a time period is
it a period piece or is it a modern
piece you know th those are all kind of
window dressing issues uh what I want to
make the case to you today is that the
atmosphere is actually just as
archetypal and just as meaningful and
just as symbolic as our plots that we've
been looking at and the characters that
we're going to look at as well so how
what do I mean by this um now I've done
one lecture on on this idea but I but I
I think it's worth um it's worth
reiterating um you can think of the
world of
story as having a
landscape and each place within that
landscape has symbolic spiritual
resonances um and so A good rule of
thumb would be to look at the
three-part uh structure of the cosmos uh
which is Mountain Garden SLP
Paradise dry land slash world of of
kings and Rivals and then the sea or the
underworld or the domain of the
Leviathan the digestive system of the
cosmos um if you look at the maps that
authors will draw of their world you
know and you you look at tolken map of
Middle Earth for example you'll see
Middle Earth you'll see a kind of a
garden area you'll see with the Shire
you'll see kind of a mountain Paradise
with where the elves live you know they
kind of live up on the mountains and
more of a paradisal uh existence um and
then you'll see the underworld which is
Mordor you know so so you're looking at
essentially um a map that includes these
different these different places um now
of course you know I've made the case
before that that it's my contention that
certain monsters live
in uh different monsters live in
different parts of that of that world of
that map um so uh you're going to see
some kind of a a uh a symbolic
representation of what it is that's
going on in these different places okay
so now there there's there's also a
fractal component it's it's a little uh
interesting to try to explain this um in
terms of the human body
as well which is represented uh not only
in story but also in architecture um and
in the way that we speak um which which
is head heart and
gut um you'll notice this in Star Trek
uh you'll notice it in Lord of the Rings
you're you're going to find your elves
uh your men and your uh dwarves uh you
know I mean you know jro tolken is so
he's got good he's got light and dark
versions of both let's say you know just
the same as I was talking about um uh
someone like uh Frank Herbert and dune
is going to have all of these AR
character archetypes good and bad
represented you know the the the good
mother and the bad mother just like I
was saying with the Fairy Godmother and
the stepmother the good father figure
the bad father figure um well in tolken
you know he's got uh you know basically
um the the good version of the higher
beings like the elves and then the
corrupted version of those higher beings
you know in in the nascal and then the
good version of the of the middle beings
like the the humans and then the bad
version of those uh in the in the in the
Orcs you know and then the good version
of the lower beings like the dwarves and
then the bad version like the Goblins
you know and so there's this things are
all starting to fit together in terms of
uh the the not only the
characters and different roles that
they're playing but the places that they
inhabit as well and so I think that this
is also a very um worthwhile thing now
it even survives in our language so
think of it when you say you know I had
an idea what do you do what what do you
do with your hands what do you ah yes I
had an idea you're pointing to your head
you know so you're talking about this
what this part of reality you know if if
the human is a microcosm for the cosmos
the cosmos has a head a heart and a and
a gut just like you have a head a heart
and a gut and then you can say in
literature and stories there's a head a
heart and a gut and they can represent
be represented by characters but they
can also be represented by places and so
this is why I think the atmosphere
sometimes can be um just as meaningful
as uh
as all of those other components and if
you are a filmmaker like someone like
Terren Malik you might say okay there's
almost no plot and really even the
characters are pulled back a little bit
and the
atmosphere is going to start to manifest
itself a little bit more prominently
think of The Thin Red Line and you've
got what you you've got your
no your paradisal Visions you know at
the beginning of The Thin Red Line he's
rowing his boat through the Beautiful
You Know Island Paradise okay and then
where does he go where does he wind up
he goes to war he goes to to to hell you
know and then he's got this middle land
of of of in between those two places um
so so this is this is something that's
going on um um all the time so uh Garden
Paradise dry land and see on underworld
and head heart gut um becomes another
part I'm going to give you one more
example of this I if you go back and
watch my lecture on
Chinatown um you're going to notice um
that the
uh the the the screenwriter essentially
wanted to do three movies and the first
one has to do with water which was
Chinatown the second one was going to
have to do with land and the second one
was going to have to the third one was
going to have to do with air so excuse
me um he only wound up making the first
one but he wanted to do three very
interesting that he wanted to do three
and that they would correspond to these
different locations so in
Chinatown how do we know that we're
dealing with the c/ underworld um I'm
going to show you a clip I've shown this
before if you watch my lecture on China
Town but I'm going to show you just a
little bit of a clip from Robert mcke
here where he talks about what he calls
an image system uh an image system is uh
when when a screenwriter will take some
symbolic element and put it into the
screenplay and it'll have it show up
over and over to represent something
within the screenplay and what is it
what is one of the the primary things
that that they put that Robert Townsen
puts into uh Chinatown is water so let's
take a a look at that and like any fine
novel or play a film becomes poetic by
incorporating into itself an image
system this poetic system must be more
than subtle it must be subliminal the
audience is not to notice the moment the
audience reacts to an image as symbolic
the effect is
destroyed and I'm about to do just that
by pointing out that Chinatown has not
one but four such poetic systems that
weave throughout the film enriching
everything the first is motives of water
versus drought and so you'll see and
hear constant Illusions to drowning to
fish drinking beaches Lakes reservoirs
steam irons spit the city's Department
of Water and Power in this film water is
power and in the hands of a man named
Noah you may think you know what you're
dealing with but believe me you
don't why is that funny it's what the
district attorney used to tell me in
Chinatown the second system is sexual
cruelty there's only one instance of
loving sexuality in the film all the
rest caused suffering adultery
castration sadism incest and horses a
lot of horses the universal symbol of
sexual
irrationality did you talk to him this
morning no um I went riding rather early
looks like you went quite a distance
riding be that third blindness or seeing
falsely photographs cameras Windows rear
view mirrors broken eyeglasses
binoculars sunglasses and eyes
especially the eyes of the Dead Jak what
are you doing here nothing Morty it's my
lunch hour thought I'd drop by and see
who dropped dead lately yeah is there
something middle of a drought and the
water commissioner drowns only in La
okay so what do you notice there uh he's
putting water uh everywhere um so
there's this idea that uh that Noah
cross the the primary villain in this
piece is uh trying to take our
protagonist down into the water trying
to drown him trying to dissolve him down
why
because um the protagonist is is locked
inside of this world that he has created
this underworld um so uh the Jack
Nicholson character is stuck inside of
this underworld and what's down there is
salt waterer and things that are going
to dissolve away your identity and
dissolve away your physical body you
know this this notion of of of
everything that goes on down in the
Underworld so you see they go down to
the ocean he's got the saltwater Pond
where the person was drowned um in the
backyard um they go to Catalina Island
they're eating fish uh there's all these
different sort of ways to clue Us in
that the landscape the setting of
Chinatown is the underworld or is Hades
or is Hell or is G you know it's that
bottom part of
reality um so it's it's it's down here
this is where the story is set and this
is where the character
goes okay
so plot character atmosphere and
Viewpoint we're going to sa Viewpoint
for another video um but like I said you
know I really do think that it is
worthwhile digging into these Concepts
and really trying to understand what's
going on symbolically
metaphorically with each one so that you
can really understand why it's there why
do people go to the underworld in these
stories why is there this three-part
system of the landscape of these stories
um if you're writing a story you might
say okay you know here I am I'm going to
I'm going to write one of these I'm
going to use the template Loosely the
the the kind of like uh you would if
you're doing a jazz song or a blues song
or I'm going to use that kind of
aesthetic to create a rags to Rich's
story you know um and that's only what
I'm saying is that's only one part of it
you're going to also want to know about
these archetypal uh prototypical uh
stock characters as well and what is
their function how do they work why do
they do what they do why do they show up
all the time and the setting the places
you know is are you going to have uh an
underworld in your story are you going
to have a Middle Earth and a paradise
you know are you going to have
interaction between those things are you
going to invert them are you going to
you know play around with those Notions
or something put a variation on it
whatever it might be but I think it
really does behoove us to to understand
uh understand these things so let's go
back now to what it is all right so plot
is what character is who atmosphere is
where point of view is the
Storyteller and um hopefully this will
help you in your movie watching as well
you know if you're watching um a Terren
mik movie you're going to want to really
really pay attention to this atmosphere
you're going to notice where it is that
these characters go on Journeys to um if
you're watching the office or if you're
watching parks and wreck or if you're
watching another kind of situation
comedy you're going to want to know
about these archetypal characters um
just as much as you would with the plot
so um so I think they all fit together
and uh again this is going to be my
ultimate story map the ultimate story
map and um once again um I'm basically
using uh this this YouTube channel as a
experiment of source of sorts and uh and
and all of you watching as my guinea
pigs here to see um if these ideas are
coming across if they're resonating with
you and if they're helping you in your
creative work um I'm finding that uh
more the more people I talk to that are
working on writing things on creating
things on uh movies and documentaries
and novels and short stories etc etc
that the more I get familiar with things
the easier it is for me to help you make
your peace better um the the the main
idea a here is to go
from an idea an initial idea that you
have and then as you make your second
draft that your second draft is better
than your first draft so many times in
my grad school days and early writing
days and whatnot I would find that uh
the second draft is different than the
first draft but you really have no tools
of knowing whether or not it's better
than the first draft and what you want
is each one to get better so I think all
of these components um should really
help us I'm hoping that this is kind of
like shining a light on some of this so
you're not just feeling around in the
dark and thinking well here I'm creating
a character but I'm not exactly sure
what they're supposed to say or what
they're supposed to do um how I'm
supposed to figure out what they're
supposed to say and what they're
supposed to do how they're supposed to
act in a certain situation or not and
then the ones that just sort of grab you
you know where it's like wow that
character uh is so compelling I I just
can't keep my eyes off of that person
you know that's usually um because
you've inadvertently tapped into one of
these Universal Timeless uh qualities um
and it's and it's going to resonate with
people and so I'm just trying to help
you see what some of those are so that
your creative um Endeavors can flourish
within that landscape so that you can
use all those things for your benefit
and and it like a tool so that you know
what the tool is for so that's that's
basically what I'm trying to do here so
thanks for watching and uh I'm going to
get back to the seven basic plots
lectures again soon I've got a couple in
the hopper here it takes a while when
you have a full-time job and you're
doing this sort of thing on the side but
um I'm still working on it so um thanks
for watching
