new thinking alloud is presented by the
California Institute for human science a
fully accredited University offering
distant learning graduate degrees that
focus on mind body and spirit the topics
that we cover here we are particularly
excited to announce new degrees
emphasizing parapsychology and the
Paranormal visit their website at cs.edu
thinking
aloud conversations on the Leading Edge
of knowledge and Discovery with
psychologist Jeffrey mishlove
hello I'm Jeffrey mishlove today we'll
be exploring the Deep truth of religious
myths with me is Dr Bernardo castrop a
computer scientist and philosopher he is
the author of rationalist spirituality
an examination of the meaning of life
and existence informed by Logic and
science also meaning in absurdity what
bizarre phenomena can tell us about the
nature of reality and dreamed up reality
diving into the mind to discover the
astonishing hidden tale of nature also
why materialism is baloney how true
Skeptics know there is no death and
fathom answers to life the universe and
everything and brief Peaks Beyond
critical essays in metaphysics
neuroscience Free Will skepticism and
culture also more than allegory on
religious myth truth and belief and to
be published in 2019 the idea of the
world a multi-disciplinary argument for
the N mental nature of
reality Dr castrip lives in the
Netherlands and this interview is being
conducted on Skype so now I'll switch
over to the Skype video
welcome Bernardo it's a pleasure to be
with you once again and uh we'll be
talking about the Deep Truth uh of
religious myth which uh is interesting
because you know some of my favorite
public figures like Bill Maher is a
popular comedian make a big point about
how religious myths are false and people
believe in talking snakes and what kind
of nonsense is is that uh you really
Endeavor to address that
problem yeah I think you know we bring
um very modern attitude to to to the
interpretation of religious myths I mean
interpreting something very literally is
is a more or less modern phenomenon in
in human
history simil analogy metaphor uh
symbolic interpretations have been the
main stay for for for a long long time
before we brought this this attitude of
trying to interpret everything literally
uh of course if you interpret religious
myths literally uh uh then they are they
are not true they they are certainly not
literally true thank goodness because
otherwise they would be so flat so
uninteresting so uh almost meaningless I
would say uh but if instead of looking
at the finger you look at what where the
finger is pointing to uh what it's
trying to indicate what it's trying to
evoke within you then I think it's a
it's a whole different story but in the
the title of your book more than
allegory suggests that you don't want to
just limit the metaphorical
interpretation that that that in itself
is rather flat right because what what
is the difference then right between a
metaphor or an an allegory uh and a myth
I think uh uh an allegory is a a
colorful interesting way to to say say
something that can be said literally
that you can't precisely describe or
explain in a direct literal way uh but
you can use an an allegory to make it
more interesting or to make it easier or
less complex or more evocative whatever
but there is a literal alternative uh
the difference here is that when you're
talking about a symbolic uh message uh
the the difference is that there is no
literal
alternative U that at it is an inner
experience that you're trying to evoke
in somebody else's mind in a way that
cannot be indicated conceptually cannot
be indicated through through direct
descriptions it has to be evoked it has
to be pointed that it has to be made to
arise uh by itself within somebody
else's mind uh because you see uh there
is nothing in in our understanding of
nature that requires that uh the
linguistic structures evolved by a
primate species on planet Earth should
be sufficient to directly and precisely
describe the deepest truths of nature I
mean that's preposterous right we know
that I mean my cats cannot describe the
deepest truths of nature through their
meowing language uh uh why should we um
it's a very entric anthropocentric thing
to to to imagine that we could literally
capture the deepest truths according to
our own linguistic constructions uh and
and these same linguistic constructions
underly human rational thoughts I mean
no one chumsky has been putting forward
that that idea for about 50 years now uh
I think that you know the structure of
our thinking is the same as the
structure of our language that there is
a universal grammar so to say underlying
how we put Concepts together to weave
stories and explanations and and
descriptions I don't think there is any
reason to think that the Universal
grammar encoded in in our primate
species Homo sapiens sapiens uh should
be powerful comprehensive enough uh uh
to to evoke within our own minds or in
the minds of the people we're trying to
communicate with uh the the deepest
truths of nature I think that can be
achieved only uh in a symbolic way in a
way that appeals to the deeper mind the
mind that underlies the intellect that
underlies reasoning conceptual reasoning
which is a much more ancient mind uh
phenetically speaking it's been there
for a long time it's much more rooted uh
uh uh in the you know the primordial
soil of nature so to say it's much more
connected to the primordial truths it's
not yet lost in the in a cloud of
conceptualizations and alternative
conceptual realities and reality tunnels
you know which unfortunately or
fortunately I don't know is the culture
we live in today well I think many
modern people people would respond to
your argument here by saying look at
science science has had amazing success
at uh describing nature down to many
many decimal points of
precision that's absolutely true science
is uh extremely successful in describing
the behavior of nature uh the entire
scientific method is based on
observation confirmation by observation
When You observe nature What You observe
is Nature's Behavior if something
happens here and that leads to something
happening there and there is some
correlation between the two uh that's
what you then model through scientific
models and which you then use to predict
the future behavior of nature anchored
on past observations uh but this whole
thing about Behavior it doesn't tell you
much about what nature essentially is
about what essentially is going on and
there is a metaphor I like to use um
imagine you have a 5-year-old kid your
son 5 years old and he's playing
computer games and he is really good at
it and he's winning you know local
championships and may maybe even the
world championship in playing a certain
computer game he's very good at
understanding the behavior of the game's
characters and you know how how they
should go about their business in order
to collect points and you know extend
their lives and so on that doesn't give
your kid your 5-year-old kid any insight
into computer hardware and software
architecture the whole mechanism that's
bring bringing the gain to to life he
only has an insight into the behavior of
the characters under the circumstances
and the framework of the game I think
science
is um a method for understanding the
behavior of nature under the
circumstances of our perceptual and
conceptual abilities our ability to
perceive nature and conceptualize it and
turn that into predictive models but it
doesn't necessarily give us any insight
into the underlying structure
what is bringing this about what is the
essential nature of being of ourselves
and the world and that's precisely what
I think religious myths um the the valid
ones the traditional ones that that have
some inertia going in the human psyche
it's precisely what they are pointing at
well I know you have a background in
computer science uh but really you're
functioning as a philosopher primarily
it strikes me yeah I will soon have a
very formal background in philos I'm not
I'm not going to anticipate
that okay but but what we're talking
about is philosophy and it is the
purpose of philosophy
to describe the ultimate nature of
reality that's what we call ontology and
and you've written extensively on
ontology and epistemology using the
English language and coming up with very
refined arguments as as a matter of fact
so are are you you saying that
ultimately philosophy itself will must
fail to what extent is a religious myth
a form of philosophy I mean if you go to
India if you go to the east they don't
make that distinction the philosophy of
the vadas of the upanishad in the vadas
um is a religious myth it's philosophy
made through the symbolism of religious
myths um in the west we've made this
partitioning and this partitioning has
become much more dramatic in the early
20th century with the with the emergence
of analytic philosophy philosophy that
is supposed to be conceptually clear
specific and direct philosophy that um
doesn't have much tolerance for metaphor
maybe as as an addon at something extra
to to to to make an a literal
explanation a little bit more appealing
uh but not as the means of conveying a
message so we've split this in the West
now if I grant this split I would say uh
we can go a fairly long way with
analytic philosophy I I I'm not a pure
critic of analytic philosophy I think it
has value uh we've found ourselves and
we still find ourselves today in a
conceptual moras and I think the the
clarity of thinking the rigor in the use
of
terminology uh and in in making explicit
each step in in one's line of reasoning
I think that's important it it helps us
without uh uh stories and pretentious
stuff there on the fringes of the
culture that try to come across as
purely reasoned uh uh while in fact it
has a bunch of implicit mistakes built
into it and it has no value it's just
garbage so I think analytic philosophy
has value in in making this distinction
but there is only so far it can go
because it's not symb IC it's very
direct so it's fundamentally limited by
the human intellectual ability by by the
universal grammar of chumsky U I think
we should use it to go until that limit
until that edge uh and it's useful also
because our culture is based on
communication and communication is based
on language itself so it you know our
culture can't go much beyond that before
appealing to the to the mythical stories
of religion as well so it's important we
develop that analytic philosophy but I
think we should also keep in mind that
it has its limits and and and and those
limits are such that they don't really
satisfy the human psyche the human soul
so to say we want to know more we really
want to have some intuition some feeling
uh for the deepest layers of what's
going on and I don't think analytic
philosophy can go there at all and goes
to a certain point and beyond that you
have no alternative but symbolism mhm
well as an alternative to analytic
philosophy we have uh what's sometimes
called the Continental philosophy of of
Europe that's a a different tradition
that relies heavily on on metaphor if I
read n it's it's quite poetic for
example he F fenced himself as as a a
sort of a philosopher poet right um
there are other examples that are a
little less dramatic you have we've
talked about him last time schopenhauer
he's in my mind because I'm steeped in
schopenhauer philosophy these days um he
also did metaphysics I mean n did a lot
of Ethics talked a lot about
morals you know about behavior um and
very limited on the metaphysical side
not not zero but it was not really his
cup of tea he even criticized
metaphysics quite a bit chenhow on the
other hand based his entire edifice his
entire system on a certain metaphysics
so he talked a lot about metaphysics
which today uh uh is almost purely
analytic metaphysics today is almost a
purely analytic discipline if you look
at the latest ontologies Cosmos psychism
pens psychism it's all analytic
philosophy and yet schopenhauer address
the exact same problems in in a
non-analytic way in a continental way
what what does that mean it means that
for instance uh his his usage of certain
terms of certain words is context
dependent he he will use the word
knowledge in one context with one
meaning and without telling you in
another context he he will use the same
word meaning something else and it it's
up it's on you to realize based on the
context that he means something else now
analytic philosophers cannot take this
they cannot swallow this they take the
first usage and and they fix it and they
say okay this is what this guy means by
the word knowledge and then later on
later on they find another usage of that
word and that interpretation then
doesn't hold otherwise the philosopher
falls into contradiction and they say
well schopenhauer's metaphysics is
untenable it's full of contradictions
it's not it's just that the usage of
terms is context dependent because that
that comes very natural to most human
beings except mathematicians computer
scientists and analytic
philosophers well I think it's also very
human that we change our minds uh quite
a bit or that we have different personas
that have different uh attitud udes
beliefs uh inner uh mental structures
depending on the context that were in
you see it all the time in politics of
course absolutely and some sometimes
these changes of Mind aren't even really
changes of mind uh they are just you
know there are many angles from which to
look at the same object the same truth
so to say right uh and sometimes when
you you approach the truth from
different paths different angles uh what
you describe on the way there can be
different and yet you're converging to
the same point just from a different
angle uh in the book I use the the
metaphor of the cylinder uh that if you
take a a solid cylinder and you
illuminate it from one side the shadow
will look like a rectangle if you
illuminate it from Another Side the
shadow will look like a circle and now a
rectangle and a circle they are mutually
contradictory right well yes in the
world of 2D shadows but in the world of
3D cylinders they're perfectly
reconcilable so the fact that one day
you say rectangle and in the next day
you say Circle doesn't necessarily mean
that you changed your mind or that
you're falling into contradiction you're
just approaching the problem the
cylinder from a different angle well
when you look at reality uh you uh use
the term Transcendence that's very
important in uh your thinking uh I
perhaps you could elaborate on why why
Transcendence seems so significant to
you it's my way of highlighting that
there is more to Nature there is more to
what is true most likely uh than what
can be captured directly literally
through our conceptual reasoning uh
whatever truths of nature cannot be
directly described and made sense of in
a literal way in a direct way is from
the point of view of the human intellect
necessarily and almost by definition
Transcendent in the sense that it it
escapes the reach of the intellect to
capture model and make sense of in a
closed causal U manner uh there is there
is it's not etched in stone in nature
that the intellect should have a limit
that is coextensive with with the limits
of reality itself the intellect is a
little tiny subset of what's real
right well The Logical positivists who
had a lot of influence in the early part
of the 20th
century argued that if if we can't uh
analyze something uh conclusively
through the
senses uh and and through logic and uh
reason we shouldn't talk about it at all
that it's simply nonsensical to even
pursue it further you you seem to be
suggesting no we have other
means exactly that is the point if if
all the there were to a human being if
all there was to a human being were the
intellect if that if that were the case
then the logic positivists would have a
point uh there's no there's no use in in
in in going beyond the limits of the
intellect because there is all there is
to us so there's no use in talking about
anything that transcends that but I
don't think we are limited to the
intellect uh at all we are not limited
to conceptual
reasoning um we are not limited to the
linguistic manipulation of Concepts in
our heads there is a much more
primordial mind the foundation of the
human psyche that psychologists would
call it the unconscious personal and the
collective unconscious for yion I don't
like the word unconscious I think it's a
misnomer I think it refers to a part of
mind that escaped our ability to to
introspect into to metacognitively
access but it's not necessarily
unconscious in the sense that it lacks
the qualities of experience I think it
doesn't it's experiential in nature but
we can't interspect into it that quote
unconscious part of mind um has been
shown even by modern psychology to to
Encompass uh uh all all the degrees of
freedom that Consciousness itself has it
has a form of reasoning although it's
symbolic reasoning uh it's image based
mythical reasoning uh it it it holds
memories it it has cognitive
associations uh all the whole gamut of
mental conscious mental activity is
mirrored there uh but I would argue it
has less constraints it's not
constrained by continuity it's not
constrained by Aristotelian logic which
is more or less arbitrary every logic is
arbitrary in the sense that every logic
is founded on certain axioms that we
just postulate or consider self-evident
but nothing nature tells us that it
should be so even logicians today they
fight they have different versions of
logic it's not only Aristotelian logic
out there there is a intuitionistic
logic in which they drop one of the axom
the law of excluded middle um any anyway
uh uh that quote unconscious part of
mind is not limited by these axom it's a
much more raw foundational primordial uh
way of I don't want to use the word
reasoning thinking a way of relating to
to real inner and outer uh and I think
it has much deeper Rich than the
intellect itself and if it is there then
of course there is a point uh uh for for
human beings to talk about things that
transcend the intellect because we are
not only intellects there is more to us
so why shouldn't we talk about it it's
just a different way of talking it's not
a literal way of talking it's talking by
pointing it's talking by symbol a symbol
is something that points at something
Beyond itself it it it's trying to turn
your gaze to what it's pointing to while
a literal description attracts your gaze
to itself it's not pointing at anything
beyond itself it is what it's trying to
point at that's the
difference well it it does strike me
that for hundreds of thousands of years
human beings never had written language
uh or or even mathematical symbols we I
suppose we had some sort of spoken forms
of communication but many scholars
suggest just that in that time which is
you know 90% of human history at least
maybe more uh people basically thought
in pictures and in
metaphors our ability to think
symbolically certainly very old uh it
has evolved before language language
sort of hitchhiked on our ability to
think symbolic Ian thuta wrote a an
excellent book about this in 2012
Masters of the Universe I think was the
name it's a great book highly recommend
it uh
so yes our ability to think symbolically
precedes is more primordial than our
ability to think linguistically and
conceptually and you see that and now
I'm speaking almost as a death
psychologist now which I'm not uh but
you see that U when we dream we dream
symbolically our dreams are not literal
or reasoned expressions of our inner
mental activity it it's a symbolic
expression what we have underly the
intellect which goes to sleep uh is
symbolic thinking mythical thinking um
is it wrong well from a literal
perspective it's certainly wrong but is
is it really wrong in the sense that
it's not pointing at anything of any
validity nature I doubt that I doubt
that very much well there are many
people who would call themselves
rationalists today uh or even Skeptics
who would say that you know our our
great concern is what they would call
the rising tide of Superstition and they
they could point to all sorts of Horrors
that occur when people take these
various myths uh literally and it
usually ends up in tribal conflicts I am
horrified at all that as well I share
that concern I sympathize very much with
the critique when when people take a
religious myth literally they are doing
greater abuse to the human psyche than
when they discard the religious myth all
together both are mutilations of the
human psyche um because you see a
religious myth the whole power evocative
power it has is beyond its literal
appearance when you interpret it
literally you're basically killing it
you're flattening it um then you're
throwing away whatever value uh it has
uh and that leads to Conflict for sure
because you see if I'm looking at a a
shadow the wall and it's a rectangle and
you're looking at another shadow on the
wall and it's a circle and we take both
literally then the circle is not
compatible with the rectangle and I will
fight you because for me the truth is a
rectangle for you the truth is a circle
and we'll go to war over it but if we oh
what is the shadow pointing at what is
the circle pointing at oh there is a
cylinder you know and the cylinder is is
a Reconciliation of the Shadow and the
rectangle ah now we now we are we're
going somewhere now we are hinting at
something that that can be of great
value uh so I I share the concern of the
rationalists in that sense at the same
time what is a rationalist but somebody
who denies many of his or her own
psychic functions uh U by saying well
all that matters is the intellect
rationalist from that perspective is
also committing voluntary
self-mutilation he's ignoring intuition
he is ignoring mythical symbolic
thinking he is ignoring gut feeling he
is ignoring artistic an an aesthetic
ability an an aesthetic mode of
interacting with the world uh he's
ignoring so many things uh uh that's
just self-mutilation I I see no reason
to mutilate myself that way I wouldn't
cut off my arm why why will I cut off my
my symbolic
psyche well in your pursuit of the
nature of religious myth you have a
section in your book on the nature of
Truth itself and uh interestingly you
end up concluding that e everything we
believe to be true about the world is a
story We Tell ourselves in effect uh not
very different at all from a religious
myth that's the most delicate part of
the book yes yes you you you you were
accurate of course there is like a
hundred ways this could be completely
misinterpreted um so I would refer
people to have a look at part two of the
book to understand what I mean by what
you just said because it may not mean
what it looks like if we just know say
it so short
um we live in a story ultimately because
you see if you remove the story all
there is is the present and the present
is infinitesimally small it's
vanishingly small when you try to pin it
up it's gone it's already gone into the
past and where is the past it's nowhere
you can point to it no longer exists as
far as your experience is concerned all
you have is a memory but the memory self
is experienced now in the present your
memory is not in the past and the future
didn't come yet right uh so it also
doesn't exist all you have is the
presentence which is vanishingly small
because you can't pin it down so small
it is so everything that exists exists
in an in in a vanishingly small space of
or segment of SpaceTime so that that's
nothing experientially
that's really nothing so we don't leave
that because it's
so um intangible so to say what do we
leave then where do we leave our lives
we leave our lives in a story in a
narrative and that narrative extends
experience all the way into the past and
all the way into the future um that's
the bulk of human life the bulk of human
life is that narrative and there are
some narratives that are good good um
the scientific narrative has value and
if you compare to some you know there we
we have been historically in phases in
which can be fairly characterized as a a
morath of superstition in which uh uh
horrendous crimes have been committed uh
in the name of a very bad story that we
told ourselves there is there is no
denying that to anybody who picks up a
history book um but there are stories
that that are better the scientific
story is fairly good but has tremendous
limits and I think we are now hitting
the wall with the scientific story
because we're realizing okay it doesn't
convey meaning it doesn't convey any
deeper purpose and significance uh to
human life there is an athetic ability
to it for sure um the scientific
story has tremendous aesthetic power I
don't know whether read whether your
listeners will relate to this but to me
I mean I used to work at CERN and as as
a young adult in the beginning of my
career and to me it was
like a religious experience in a certain
way uh because of the aesthetic power of
that I mean we were fully around at the
time with suie super Symmetry and and
the beauty of that was just it I mean
nature had to be like that turn out we
haven't found any super symmetric
particle yet so that that dream may may
be a dud which is fortunate um but
beyond this aesthetic value it it
doesn't convey deeper meaning purpose uh
it doesn't feel the hole that we feel
here in in the chest right once we dealt
with the basic needs of survival you
know have enough money in the bank to
leave with some security a good health
insurance house and food on the table
there is a hole that's left and I don't
think the purely scientific story about
the behavior of nature can cover that uh
we need another story and I would say we
need a modern religious myth that uh
that is not completely
implausible um plausible but modern
religious myth and by that I mean a
story that transcends the intellect a
symbolic story that points points beyond
the intellect um would that be still a
story yes of course it would still be a
story because we live in a story that's
what life is otherwise it's a
singularity it's it's it it's
vanishingly small it's intangible well
we're coming now to a point in our
conversation uh which really fascinates
me because you create in in in your book
in the third section of this book you
create a myth and I have the feeling
that at least in part this myth is based
on actual experiences that you've had
and in part it struck me that your myth
is based on uh a a protocol for a new
kind of science alog together um with
might call them Psychonauts explorers
into the depths of of the human mind and
maybe without giving the whole book Away
we we could explore that a little
bit uh there there were two questions
there um to what extent is
that Rio Rio event well it's based on
well it's a highly stylized biography
let's put it that way uh made to serve
the purpose of of of the book
um so but it I didn't take that out of a
hat completely I don't think I could
take something like that completely out
of a hat if you know what I mean I don't
have the enough creative juices to to to
do that um like that um is that a new
kind of
science that I would resist a little bit
Jeff to call that a I may even have used
that characterization a few years ago
I'm not sure but today I would resist
that let me tell you why um I am I'm
critical of science trying to be
everything science trying to be
philosophy trying to be metaphysics
trying to be ethics trying to be
everything I think it's nonsense science
has a very clear definition it's about
observing the patterns and regularities
of the behavior of nature modeling those
and being able to predict the behavior
of nature mainly for the benefit of
technology and there there therein lies
the power of science we can build
technology with it like the 5-year-old
kid can win uh championships playing
that game without understanding the
underlying computer architecture or
software or softare that that enables
the game I think science is equivalent
in that sense enables us to build
technology even if we don't really
understand the nature of reality we
don't need to we know how it behaves we
can use that to our advantage
um but I think the power of science lies
precisely in this limitation of the
scientific method uh if we accept that
it's limited that way we keep it clean
we keep it powerful and pure if we try
to make something of it beyond what I
just said that's where I think we can
get confused uh things can become
unclear uh we may lose ourselves in
something that isn't really science at
least not according to a clean 21st
century definition uh that doesn't mean
that there AR there aren't
other avenues other modes of acquiring
knowledge about reality I think there
are many others and maybe part three of
the book talks about one of these other
modes of acquiring knowledge about
reality but I would hesitate calling it
a new kind of science I I want to
preserve science if you know what I mean
because I think it's very powerful
according to this more restriced
definition well the reason I called it a
new kind of science is is that what you
have described in several chapters in
the third section of your book is it
struck me as a scenario that almost
perfectly uh embodies what um one of my
friends and mentors and former
professors Dr Charles tart published in
science in
1972 an article that got a lot of
attention back then called State
specific science in which he proposed
that scientists themselves enter into
various Altered States Of Consciousness
to see if there would be um consensus uh
reality uh that might be uh observable U
uniquely through the altered state and
not available to us in our normal State
of
Consciousness uh I certainly see Val you
in that uh I have some concerns as well
um let me share with
you are there consensus experiences in
alterate States Of
Consciousness absolutely there is just
no doubt about that I mean if I drop
some words here talking to you maybe
most of your audience will not know what
I'm talking about but there will be some
who immediately say oh I know exactly
what what what he's talking about for
instance uh people who use psychedelics
if I say the Dome everybody knows what
that is everybody who has had a decently
effective dose of psilocybin or DMT
knows what the Dome is they have been
there it's a shared experience there is
something in an alter State of
Consciousness that this word will
identify it doesn't describe it if I
just say the Dome and you never had the
experience and you try to imagine a
concrete Dome or something it's not that
at all has nothing to do with that it's
something completely else but if you've
had the experience you understand what
the words indicate or if I no I have to
interrupt because I've taken
psychedelics maybe a hundred times and
I've read your chapter I know you refer
to the dome in it but uh I I wouldn't
apply that word automatically to my
experiences so that's my concern you see
there are many people who will
immediately recognize it or if I say the
Bor Cube uh many people immediately
recognize it I know at least one person
who immediately recognize the the the
tof machine um so the these are
experiences that are at least to some
extent shared because if you if you go
to psychedelic festival and you drop
these words people go oh of course I've
been there I know exactly what you're
talking about many times maybe you
should make an appointment and meet over
there um but then other people who have
had psychedelic experiences do not
recogn it um so these are partly
consensus experiences and it's not only
psychedelics meditators share
experiences I mean the Buddhist void is
something that to a large extent shared
but I have never visited the bo oh
actually I have I have I have been to
the void once but it was only once uh I
don't consider that enough to
establish me as a participant in the
consensus um so there is some degree of
consensus but at the same time you bring
so much of yourself to the experience
and it's so circumstance dependent that
I don't think the degree of consensus
that can be talked about is enough for
us to say well a science can be built
around it there isn't enough stability
uh there isn't enough internal
consistency there isn't enough and I
will use this word with a lot of
reservation but I will use the word
anyway there isn't enough OB objectivity
psychic objectivity for us to identify
stable reliable patterns and
regularities of behavior of experiential
behavior in those Altered States uh for
us to develop anything remotely akin to
what might be characterized as science
um I think those
experiences uh the greatest value they
have is is to evoke a a form of nosis a
form of uh of of
recognition um because you see U
scientific consensus is is a replacement
for um direct acquaint acquaintance with
what is true if you don't have direct
acquaint acquaintance with something
that is true you need the consensus of a
culture of a society uh to convey a um a
proxy of that certainty to you something
that you can rely on even though it have
never been directly acquainted with but
you nonetheless you believe it because
others are telling you we've done a 100
experiments and they're all consistent
we know this is true that's the end of
it fine but when you're directly
acquainted with something that is true
you know it with every fiber of your
body you you don't need others to come
to you and say wow publish this paper
we've run these experiments you go yeah
good for you but I know I know what I
know and it and and it's
surprisingly sufficient for the person
who experienced it know if I say that
other people would say well you can't
trust your own experience because you
know it has been known to be uh
unreliable you know we are all prone to
wish fulfillment and visions and
hallucinations it's all true but if if
you've been there you know what I'm
talking about there is a level there is
when you pass through that gate all
these arguments about the unreliability
of personal experience they sort of
dissolve they they evaporate because the
power of being acquainted with something
is just so absolutely massive that if
you decide that you're not going to rely
on that you might as well roll up in a
corner and die because you can't rely on
absolutely anything anymore ultimately
all you have is your inner certainty
even if you transfer that uh to to a
consensus of others that's your inner
certainty that you're doing Commerce
with uh that's the only currency you
have um so I don't think know
Transcendent States uh I don't think the
greatest value is to develop uh
consensus-based science I think the
greatest value is that they give you
direct acquaintance with an aspect of
nature that after the experience you
just cannot deny at least for a while
after a while you forget the experience
and your rational mind kicks in again
and you go like well do I really trust
what I experienced or not and then
you're you're back in in in Maya that
it's normal Maya that's an interesting
word that refers to illusion yeah but
but yes uh okay let me be more accurate
you're back in this story the cultural
narrative that basically defines the
reality we live in uh a the direct
acquaint acquaintance with the truth
happens underneath the story it's it's
what the story is covering MH uh it's
it's the veneer on top of the story
that's the on top of the truth that's
the cultural narrative it may be more or
less opaque or transparent uh but
underneath that there is direct acquain
with the truth um but after you are back
to normal states of Consciousness for a
long time and you're back into this
culture watching television talking to
your boss or going to your
doctor how long does that uh survive not
very long you're back to back to my in
the sense that you're back to the story
kind of uh almost like a hypnotic
trance yeah an extremely powerful one
yeah an extremely seductive
compelling irresistible it I think it's
completely
irresistible uh maybe some humans have
transcended it and I don't know any yeah
well in in your story you describe an
encounter with a magician who is able to
magically Transform You from One reality
to another to another to another and
each time they seem real and uh it's
almost like you think you're going to
break out of the illusion only to fall
into a different
delusion yes uh how far you want to go
down that rabbit hole without the
context
um and I relate that to to the skeptic
movement um Let me give first make a
disclaimer I think skepticism is very
important um skepticism is an attitude
of caution of doubt in which you
question your own belief you're like
well do I really believe this and if I
do why do I believe that what reasons do
I have to believe this I think this is
very important um it can that there's
also false skepticism out there which is
basically well I I don't think story B
is true because story a is true then
you're just basically a fundamentalist
for story a and then you try to cat
across as a as a skeptical of story B um
but even for True skepticism there is a
potential trap
um when you question your own beliefs uh
to the point that you sort of uh become
objective about your own beliefs that
you put them in front of you you
separate yourself from them and you
analyze them coldly oh those are my
beliefs what reason do I have to believe
in those stories so you sort of extract
yourself from your beliefs this movement
of extracting yourself from your beliefs
basically brings you to another set of
implicit beliefs from which you
objective objectively observe the other
beliefs that you just extracted yourself
from this falling back onto another
implicit
story uh which basically is based on a
whole belief system as well that
movement is the best way to get you to
buy completely into a different story uh
because it completely evades your your
your
critical um abilities uh you're not
pointing your critical eyes to the story
you fall back onto you're you're looking
at a certain belief system and you fall
into another set of beliefs that you're
not criticizing you're not evaluating
critically so that was what I tried to
illustrate with with that metaphor and I
think that happens at many levels
cultural level personal level even some
Transcendent levels mhm well I don't
want to give away your whole book
because I I certainly encourage our
viewers to read it for themselves but uh
you do more or less end up by concluding
that that religious myths can be
valuable even for rationalistic
scientifically minded people and and you
suggest that uh they might start with a
myth with which they feel at least some
degree of
comfort yes I think most people at least
if not everybody most people before
their their reasoning the critical
reasoning kicks in and forces them to to
break away from a certain story most
people have a symbolic story that they
actually resonate with
that gives them a sense of warmth uh an
intuition that there is something to
that there is something of value to that
although they can't quite pin it down of
course they can't pin it down otherwise
it would be literally true it's the it's
the nature of the Beast that it can't be
pinned down that it operates at another
level in the psyche um but they force
themselves to part ways with it because
their critical reasoning kicks in it
cannot find Space uh in in in in a
literal framework to accommodate that
story so they force themselves to part
ways with it what they would suggest is
don't do it uh uh even if you don't
understand it literally but you feel the
resonance at some degree uh stay with it
you don't need to say oh it's literally
true of course it's not literally true
but uh why force yourself to dissociate
uh from something that is clearly
resonating at some level maybe it grows
in you and maybe at some point you
develop a certain Insight that you'll
not be able to put it in words but which
will be sufficient for you to establish
a relationship not only with the myth
but through the myth with the World At
Large and that that that can certainly
change change lives in other words a a
sense of a Transcendent connection with
the World At Large being the ultimate
mystery yes I mean if you look if you go
out at night suppose you're on holidays
and you are outside the city and you are
in you know in a rural area and you go
out at night and you look at look up at
the night sky there are many different
things that you can see even though the
night sky is a exactly the same uh some
people would just say well you know just
masses of a of a plasma you know um
collapsed mass that is undergoing Fusion
or you know and emitting photons other
people will see their different things
other people will see you know
expressions of universal love pouring
out in the form of of of light in a
great void in the night sky other people
will see uh the constellations you know
uh Orion Pegasus and all the mythical
stories of the Greeks uh that uh that um
that are sort of implied uh in those
there are many different things you can
see um symbolically speaking um and and
what determines what you see your
relationship to the world uh the meaning
you see or project onto the world is the
myth that you're always running your
mind you're always running a myth even
if you're running the myth of I don't
have a myth that that's also a myth that
there's always always a basic operating
system you know bios a basic input
output system in your mind on the basis
of which you you give value to the world
semantic value to the world otherwise
the world would be just a set of
incoherent pixels and there would be no
life as such uh so you're always running
a myth the myth determines to a very
large extent the quality of your life um
so I think it's very important that we
we are cognizant uh about this so we
can explore the depth of our own psyche
to the maximum extent so we can run the
best myth uh we are capable of that
nature endowed us with instead of
self-mutilating and saying you know all
there is of value to my mind is my
intellect and my reasoning and
everything else I would discard well too
bad if you do that Bernardo castri this
has been a fascinating and I I would say
important
conversation I'm delighted to share this
time with you and to be able to share it
with our viewers thank you so much for
being with me c it's been a lot of fun
again and I look forward to more
conversations with you
book three in the new thinking allow
dialogue series is UFOs and UAP are we
really alone now available on
Amazon you can now download a free PDF
copy of issue 7even of the new thinking
allowed magazine or order a beautiful
printed
copy for
