greetings I cried unexpectedly three
times last week um
and I'm really tired I'm just back from
New York but I want to um I want to talk
about uh my experience because it uh has
much larger implications for um what I
might refer to as the shadow of the
carbon pulse or the shadow of the
superorganism um um first time I cried
as I had to put down my 14-year-old um
 hound Maisy last week I knew it was
coming she had cancer she was going
downhill uh but when we put her down she
was just the sweetest girl and all the
memories of the last 14 years uh her as
my friend as part of my family uh came
flooding back and yeah um I cried which
is appropriate uh dogs our family the
next time uh was in New York uh last
week for climate week um I went to a
movie screening of a movie called future
counsil which is uh 8 12-year-old
children from around the world uh went
to talk to a bunch of corporate leaders
about climate change and the environment
in the future and it was kind of loosely
based the monster in the movie was
called Groth which was Loosely based on
the economic
superorganism and uh something about the
way that 12-year-old children can unlock
one's heart and speak the truth that
adults um feel but can't articulate uh
opened up something in me and I I welled
up at the at the United Nations
showing the third time was at the uh uh
inaugural uh planetary health check
meeting announced by the planetary
Guardians and Mella rampel was there and
Carlos no and Christina fueras and all
kinds of people talking about and Johan
rockstrom let it off they all talked
about how our planetary health check is
um leaving the stability of the
anthropos scene and it's very precarious
uh positive feedbacks um Loom uh the
Amazon forest uh turning to Savannah
climate oceans and how this is all
critical to save humans and our future
society and civilization and at the end
Jane Goodall spoke I'd never seen her in
person before and she's like everything
that was said was so important uh but we
neglected to mention that not only is it
uh important for humans but for other
non-human animals and she ended with a
greeting uh a chimpanzee
vocalization and unbidden I just
completely welled up with tears and my
heart came up in my throat and I don't
know if other people had that same
reaction and maybe it was a an extrity
of my dog just
dying but you
feel uh the urgency and salience of this
species level moment of this one planet
in the universe that we know of to
Harbor life and complex life and the
stakes of our times um uh and so uh I
think it was appropriately emotional
what I want to talk about today is
um you know this podcast uh my work my
presentations my
Frankl I'm known as a systems scientist
energy human behavior ecology money how
things fit
together um but there is a very real
embodied emotional underpin
to our experience um our lives on the
earth and I just want to Riff on that uh
a little bit uh so that's going to be uh
today's
topic I'm just going to share a couple
stories so in New York I met someone who
just sold his company for like hundreds
of millions of dollars uh and he had
followed the podcast and he's like I am
becoming aware of my time on this planet
where I have to do good and do what the
right thing is so I've been learning
from you and we had just a really good
meeting then I went to a party uh and I
wrote a note as I was going into the
party that I need to call my friend in
California who introduced me to this guy
and said we had a great meeting so I
like wrote myself a little note on my
phone
I go into this party and I was early and
there was only one person there uh and I
didn't know the person and I introduced
myself and I'm like how do you know the
people here he's like oh this guy in
California introduced me and it was the
same guy that I had just written a note
um and there were like 10 of these
things happened in the last month these
little serendipities that you think
about someone or you worry about
something and then all of a sudden it
happens and I told this to this guy that
I had just met he's like oh yeah he's
like I was in the Amazon uh um a few
years ago and I befriended one of the
shamans down there and they said when
these things happen these serendipitous
things that's what supposed to happen
it's when they don't happen that you're
out that you're nonaligned and when they
do happen you're in the zone and you're
doing the work that you're supposed to
so I am a historically anyways a
materialist
not like a consumer I'm not talking
about material things I'm talking about
a material uh explanation and
understanding of our
world um and I still am um but there are
things that happen that I cannot
explain
um here's an and I'm not going to go woo
here uh you you don't need to uh worry
about that but I know a lot about the
global macroeconomy I don't know a lot
about the more spiritual um uh side of
of of the human predicament so I'm like
a kindergarten there and I'm learning uh
but a couple weeks ago uh something
really interesting happened and I was in
ceremony with five other people uh all
of one of which I had uh known and
trusted they're deeply working on the
metac
crisis um and we were talking deeply
about this stuff for several hours we
were holding hands um
and uh I was talking about an experience
where someone emailed me a nasty email
and wanted to be on the podcast and
wondering why I wasn't inviting her and
I was talking I referred to her as this
psycho woman who emailed me and then we
talked for a few more minutes and then
the guy next to me um yes Mom I was
holding hands with a man it was okay
um he's like did you notice that the
energy field um between the six of us
dropped when Nate referred to this woman
as
psycho uh and I instantly knew it myself
as soon as I said that I felt some
disturbance in the force and so then we
talked about it but in the interview few
weeks um I have stopped short of using
adjectives or pejorative language to
describe
people and I'm like what's up with that
I I was with six people or five other
people that I trusted and we had a
beautiful experience and came away like
closer friends and and bonded and the
only scientific explanation that I have
is that is uh that was a deepening of my
recognition and embodied perception that
everything is connected Ed that we're
connected to Nature we're connected to
each other yes multile selection and
such is still operative in our past but
there is a connection and if we're
connected to
everyone I don't have to hang out with
everyone I don't have to like everyone
but I should probably have compassion
and tolerance for everyone so it's like
this speed bump has been placed in my
mind where I don't like about
someone or call them an idiot or psycho
or anything I I saw well that that
person is having some troubles right now
or some
challenges it's just very interesting
um so I also went to this sound
meditation uh in New York and saw a wild
disparity of
responses and grief and suffering and um
trauma uh just under the
surface and this is all to say that the
carbon pulse and the economic
superorganism we focus on the material
and economic benefits that all this
fossil energy and materials and uh
complex technology and just in time
conveniences for us have delivered but
as we've gone up this curve there's a
corresponding decline lining curve
underneath which is we've created
systems where profit has been
prioritized over our consciousness of
people of all living things uh of the
environment we're becoming divided uh
from within the the um feminine the
masculine yin and yang within us um we
we're polarized in society we're
fractured um people's nervous systems
are completely on edge and and I think I
I I think there's this giant
like societal root canal appointment on
November 5th or whatever the election
date is and people know that things are
going to get crazy no matter who wins
and we're all carrying that um we are a
species out of context completely
divorced from our ancestral conditions
on the PTO scene when we had 150 people
plus or minus we lived with for our
entire lives and I think um you know
we've lost our moral
compass uh so much of the technology and
riches and wealth of the world um in our
Global North society and and by the way
everything I'm saying here largely
applies to the United States which is
where I live so I don't want to speak
for for other places though I'm sure
they they rhyme um but we get the reward
without the work people are addicted to
pornography where they have the orgasm
that is completely divorced from the
tenderness the intimacy and the human
touch we have stock options and stock
trades which give us instant uh dopamine
reward um unrelated to the long work
that gave us uh killing and stalking an
antelope and bringing meat back to our
tribe there's lots of things we do that
are dopamine Centric but our nervous
systems our lyic systems our reptilian
figh ORF flight systems are are really
in bad shape as a culture one of the
richest societ ities that's ever lived
and we live in a sick
Society mentally and physically not
everyone of course but we've got the
elites and the military and the
government who are living High Riding
High in the super organism and then
we've got the people that are uh
attached to them um and then there's
people that are um trapped uh in their
daily jobs just trying to do uh meaning
meaningless stuff to get a paycheck and
then there's a lot of people that are
completely untethered and unsupported
and I feel deeply that mental health and
resilience is about the most important
thing that's going to be needed in our
country uh in the in the next five years
so um if you take Marvin Harris's uh
cultural materialism framing with I
which I've talked about a
lot we have the infrastructure on the
bottom
uh which is the energy and the the
environmental waste capacity and what
sort of technology and all that above
that is the social structure U which is
our our laws and our institutions and
our economic policies and above that is
the super structure which is our ideas
and our beliefs and the morals and such
but what he didn't talk about is
potentially a
circle uh that surrounds those three
things which is the health and the
nervous systems of the
individuals um that comprise the society
that's being studied and I think we
could even go A Step Beyond that and
make that Circle a sphere which
represents uh the emergence and the
connections between the humans in
proximity I was in New York and I was
with these uh um eight people in a in a
circle um we just stood around by these
cupcakes uh in a room at this party on
Friday night and they were talking about
this energetic field and I'm like
energetic field come on uh but I looked
it up this weekend and humans have an
electromagnetic field that goes 8 feet
and it comes from the heart not from the
head it's from the heart and you can
measure people's reactions and if you go
beyond six uh 6 feet oh is it 6 feet or
8 feet I forget but if you're like eight
or no it's 6 feet because at 8 ft you no
longer feel that and at 2 feet it's like
really intense so there is some sort of
a
non-quantifiable but also non woo
energetic field when people get together
that's also something we've lost because
the carbon pulse has allowed us to just
order stuff from Brown boxes and sit in
our living room and consume uh dopamine
um and uh you know without any of the
the social benefits that we used to
consume things and by drawing down uh
the health of our ecosphere at the same
time
um I don't know what the conclusion is
other
than there is a shadow uh of the
superorganism and despite all the stock
market at all-time highs the real stock
market which is the biosphere is at
all-time lows and a lot of people are
suffering and anxious and
depressed um and I don't think our
nervous systems are that healthy and yes
as a host of this show I plan to
continue to drill down on the energy uh
Natural Science
economics Bend not break interventions
uh for the coming decade but I also am
going to
explore um the uh the shadow of the
superorganism which is the stuff on on
the on the liability side uh in our
society but there's a tiny tiny sliver
on the positive side that the carbon
pulse and the superorganism have
enabled they've enabled in me this
recognition and maybe uh it's this
change in Awareness this change in
Consciousness this changing perspective
of the critical moment that we're all
alive and sharing this conversation
together maybe that's starting to Bubble
Up maybe something is happening that is
a little bit
woo I don't know but I'm I'm going to
continue to uh explore this and at the
risk of seeming woo to some of you
hardcore uh left brain scientists I
won't do it all the time but uh I will
once in a
while Namaste talk to you next week
bye-bye my wonderful welcome comes to
you from the forests and hills of gombi
national park in Tanzania the sound that
you would hear if you came some of you
have been but if you go to gombi and
climb the hills in the morning the sound
of a chimpanzee greeting the day
announcing here I am who's out
there hello
