f f it's excellent to see you welcome to
possible likewise great to see you in
Arya what gave you the idea for imag net
like what was the ah we need to do this
it's very hard to pinpoint a very moment
but it centered around the time of 2006
where I was so deeply doing research
using machine learning algorithms in uh
trying to understand objects and images
and no matter where I look I couldn't
escape the fact that there is a
mathematical concept called overfitting
with machine learning models and this is
when the the model complexity and the
data the models are using don't quite
match especially if the data it's not
just the data volume it's the data
complexity and data volume don't really
Drive models in in the effective way and
of course not all models are created
equal we now know NE Network models have
so much higher capacity and and
representational power but but those
jargons aside there is definitely an
interplay between data and model and
everywhere I look people are not paying
attention to data we're only paying
attention to model and that really was
kind of the moment I had the Insight I
think we need to not only look at models
or in a way or look in the wrong way we
need to look at data and use data to
drive models and of course at that point
move my early career job to Princeton as
a faculty I Came Upon the work called
wordnet and uh wordnet was nothing to do
with computer vision but it was a
wonderful way to organize Concepts in
the world and I like the name wordnet
and one thing led to another image that
came about because of the need I I I was
so passionately believing the need for
big data and uh diverse representation
of the visual world I started kind of
the at a midpoint in your AI career with
kind of the amazing image net and now we
have World labs and so I want to kind of
draw the line from imag net to World lab
so what's what's the idea with World
Labs um what's the thing that you are
building towards that is a key portion
of kind of where we're going and how to
understand this both World Labs itself
and as as a trend in AI yeah re we talk
about this right it's our favorite topic
is where technology is going one thing I
have been obsessively thinking all my
career especially post image them to be
honest is really what is intelligence
and how do we make intelligence happen
in
machines and it really really to me
boils down to two simple things if you
look at human
intelligence one is that we say things
we use linguistic
communication as a tool to talk to
organize our knowledge and to
communicate but there is
another the half of intelligence that's
so profound to us and it boils down to
we do things you know we do it by
cooking an omelet we do it by you know
taking a hike we do it by friends having
fun and really enjoying each other's
presence that goes Way Beyond any word
we say just just the way we can
comfortably sit in front of each other
hold a beer can all this right is part
of intelligence and that part of
intelligence is really grounded in the
ability to make sense of the 3D world we
live in to perceive it and to translate
it into
a a a set of you know understanding and
reasoning and and predictions so that we
can do things in it that ability in my
opinion is called spatial intelligence
is really the fundamental native ability
that embody intelligent animals like
humans have which is the the ability to
deal with 3D space so image
net happened because I was on a quest
of putting labels on the pixels in 2D
images and 2D images for humans are
projections of the 3D World so you can
see it was a baby step
towards understanding the Fuller World
visual world we liveing and that baby
step was critical because whether it's
for humans or animals or machines
comprehending those objects and images
labeling it is a key First Step but now
that um gosh more more than 15 years 14
years have passed I think we're ready
for a much bigger Quest it's almost a
home run quest to
unlock the most important other half of
intelligence which is the the question
of spatial intelligence now what makes
spatial
intelligence really
interesting is that it has actually two
aspect one is the physical 3D World and
another one is the digital 3D World and
we never really were able to live in in
between but spatial intelligence now can
be a unifying technology that makes
sense of both 3D grounded world as well
as digital 3D World so when I think
about sort of the the promise of spatial
intelligence you know if went back to
1880 horse drawn carriages unpaved roads
like you would be like this is a totally
different world but if you go back to
1980 okay like people are driving
different cars but they're living in the
same buildings they're still driving
cars sort of like the the mechanics of
the sort of real world are pretty much
the same do you think that there sort of
this other half of intelligence will
change that over the coming decades that
we'll actually see the great
transformation in the real world that
we've seen in the digital world over the
past few few years I think so Aria and I
think the the line between real and
digital will start to blur for example I
I think about me driving on the highway
and if I have a flat
tire I have a feeling I'm GNA despite
the fact that I'm a
technologist I have a feeling I'm going
to have a a hard problem with that flat
tire but if I can wear a glass or even
point my phone to the the car I'm having
the flat tire and just
collaborate with that potential
application to to guide me through the
process of changing that tire whether
it's through Visual guidance or some
dialogue or
mixture I think that is a very mundane
daily life example that really breaks
the boundary of physical 3D World and
digital 3D World and that image of
Technology like this empowering people
whether it's changing the flat tire or
doing a Cardiology surgery is a really
uh exciting imagery for me and so you
say you know you use LMS all the time to
teach yourself things which I always
think like should be inspiring like my
kids they're always like oh I don't I'm
so good at math I don't need to learn
anymore and I can be like you know fath
F Lee is using llms to learn I think you
have some you know you have some more to
go but what do you what do you see when
you're talking about large World models
versus llms like how do you explain that
difference to people and how do you
think that's going to play out in the
future well fundamentally like I said
one is about saying things the other one
is about seeing and doing things so so
they are very fundamentally different
modality the large language models the
basic unit or lexic whether it's a
letter or a word and in our model the
world models we use the basic units are
pixels or voxels so uh they are very
different language I almost feel like
language is the language of human 3D is
the language of nature we really want to
get to a point that AI algorithms allow
people to interact with the pixel World
whether it's virtual or physical your
answer is reminding me of another quote
you've used which is uh quoting
sociobiologist Edward O Wilson saying we
have Paleolithic emotions medieval
institutions and Godlike technology and
it is terrifically dangerous so given
you know kind of reasoning language of
nature education of people how do you
invert that and what is uh the
opportunity upon us for Humanity in the
age of AI yes I still believe that and
because I believe that you and I and our
friends started the human Center AI
Institute so if I were to reverse I
almost would reverse the sentence humans
are capable of creating Godlike
technology so that we can improve our
medieval
institutions and raise above our
Paleolithic emotions or Channel our
Paleolithic emotions into
creativity productivity and benevolence
what would you say is the key key thing
in how we build the technology to help
us realize our aspirations is it a focus
on compassion is it a question of kind
of the human centered and the symbiosis
of the interaction what what's the thing
that you would build as the next step on
this having technology and AI help us
realize our better selves I can see why
you're H simis major read the the the
combination of philosophy and technology
in you I agree and and and you know just
the previous quote we almost use
Paleolithic as a negative word but it's
actually not a NE negative word it's
it's a very neutral word the the human
emotions or or human self image of who
we are and is deeply rooted in evolution
in our dnas and we're not going to
change that and the world is
simultaneously beautiful and messy
because of that so seeking about the
technology and the future of
Technology's relationship with human I
think we need to respect that we need to
respect some of the most fundamental
truly Paleolithic rots of of who we are
a couple of things that technology
development really need to respect and
the more we respect it the better we are
one is the respect of human agency I
really think one of the Public
Communication issues of AI is we too
often use AI as a subject in a sentence
as if we're taking away human agency or
sentences like AI will cure cancer I'm
sometimes even guilty of saying that the
truth is humans will use AI to cure
cancer it's not AI curing cancer or AI
will solve Fusion the truth is human
scientists and Engineers will use AI as
a tool to solve fusion and uh what is
even more dangerous is AI will take away
your job you know and and I think we
really need to recognize this technology
has so much more opportunity to create
opportunities and jobs to empower human
agency and that that is a very important
first principle I I care about and and a
second important first principle is the
respect of humans every individual wants
to be healthy wants to be productive
wants to be respected members of society
and no matter how we develop or use AI
we cannot lose sight of that and losing
sight of that is dangerous
is
counterproductive and I think these two
things alone are critical in guiding our
development of this technology talking
about this is is really rooted in this
deep belief that the so what of any
technology any Innovation is to be human
benevolent and that is the Arc of human
civilization is that every time we
created a tool we wanted to use this
tool for good of course it's a double
edge short we could misuse the tool we
would have Bad actors to use the tool so
even looking at the Dark Side of
technology and tools it pushes us to
even want to double down on how to make
it better how to you know make a human
centered and and that was really truly
the the fundamental principle of human
Center AI Institute is that we see AI
you and I and our friends at Stanford
see AI as such a powerful tool it's a
civilizational tool we better put a
framework around it as early as possible
that put human and human benefits in the
middle of of this and one of the
absolute most critical aspect of human
Center Ai and how I believe it should be
guiding every company every developer is
really this concept of empowering people
you have been working in a AI for such a
long time in many different capacities I
feel like some people are just getting
up to speed on AI now like what do you
think about this moment in AI Innovation
both in terms of like where we are what
developers are facing like what do you
think we need to do to get to the next
level of solving these problems today it
is a phenomenal moment the reason I I
think this is
absolutely uh the the inflection of a A
revolution is because of the application
the AI now can be used by everyday
people and businesses and many of the
dreams that us the early AI Pioneers
have thought of in our early phase of
the career have been realized or almost
realized for example the rhetoric
general public phrase touring test is
pretty much a solved problem now touring
test itself I wouldn't call that the B
and and all test of intelligence but it
was a yard stick that was so hard that
it was a legitimate yard stick and it's
a solved problem and cars driving by
themselves right it's not fully solved
but it's so much more solved than 2006
so so I think because of the power of
these models been
productionize into the hands of everyday
people and business I think this is a
phenominal uh phase of the AI Revolution
but I'm also keenly aware area we live
in the Silicon Valley bble because I
still think the entire global population
still are being brought up to speed of
where AI is but we do see the future and
where future is going so I think so many
possible listeners can resonate with
what you're saying about this could be
an enormous human amplification it could
be enormous positive and like we do have
to worry about sort of the negative
consequences we want to be able to steer
it in the right direction like what do
you think like from a development
perspective what do we need to do to
make sure that AI is going into this
positive direction and if there's you
know government or cross sector
collaboration that you think is needed I
would I would love to hear about it
honestly I think there's a lot we can do
and I think we should be doing it
yesterday and it's not late we should
just really commit to do this one thing
that I think we should do is base all
this on science not science fiction
there has been so much hype rhetoric on
you know the extinction of humanity
because of AI or you know World Peace
because of AI either
side is more science fiction than
science so when we think think about how
we approach AI policy AI governance
basing it on data basing it on
scientific facts basing it on scientific
methodology is so
important now second is uh I really
believe just like many other technology
and tools putting guard rails around the
application where rubber meets the road
where where humans are being impacted is
the right place to focus on our
governance energy rather than stopping
Upstream development F think about the
early days of car it wasn't very safe
you know there was no seat belt there
was at the beginning didn't even have
doors there was no you know speed limit
and all that and then we did have
lessons you know that cost human lives
but what happened is we did a go to Ford
and GM and say shut down the the factory
we create a regulatory framework for
seat belts for speed limits and all that
so today AI is
similar it it is a profoundly empowering
technology but it comes with its harm so
what we should look at is when AI is
applied in medicine how do we update our
FDA regulatory measures uh when AI is
apply to you know Finance how do we put
the regulatory guard rails so the
application is where we should focus
governance energy on that's a second
thing last but not the least to me is
that we need to understand that a
positive future of AI comes from a
positive ecosystem and that ecosystem it
needs private sector I think private
sector both in terms of big company as
well as private sector in terms of
entrepreneurship uh is very important
but we also need public sector yeah
because public sector produces public
goods and in my opinion there are two
forms of public goods the one form of
public goods are those curiosity driven
Innovations and new knowledge whether
it's using AI for Fusion or using AI for
curing diseases using AI for for
empowering our teachers all these
different ideas a lot of them come from
public sector image that came from
public sector you know yeah another form
of public goods are people we need to
educate more and more Youth and the
public about this technology and public
sector shoulders from K12 to higher
education shoulders the bulk of the
societal Duty in education yeah so I
think these are the different aspect of
AI governance and policy that I care a
lot
about actually what you just spoke about
I think one of the things you should
also emphasize a bit of the AI for all
because one of the other things you've
been doing is this work to make sure
that AI is not just the province of
amazing you know professors from
Stanford with phds in physics from
Caltech right but everybody else you
know say a little bit about the AI for
all and what the the mission and
contribution is there so AA is a
nonprofit organization like co-founder
uh with my former student and colleagues
and the mission there is really to give
opportunity for K12 students from
diverse background to get to AI through
summer programs in universities and and
internships the idea is to try to get to
the public good you know education part
of AI is we know AI will change the
world but who will change AI we want
more diverse group of people to come and
be inspired by using this technology
developing this technology for all kinds
of great causes so we we have been
focusing on women and students from
rural or inner city or or different just
historically underrepresented
communities and and backgrounds to
participate in these summer programs and
it's just so inspiring to see these
young people using AI or studying Ai and
improving ambulance dispatch algorithms
to using AI to assess uh water uh
quality in rural communities it's still
a small effort but I hope it keeps
growing because this very um goal of
including more and diverse people in AI
is a very important one
so one of the things that you've also
worked on is Healthcare and you know one
of the things that I think people the
areas that people should also track
about the elevation of the of humanity
of The Human Condition is what AI can do
with health care so say a little bit
about that and say what some of the work
you've done and some of the work you're
you know kind of hopeful for for AI and
healthc Care kind of looking forward
yeah read as my book also describes I am
passionate about ai's application in
healthcare for many reasons you know
Healthcare is absolutely the very core
of human Center inness so Healthcare is
a very vast industry it goes from basic
biosciences of drug Discovery or di
Diagnostics all the way to the clinical
diagnosis clinical treatment healthc
care delivery and public health right so
this is the the exciting thing is every
point of this system where seeing AI
could be of great help my other area I I
love and focus on is Healthcare delivery
that's where humans are helping humans
we have far fewer nurses in America that
our patients need the job is ghouling we
have strong nurse attrition there are
some stunning statistics for example in
one shift some nurses average more than
four miles of walking just by fetching
medicines and and equipments and all
that in one shift our nurses can do up
to 150 180 different tasks in the mean
time we have patients that fall from the
hospital bed because they are lacking
enough care we have a lot of issues
triaging very sick patients with so SI
patient so Health Care delivery needs a
lot of help let alone our elderlies uh
living at home alone you know on S risks
or dementia deterioration so my work in
the past 10 years plus has been looking
at using smart cameras cameras that are
noninvasive and non no contact to uh
help our caretakers to pay attention to
our patients if they're in hospital bed
pay attention to their movement to
prevent fall if they're at home pay
attention to their behaviors or
loneliness or nutrition intake so that
we can track what's going on if there're
in surgery room pay attention to the
instruments that the nurses have to
count every single minute so we don't
lose them in the body of the patients
this kind of smart camera technology we
call NBA intelligence is intended to be
helpful to our doctors and health care
workers so that we can collectively
improve the quality of care for our
patients so now you know AGI is a term
that's bounded about a lot I think you
might have said somewhere I'm not even
sure what AGI means because obviously so
many people mean it it's kind of their
own R Shack test so say a little bit
about why what this AGI discussion is
maybe what it should mean right and what
what what would make this a little bit
more rational versus a set of scattered
you know it's great it's terrible it's
it's gonna destroy all jobs it's gonna
help all Humanity Etc I know re I mean
this is this is most a fun but also a
frustrating conversation I I genuinely
don't know what AI means because I think
the term came from a commercial side of
the world around 10 years ago when AI is
coming of age and there is a lot more
commercial interest what the initial
term which I I respect that intention is
to add the word g General into AI to
really emphasize that the future of AI
is more
generalizable capabilities rather than
the very narrow one for example today's
self-driving car is much more
generalizable than just a camera that
detects trees right so so that that
narrow focus of one specific task versus
a a powerful technology that can do a
suite of task is real the reason I feel
I have always not been 100% clear is if
I go back to history to the founding
fathers of AI the John McCarthy and
Marvin Minsky of AI if you go to their
their dreams and hopes starting the 1956
summer that has been their dreams all
along is to make machines that can think
and help people to make decisions and
eventually can even do things nobody in
their original Dream of AI said we dream
of extremely narrow AI tasks that detect
trees the birth of this field as
artificial intelligence is thinking
machine
so from that point of view well we share
the same dream we share the same
scientific curiosity we share the same
quest which is machines that can perform
extremely intelligent tasks so from that
point of view I don't know if I should
call it AI or AGI to me it's the same
thing well I'm thinking about sort of AI
that can do things like you said it
feels like recently with the new
improvements in voice and about atic AI
we're sort of creeping closer where
you're like oh I'm just having a normal
conversation with my Ai and we're
getting close to it sort of doing things
for you are there ways that you use
agents now in your life that you think
are particularly helpful or sort of the
promise of agentic AI and voice in the
next few years you think are going to
change things I definitely think the
natural language way of sharing
knowledge allowing people to be able to
whether it's search or just ideate or
learn something is a very powerful tool
even for myself I use uh llms to uh try
to understand a concept to try to
understand a paper to try to just ask a
number of questions that I didn't know
what really excites me the most is
seeing people and kids using it as a
tool to improve their own learning it I
I do want to focus is that no matter
what let's make sure we we keep the
agency the self agency in people and
give them good tools to to learn and to
empower them and I think as we uh deepen
the powerful tools and I myself is
working on that uh we'll see more and
more that collaborative capability to
allow humans to use these tools to do
things more per nicely and I would be
excited to see those happening I think
it's not only important because of
course it's the right thing to do but I
think also you then get the narrative
that oh these people developing AI are
trying to replace humans and get rid of
them and I don't want to look at a
screen for 10 hours a day and listen
there's no one who wants to look at a
screen for 10 hours a day less than me I
think human interactions are so critical
and so important and they're so
important for everything for for
teaching for Community for empathy and
you know one story you told in your
truly beautiful book The World's IC was
about a math teacher you had a high
school math teacher Mr Sabella which
just showed that it is important to have
human interaction so can you say a
little bit more about that and perhaps
the memorable advice that he gave you
the book really acknowledged by early
days as an immigrant kid who who came to
New Jersey at the age of 15 and landed
in the public high school not speaking
English and that was the the the
beginning of my journey and very lucky
for me very soon I met a math teacher
called obella who really treated me with
that sense of respect and unconditional
support and Not only was my math teacher
but also became my friends in a very
difficult teenage years as a new
immigrant and and throughout my life
till his own passing away but what has
he taught me is not through words
can never s me down and say hey fa F AI
is going to take over the world let me
tell you to be human centered with AI
like I don't think that word even you
know was was in our dictionary sure he
just Tau me through action is that at
the end of the day the meaning of our
society of our lives are the kind of
positive things we do to each other for
each other and the kind of beliefs we we
hold and the the Beacon of light we
Chase and in through his action I came
to appreciate respecting and lifting
other humans is a beautiful thing even
if that's a clueless kid who who didn't
speak English and didn't know what she
was doing in a new country so so I think
that kind of generosity fundamental
kindness and compassion is the core of
what being human is about and there that
you know the biggest learning from him
for me is put humans in the center it's
beautiful thank you yeah
beautiful so rapid fire is there a movie
song or book that fills you with
optimism for the future my neighbor
totor
Ro is one of my alltime favorite movie
yes I can hear the music I'm not going
to attempt to sing cuz I'm lousy but yes
it it's so simple so beautiful I I I'm
the sucker of beautiful pixels and and
yet so so profound I have the excuse to
watch it with kids but honestly I don't
even care how they feel I just love
watching
it that's awesome that's awesome so what
is a question that you wish people would
ask you more often I wish people would
ask me more about how can I use AI to
help people because I can talk for hours
about that and I can I can think about
so many of my amazing colleagues at
Stanford worldwide who are doing that I
can if I don't know what they're doing
because they're just their own genius um
expert in in in the discipline at least
I can point people people to their work
absolutely there's so many people doing
amazing things right now and we we need
to inspire more people to do the same
where do you see progress or momentum
outside of your industry that inspires
you I actually think our Humanity's
focus on
energy really does inspire me because I
think again I I guess I just cannot
completely untether myself from AI even
I development is pushing against this
very real question of energy right
electrical power and I think that the
changes of the environment the also the
democratization of having energy for the
global population is so critical and
also you know we cannot always rely on
fossil fuel so a lot of these advances
and and just the the global movement in
the field of energy is is uh exciting so
for our final question always uh can you
leave us with a final thought on what
you think is possible in the next 15
years if everything breaks Humanity's
way and what's the first step to get
there I want to
see a global
increase of knowledge well-being and
productivity is especially with the
emphasis on shared Prosperity the reason
that I want to emphasize on that is on
the technology side I am an optimist I
know that technology can help people I
know if we use it right it can discover
new knowledge it can help us to innovate
it can increase our uh well-being but I
think it's so important that we are
learning that lesson over and over again
is that when that happens we need to
recognize we need to share that
Prosperity we need to um democratize
that benefits absolutely I hope so too F
thank you as always thank
you possible is produced by Wonder media
Network it's hosted by Arya finger and
me Reed Hoffman our showrunner is sha
young possible is produced by Katie
Sanders Edie Allard Sarah schle Vanessa
handy Aaliyah Yates and Paloma Moreno
Jimenez Jenny Kaplan is our executive
producer and editor special thanks to
Jessica Williams AI sheralds herin
shathi Russell Wald and little monster
Media Company
