on a routine flight between Helsinki and
Tatu a pilot glanced at his navigation
instruments and felt a sudden cold wave
of disbelief wash over him the plane
which should have been coasting over the
Baltic Sea was inexplicably thousands of
miles off course hovering above a remote
stretch of the Pacific Ocean on the
opposite side of the world now this
sounds like the opening to lost the
reality is something much more scary
Russians specifically a concerted body
of activity to disrupt the way we
navigate around our planet using the
global navigation satellite system or
gnss to provide GPS data in fact we can
actually see this happening this is the
global survey activity that measures GPS
threats and interference Around the
World As We pan East we notice a
significant increase in the failure rate
of GPS Fidelity with particularly High
compromise exactly on the Helsinki tartu
flight path by assuming the line of
sight is needed for this GPS attack and
looking at the signal strength in the
area internet sleuths narrowed down the
likely source of this phenomena to just
west of St Petersburg there's also
another interesting Dead Zone but that
one's located in the USA just west of
San Antonio what initially got me
interested in this story was videos like
this one that have been circulating the
internet for a while now and show in the
middle of a drone show hundreds of
drones suddenly falling out of the sky
there was an internet rabbit hole that I
went down that other drone companies
were using GPS Jammers to sabotage their
comp competition but all this brings me
to one point in a world where our main
means of navigation both military and
civilian is so easily compromised what
do we do about it I wanted to find out
so I reached out to a team of quantum
physicists and Engineers based in Oxford
that are working on a solution the
world's first Quantum positioning system
A system that Taps into the very nature
of quantum mechanics in order to
navigate we hear a lot online and you
guys leave me a lot of comments that the
of quantum much like Fusion always seems
30 years away this is a direct
Counterpoint to that argument the magic
behind their technique comes from the
ability to control Ultra cold states of
matter at inflection we're experts in uh
Cooling and trapping atoms um and
manipulating them using magnetic fields
and light uh and the reason that we do
that is that if you cool down atoms um
exquisitely cold few billionths of a
degree above absolute zero uh then you
can create a new state of matter it's
called a Bose Einstein condensate what
inflection are trying to do is develop a
new approach to position sensing but
what exactly does that
mean when we think about working out
where we are on the planet there are
really two main ways of doing this
either trilateration which is used by
GPS systems where we have a
constellation of GPS satellites in orbit
constantly sending out their position in
the sky and the time on their local
clocks these radio signals travel
outward at the speed of light from each
satellite and if you detect a GPS signal
you can look at your current time
subtract the time of the GPS signal and
this tells you how long it took for that
GPS signal to arrive to you as all light
waves move at the speed of light the
speed of light multiplied by this time
difference tells you how far away the
satellite is from you you now know the
distance you just don't know the
direction to this satellite but if you
can do this for three or more satellites
you can get a ring of overlapping
possible positions that converges on a
single point in the plan it telling you
where you are but actually GPS can be
very easily spoofed and can be very
easily jammed so what I mean by jammed
is it can happen for natural Reasons I'm
I'm in between large buildings or I'm in
a mountainous region or maybe I'm under
the ground right I'm I'm on the tube
traveling around London I'm not going to
get a GPS signal GPS can also be jammed
with very cheap Jammers that literally
block the GPS signal spoofed is a little
bit more Insidious where you look at
your GPS signal it tells you that you're
in one place you're really in another
that can be either in the theater of war
or like a few delivery drivers did a few
years ago to disguise the fact they were
taking naps throughout the day if that
is the case then all of these break the
reliability of GPS if that goes down do
you have to rely on something called
dead reckoning and dead reckoning is
based on accelerometers rotation sensors
that measure inertial forces dead
reckoning was originally developed by
Sailors as early as the 1600s trying to
navigate around the globe back then all
they had was a compass and that gives
you a direct Direction but not a
position so how do you work out where
you are imagine you are a sailor trying
to make your way over to America you
start by locating your position on the
map by looking for the port you are
leaving from you decide to head to
America by moving straight west if we
make the physicist assumption that ocean
currents and stray winds don't knock us
off course at all and we follow our
compass reading perfectly where we are
on the map is a simple question of how
long we've been traveling multiplied by
our speed Sailors determined a ship's
speed by a log with a rope tied to it
overboard every 47 ft a knot was tied in
the rope and by counting how many knots
were pulled out by the log the ship
could determine how fast it was moving
this gave us the definition of speed
measured in knots still used by ships
and aircraft to this day this worked
okay for Sailors back then but for some
reason never caught on with commercial
aircraft Pilots maybe because you need a
lot more rope but also because these
systems weren't accurate enough and
velocity is rarely constant so during
the mid 20th century particularly during
World War II dead reckoning systems
moved to measuring acceleration rather
than velocity these worked broadly the
same but measured acceleration over time
to calculate velocity then velocity over
time to calculate position I like to
think of this as basically what you do
if you ever find yourself kidnapped and
put in the back of a trunk you feel the
movements of the car around you and keep
track of your position this process
works because every action has an equal
and opposite reaction to understand this
better you might imagine Einstein in a
rocket ship in space as the rocket
accelerates he gets pushed to the bottom
of the ship similarly moving left or
right causes him to bump into the
opposite wall the device that measures
all of these movements is called an
inertial measurement unit or an IMU and
it measures changes and acceleration or
deceleration by watching its internal
Einstein bump around but why is this so
interesting it means that unlike GPS no
external reference signal is needed
which could otherwise be vulnerable to
hacking jamming or poofing dead
reckoning systems just need to know
where they started and they can use the
laws of the universe to determine the
rest they are effectively unhackable
assuming at least that no one has direct
access to the device An Elegant solution
for keeping track of reality the problem
with normal Imus is that their
sensitivity is limited and the reason
for that is that all of these sensors
have an unavoidable level of drift and
noise and that drift and noise
accumulates over time so you start off
with your known position and you
integrate forwards your your local
acceleration and rotation for a few
minutes a few hours and a few days and
eventually the uncertainty of your
position grows and grows and grows until
it's no longer usable so if you're
imagine you're a submarine you're trying
to go from the middle of the ocean
through a narrow straights s a channel
Gap without broadcasting your position
with Sona or any emissive technology you
then are more and more uncertain about
your ability to navigate underwater and
I pick underwater because GPS does not
penetrate underwater at all so
regardless of of the situation you
always need inertial navigation
underwater the goal for inflection is to
overcome the limitation of traditional
inertial measurement systems by
developing one based on the quantum
properties of the universe and a state
of matter called a Bose Einstein
condensate because I'm an experimental
physicist and I like understanding how
things actually work I wanted to see
deep within their system to see how the
pieces of this puzzle come together to
do that though the first challenge is to
make some of the coldest atoms in the
universe can you start by just talking
me through how you actually go about
cooling an atom using a laser CU that
sounds utterly counterintuitive you know
like usually you think of lasers as
heating things up how do you actually
use a laser to cool something down so
the basic concept is uh when the photon
of light comes in and interacts with the
atom it sort of stays momentarily with
the atom and then is reemitted into the
environment randomly in all directions
and because every time an atom
experiences an interaction with the
laser light it loses a little bit of
energy its kinetic energy is slowly
sapped away as it interacts with many
many photons from the beams um and this
happens in a way which opposes motion so
if the atom moves towards the laser beam
it scatters more light than if it's
moving away from the laser beam this
phenomena has been known for a while but
I always find it amazing it's called
Doppler cooling as you might expect from
the name it exploits the Doppler effect
which is the change in frequency or
wavelength of any wave perceived by an
observer moving relative to the source
you're probably reasonably familiar with
this in the example of a car moving
towards you as it moves towards you its
engine sounds like it's at a higher
pitch or higher frequency than when it
passes you and and starts moving away
the same thing happens though with light
atoms are exposed to a laser light that
is slightly red shifted meaning that its
frequency is slightly lower than the
natural frequency that the atom wants to
absorb the atom's thermal motion is
random in nature as it bumps into other
nearby atoms but when it moves towards
the laser light the Doppler effect
causes the light to appear slightly blue
shifted bringing the light's frequency
closer to the atom's natural absorption
frequency and making it easier for the
atom to absorb the light upon absorbing
the photon the atom experiences a recoil
in the opposite direction to its motion
slightly reducing its speed after
absorbing the photon the atom will
eventually Reit the photon in a random
Direction this process is repeated
millions of times with the atom
absorbing photons from the laser light
and losing a little bit more speed in
each interaction if lasers are applied
from all six directions this can slow
down the atom essentially to a dead stop
now that will slow the atoms down but it
won't trap them so what we also add is a
magnetic field and that adds a restoring
Force so the atoms are sucked into the
center of the magnetic field in this
setup we have six uh separate laser
beams arrange so one from this direction
and its partner from above uh one from
this direction and its partner and then
one kind of in this direction and one
traveling this way and so this means
that we have a laser beam in pushing the
atoms in all uh all three dimensions and
both axes and this is the first stage of
what we will eventually do which is to
to trap and cool atoms way colder than
that even uh to the state of matter
known as Bose Einstein condensate this
magnetic Optical trap or mot means that
you can hold on to these super cold
atoms in the middle of a vacuum chamber
like this and keep them away from the
sidewalls of your container so they
don't touch it and instantly start to
heat up this is kind of hard to see
happening because well it's a cloud of
atoms but also the laser is in the
infrared which our eyes and our cameras
aren't very good at detecting here my
eyes and our main camera couldn't see
anything but when I put my phone in
front of our camera you can suddenly see
a bright red dot this is the trapped
cloud of atoms that's because the DSLR
that we're shooting on had an IR filter
over the top of it meaning that we
couldn't see any infrared but our mobile
phones didn't the team helped make this
slightly easier to understand by
blocking and unblocking the line of the
laser which you can see on this screen
with a special IR camera The Cloud of
ultra cold atoms spontaneously assembles
and then kind of explodes as the Trap
and confinement is turned off what's
nice here is you can see as the um as
the atoms disappear you can see them uh
flying away because they're no longer
held by the force of the Trap and they
just expand ballistically into the
volume of the vacuum chamber and yes
this does look like a blurry SMUD on a
screen but that's quantum physics for
you it almost always looks like that
what was really impressive is how you
can then make this atom Cloud do
something useful for
you to understand how this system works
we need to get hand hands on with the
actual
device cool heavy valuable input B this
device to say the least is reasonably
complicated it's simple as long as you
know Quantum Computing as Quantum
Computing what we're looking at here is
what we call the double mop chamber
generates a 2d M so this is similar to a
3D M but we're confined in two
Dimensions it's a line cold atom we
deliberately leave the third dimension
free that's so we can introduce what we
call a push beam so that's another laser
beam along the axis and that Parts
momentum onto the atoms in that axis and
they propagate up into the top chamber
here and so this is then where we do the
three-dimensional Cooling and then we
can ramp those magnetic fields and the
currents in the chip to load atoms into
what we call the chip trap reason why we
want to do that is because we want to
generate this the coldest state of
matter which is called a Bose Einstein
condensate and what this is is that if
you keep on cooling atoms down so we
know the wavelength of atoms is
inversely proportional to the momentum
so the colder you go the lower the
momentum the larger the wavelength and
so this nice thing starts happening
where as you go colder and colder and
colder the atoms the wavelength start
propagating out so when the wavelengths
start matching the spacing between them
they turn into what's called a Bine
Stone conding the coherent state of
matter where all of the atoms are
behaving in the same way you might have
heard of the poorly Exclusion Principle
before the idea that no two firion or
half odd integer spin particles like
electrons can be in the same place at
the same time this however doesn't apply
for bosons which have integer spin when
a collection of bosons such as atoms
like ridium 87 or sodium 23 are called
to temperatures close to absolute zero
their individual Quantum states start to
overlap as the temperature decreases
further the bosons lose their individual
identities and a large fraction of them
condense into the lowest energy State
available effectively behaving as a
single super atom in a Bose Einstein
condensate here Quantum effects become
Apparent at the macroscopic scale these
condensates can exhibit properties such
as super fluidity where they can flow
without any internal viscosity and they
can interfere with themselves like a
wave demonstrating wave particle duality
at the macroscopic level it is this
property that we want to make use of
this is exactly what we want we want to
prepare a Bose Einstein condensate and
then we want to do atom interferometry
with it in order to detect uh motion
with exquisite Precision interferometry
looks at the inter pattern between two
traveling waves it is used in
experiments you might have heard of
before like ligo to detect gravitational
waves as they move through the Earth
usually interferometers interfere waves
of light but here we want to interfere
waves of matter this is kind of wild I
think we're all pretty familiar with
light reflecting off of a material
surface like a mirror but it is
reasonably rare that we see material
reflecting off of a light surface but
that is exactly what is happening here
here we can see the atoms from above uh
so the black wires here are how we're
going to uh we're going to run current
through there and that's going to create
the Trap I'm going to shine a very
powerful laser called a dipole laser
from the side then I'm going to apply a
coherent laser pulse which will split
This Cloud into two the atoms are going
to move in opposite directions inside
the dipole uh then we're going to
coherently flip them back so that they
recombine in the middle and after
completing this uh interferometry
sequence uh the phaser the atoms is
sensitive to the acceleration so we can
take an image of the cloud and read out
the portion of the cloud in each of the
momentus state and that will be a
fingerprint of how the cloud was
accelerating during the measurement that
image is destructive so we will no
longer have a b Einstein condensate the
atoms will be warm and they'll be
dispersed in the vacuum chamber and
therefore we have to start the whole
cycle again so we get one image every
cycle which is about once a second so
what this technique relies on is that if
there are any small changes to
acceleration the ship moving up down
left right forwards or backwards this
will impart a small difference in the
two clouds of atoms such that when they
are brought back together and recombined
you see a small interference signal
correlating to this acceleration don't
get me wrong every single step of this
process is incredibly difficult and it
would be an impressive feat if it was
demonstrated just in the laboratory
alone but this is already far closer to
reality and back in May the team flew
this system on board a research flight
to prove about its capability this is a
video that we took in uh flight here we
are you can see the aircraft banking uh
and on the screen you see a single blob
there and that blob is a Bose Einstein
condensate being produced in this
particular video we're alternating
between taking a BC and then just
Imaging that directly and taking the BC
and doing the first round of splitting
that You' need to do for interferometry
whether you split or whether you just
look at the BC you drop the atoms they
they freefall briefly and you do what's
called absorption Imaging which is uh
very simple it's looking at the shadow
the atoms create and by looking at the
relative um density of these three blobs
you know the relative proportion of
atoms in each of the three superposition
States and then you can back calculate
what phase you would have accumulated
obviously due to an acceleration or
rotation the fact that you can even brag
split a BC in a plane and it stable is
remarkable it's really really amazing
and you can do so while the aircraft
moving around you can see the cloud
moving in the background to add some
context as to why this is so impressive
the enemy of all Quantum engineering is
noise both mechanical and
electromagnetic it's what we are
fighting when we're building a quantum
computer that makes it so hard to get
right and what the team here is having
to overcome you know you come from a
physics lab where everything is bolted
onto FL floating Optical tables and uh
you know the magnetic and the light
environment and everything else is quite
well shielded to taking this on a really
uh dynamically challenging environment
like an aircraft where uh the aircraft
is is shaking violently because of the
engines there is a 6 you know whatever
gigz weather radar at the front of the
thing blasting there's air traffic
control it's a very challenging
environment we are finally getting to
the point where Quantum is becoming
robust the learnings that are here will
map directly to other Quantum
Technologies and open up applications
that we never thought possible the
challenges now is to um show the
performance and the uh capabilities of
the quantum senses in in more of the
deployed trials and Benchmark that
against existing Technologies and try to
rapidly Ascend that uh technology
development curve so lots of the
existing Technologies I mentioned before
are plateauing in their performance
we're not going to get a 10x or 100x
Improvement in fiberoptic Gyros or ring
laser gyros in the next few years
they've been very well engineered by
lots of very smart people but they're
coming to the end of their development
trajectory we're just at the start of
the development trajectory for Quantum
Technologies at the first generation of
our products will be something that's
rack mounted system uh something that
can go into a a data center or or onto a
a ship or an aircraft But ultimately
where we're going longer term uh and
when I say longer term this is Ry over
the next few years is to ruggedize and
miniaturize the systems using for
example photonic integrated circuits so
taking the lasers and the Optics and the
vapor cells that you've seen and
printing these on Silicon uh so that
ultimately these products will be
something that could fit in the palm of
your hand but positioning isn't the only
problem that these systems could tackle
so because the atoms are sensitive to
acceleration they are by the same uh
exact principle uh sensitive to gravity
and and so if we can measure gravity
with exquisite Precision it enables us
to for example understand where there
are mineral deposits under the Earth we
can measure uh tunnels we can measure
geologic formations one day it may have
applications from helping guide
autonomous vehicles around high-rise
cities or helping us to navigate space
But first it will be set to work to
protect flights around the world which
as of 2024 900 flights a day on average
are now encountering GPS spoofing a
technology made possible by some of the
most complicated but fundamental laws of
our universe diving into these sorts of
Technologies is literally the coolest
thing about what it is that I get to do
as a factor of being on YouTube If you
like this video I'm going to leave some
more kind of behind the scenes footage
over on patreon and post it here for
channel members please do consider
supporting us by joining or just by
leaving a like or leaving a comment let
me know what other Technologies you
would like me to do a deep dive on thank
you to inflection and the team for
letting me behind the scenes and letting
me pick up the device before they told
me how much it costs which once I found
out I promptly put it down again and
thank you as always for watching I'll
see you next week goodbye
