there's a pile of people here of books
coming out padri and Phil and but
yourself you've got psycho Cinema so I
thought tell us a little bit about we'll
me and hell will be chatting about the
themes of psycho Cinema so yeah so I
guess um I'm one of these people who's
got like strong opinions but then also
I'm a real people pleaser so I get
nervous about sharing my strong opinions
in public but basically um it's a book
that reexamines the connection between
psychoanalysis and Cinema because uh
film theory has a strong nominal
relationship with
psychoanalysis which is to do with
um exploring the Aesthetics and maybe
the underlying themes and all this kind
of stuff I actually think whilst this is
an interesting Theory this is the theory
that's dominated since like the 1970s I
actually think that
there's a slight misdirection in it in
the way it read look
and so Lan became this really strong
sort of presence quote unquote in film
Theory but I would say it's not quite
leanian and um maybe I'll explain why
and I think it's sort of high time that
we re examine this connection and
basically the main idea is that film um
psychoanalytic theory doesn't help us
elucidate you know what's going on in
the director's head or what something
represents but film can act as
psychoanalysis on the subject so that's
the kind of like main
claim I think basically what happened
was and this is can I say so what I
think you mean by that you in sense of
what Helen's doing is is what
psychoanalysis does correct me if I'm
wrong here but is it but psychoanalysis
in a sense confronts you with your with
your desire with your enjoyment so
sometimes you're getting enjoyment out
of something you don't realize you're
getting enjoyment out of it and and this
is called The Gaze and psychoanalysis
where sometimes you you you see some OB
thing happening to you like a set of
relationships that are always uh chaotic
there's always drama around you oh God
why is there always drama around me and
then maybe briefly in analysis you
notice oh I'm kind of causing that drama
there's something about I'm I'm pooking
people without even knowing I I'm
enjoying the drama I think I'm a passive
recipient of it but I'm actually an
active part of this and I'm getting
something out of it and in the same way
Cinema cannot just Express a kind of
satisfaction of your desire in a
Fantasmic form but you're saying that
cinema at its most emancipatory can
confront the viewer with their Des
basically that's maybe a structure of
Cinema that we can maybe reflect on
coming out of this idea which is that
perhaps politically if we take it like
to its political kind of end film could
actively confront us with our desire and
maybe help us relate to it and I think
the technology film does this in a
particular way that I go go into in in
the film but there's lots of different
ways like you can have film that's not
particularly intellectual or like
politically interesting but if it's read
in a certain way it can teach us
something about the way we desire and we
can relate to it and you know examine
our relationship to it in terms of the
way we're Satisfied by completion all
this kind of stuff basically like I
would kind of think
that critical theory I'm really Pro but
there was a sort of way that it's been
tied to a version of psychon this is her
people pleasing by the way she's scared
to say that she doesn't really like a
lot of critical theories I'm kind of pro
this
anyway anyway so
basically and you mentioned the word
gays right because I'm sure we've all
heard of this idea male gaze in in film
Theory and whilst male gaze as an idea
on its own could be a good idea as in
it's looking at the way that desire that
is sexuate quote unquote male or
gendered male um has an ambition towards
closure and sort of does not recognize
its own
lack um you know this is a description
of a form of Desire that some people men
and women and all kinds of people not
just men um can possess and we can
problematize it the trouble is that what
happened is there was a sort of like use
of
psychoanalysis as if it's like in a sort
of science scientistic way so
ideologically humans like to kind of
think like a uh a detective in a
detective show where there's some like
truth hidden from us that basically you
know the world's really difficult and
 but actually there's a possible
world where it's all good and we just
need the right information so as long as
I can understand my subjectivity the
right way then I'm going to find
something out and this sort of
scientistic approach which I think is a
fundamental misreading of Lan basically
uses leanian terminology which sounds
kind of confusing and like a thing and
turns it into like a concrete idea and
kind of locks it down as
men are like this this is the essence
and there's nothing we can do about it
and so this also connected to like
critical theory and where I think
critical theory tragically did not you
know transform itself and has not been
there's lots of really good work going
on but like we think about people like
Fuko for instance were really
interestingly talking about capitalism
and its manifest form like 80 years ago
you know and so capitalism was a Dynam
and it's a continuing Dynamic but the
dynamic was a certain way at that period
in the mid-century and the Manifest
cultural stuff vuko was commenting on
but
tying so Fuko talks about gays but in a
different way to the way film theorists
talk about it and he talks about things
like medical gays which is to do with um
manifest power in given contexts what
happened is people
recognize that
Lan who is more like s in his
understanding of gays but even more
radical is using the word gays so it
must be the same thing and thean talks
about male desire in a certain way when
we look at films we're looking at the
way people are looking so let's call
this gays and men looking this way
there's a problem with patriarchy in the
mid 20th century and misogyny because of
material conditions therefore the
conclusion is this thing lock down in
reality the trouble is gaze is actually
Universal question so we can talk about
sexuation which is the way people are
gendered and people are gendered in
certain ways according to material
conditions and material reality it's not
like you are born with it you develop it
because of your second birth into
subjectivity and everybody goes through
that every gender every race every type
of person so it's not like gaze is like
this thing and men are disgusting
because they look at this way as Lan
says there is
um latent hysteria in all subjects in
the entire world which is basically
there is lack in everybody gays actually
Lan is not gendered because it become
comes before sexuation and it comes sort
of over sexuation because it's to do
with how at the base of everything every
subject lacks and it's also not to do
with seeing okay so basically
ideologically we think that seeing is
like the totalizing thing we we
automatically when we say taste taste
automatically means you know discernment
which is to do with like I'm a divided
subject who can think and choose about
you know I have a taste for chocolate it
feels wrong but we say in 2020 Vision in
hindsight I saw it with my very eyes
Gaye is really not about like men who
objectify women look like this and they
see a stiletto or they see a woman you
know that's not it Gaye is actually how
the object or subject we're looking at
looks back at us and exposes our own
lack to oursel so by gendering gaze and
really talking about a fuk codian gaze
which was relevant in the mid 20th
century according to the Manifest um
cultural forms that capitalism was
taking which are different today and we
sort of Arrested them by turning this
into this like scientistic language
instead of seeing the openness in the
terms of gaze and how because this is
something to do with something that's
more ontological than gender it's
something that actually transcends and
is relevant now gaze is as much to do
with the object or the subject object
that's receiving the look as the looker
yes so you can't really gender it
because it's like does that cushion have
a gender where you're a man apparently
and I'm a girl apparently so the Gaze is
what's operating between us as a residue
it's not like you can critique like a
man is looking in this way you know but
in terms of actually Lan and Lan's
contribution his philosophical
contribution by arresting it in this way
that's so concrete and it's really it's
hard to articulate as a filmmaker how
much this has affected the production of
film and the things we supposed to make
and what's deemed radical and do we have
is this a you know people talk about
female g as if this is and talk about it
as leanian but the trouble is by
claiming that that's Lan's contribution
to film we've like lost a whole
potential like a
philosophical political and artistic
potential to film that I think it's a
real tragedy well can you give cuz
that's you know a lot of theory but very
good sorry but can you give them like a
cinematic example of where you think a
film maybe even a popular film uh
confronts potentially confronts the
audience with their desire I think every
film does in different ways whether
deliberately or not the Wiz of voice is
a really clear example so a lot of
people critique Hollywood films because
they're too totalizing and this is bad
because it's capitalist capitalism has
an ambition to totalize but it never can
so that's sort of a problem so even if
you Acclaim it is total it just never
it's because we live in a non-total
universe but basically what I would say
is interesting about Hollywood film and
where it can be emancipatory is it
really by structured by the way the
story works by the the sets and the
ambition it leads us by our desire so it
sets up a subject that we can um
identify with the character that we can
identify with which also shows that like
there's a universal lack in everybody
cuz a you can have Ripley in the 70s as
a
female you know character that men of 80
years old can identify with them this
kind stuff anyway so we'll take the
example of Wizard of o you have this
girl Dorothy at the beginning and she is
in a sense of loss she has a sense that
she needs to achieve something by the
end of the film and the whole film is
directed through sound color eventually
music the whole structure of the story
about the target of getting this thing
finding the wizard of O and so this
really involves us and leads us by
desire and it takes us to a point of
Revelation where we're all like jazzed
up and ready to find out what's going on
only to be revealed behind the
curtain the wizard or God is divided and
we are confronted with the fact that
there is nothing there you know and I
think that film by setting up and you
know even if we know that there's
something lacking on the other side we
still get you know taken Along by this
drive by this Fantasy by this desire to
get there um and I think there's a way
of um showing us that you know this
stuff about you know psychoanalysis and
showing that desire is lacking and stuff
is not about like not doing anything and
giving up on desire desire is like the
most important force in the universe we
have to go after things still knowing
that on the other side there's nothing
and that's the real challenge but yeah I
mean there's all sorts of ways something
like Wizard of Oz is is like a really
manifest way where that's a good example
yeah um but all films you know so you
can talk about like how film relates to
sex or orgasm right when they call it
orgasm in French The Little Death
because basically
you are confronted in orgasm really the
nothingness of every and and you realize
that actually the good bit is the bit
that led up to it so even if you the
ways that um people have written about
this a lot on in terms of uh TV series
TV series keep you going because they
never give you the closure and as soon
as you get the closure you're like is
that it you know so it's it's not just
about saying we should make you know in
um there are theorists in sort of the
60s and70s that were claiming that like
realism was the most important thing and
American films were bad because they
weren't realistic it's like yeah well
desires the whole thing about desire is
that it denies reality you know and yeah
but yeah I love us but do it's
interesting say all films do this cuz I
kind of go like well no like do fils do
yeah but do most films that not like try
to cover over the gays okay I would say
yeah but they do but the gays are still
there wa when you leave the cinema and
you feel a sense of lack because you
haven't been fulfilled I would say the
worst kind kinds of films politically
are the ones that think that they're
above it and are sort of just like blah
dah you know the best kind of films the
ones that that that act actively expose
it which is only a few only a few
few years like all films do it and but
there's the ones that I can actively
yeah there's a film that I really like
um a Belgian film by The Darden brothers
from 2014 called is it 2014 2011 2014 I
think called um two days one night and I
won't go into the story but it's
basically I think a really political
film because it's about a woman who has
to go on a journey and confront
basically through her interaction with
other people the gradual loss of her
desire so that she can confront
depression and like actually engage in a
reality that is as it is not as she
wants it to be and this is kind of a
very political thing we have to kind of
deal with a lot of capitalism the
problems um remain because we so are so
invested in denying the problem Alena
Zanes just wrote a book about disavow
being the most you know important
important thing we have to T with today
are denial we can see reality with our
eyes but we still don't see it you know
and if we don't see it and aren't able
to tr with it we can't build a future
that is actually engaged with reality as
it is not as we want it to be but yeah I
kind of factiously say all films do it
because films that cover it over you
know there's often a returned repressed
where there's something that doesn't sit
right with us so we can kind of think
about our responses to certain kinds of
films but there are films that really
expose the Gaze of lack Citizen Kane
being Citizen Kane is a fantastic one
yeah because it kind of like all through
they you're looking for this object that
is going to satisfy roseb this wealthy
person is something that was kind of
like was the answer to the lack and then
you kind of realize that it was just
trash basically so you yeah this um
Citizen Kane basically on his deathbed
he's saying this word Rose Bard and this
journalist he's this really famous kind
of industrialist and is like so kind of
like what does this word mean anyway he
interviews all these people from King's
and at the end of the film we're shown
um that it's actually the name that's on
a um a sled from his childhood and
basically um this word means so much to
him it's like the object that's been
it's it's the Lost object his object put
the thing that kind of keeps him going
but basically he was sent off to be
raised by another man at the age of
eight and he was sledding in the garden
when his guy turned up and his child had
ended so Rose Bud represents this
magical world that was lost but it's
only Magic because he lost it you know
and he's never going to be able to get
it back and so it tells us something
about the way that we desire and it sort
of in a manifest way exposes very
concretely this is how we desire utop
you know Heaven Eden is Eden and so far
as it's lost yes so yeah I do think
these films that do it in a conscious
way they can really and you know it's
all to do with the way that we're kind
of like in a psychoanalytic session our
desire is speaking through the film we
are you know in a position we're sort of
like you know comforted in a sense
because um like Freud's fought d game a
lot of films sort of to do with
expectation and genre so you anticipate
certain things and certain things are
different but this is all sort of like a
com a comforting way that we're kind of
able to be taken to a point where we can
confront the horror of our desire really
which is often it takes years in psycho
analysis to be able to accept because
it's really traumatic yeah yeah very
good that's brilliant God that's that's
a great taster for a conversation we're
the thing is like when you think about
it too much you're like
does this make sense BR it's like and
you know with this theory that we're
exploring and then bringing it down to
wizard of O and citizen K and it's kind
of like this is the emancipatory
potential of Cinema which we're going to
explore and also this is very intimately
connected with psychotic Theory but also
the radical theology that that I'm doing
that we're doing but I guess yeah the
thing that I kind of feel quite
passionately about is like a lot of like
everything eventually needs to be
challenged everything is is
contradictory at a certain point so when
things
um a certain take on psychon narcis
lasted so long and I think to do with
the way it's gendered and how this is
tied to contemporary Progressive
politics which can often be um you know
a ball walk against sometimes
confrontation with like actually what is
the undercurrent of capitalist economy
you know it's really important these
things are challenged and it is
surprising to me that but I think it's
maybe because I'm a filmmaker and it's
hard it really is hard to articul
calculate how much this theory has
implicated on the way films are made and
understood especially in Europe where
there is because of various economic
policies where Europe has basically
become a corporate Colony for American
Media organizations so there's no real
organic economy outside of state-run
funding bodies who kind of have really
adopted a certain perspective which was
absolutely
correct a certain number of years ago
but capitalism is a fundamental Dynamic
but the dynamic is one of Desire it's
not an natural concrete system but it's
a system of Desire that is always
changing and as Mark said like
everything that is sacred is profaned
everything is melt solid melts into air
like things are always changing so we
always need to think in new ways instead
of sort of received wisdom basically
yeah
