in December 2016 hundreds of high school
students from around the world gathered
in Hong Kong for a global competition
these students were the top math talents
from their countries participating in
one of the world's most prestigious
events the mathematical
Olympiad among them was a team from one
of the world's most secretive and
secluded countries North
Korea six young men stepped forward
dressed in white dress shirts and black
pants with loyalty Badges of the Kims
pinned over their hearts among them was
Jong Yoli visibly more anxious than his
peers while his teammates smiled Jong
Yol kept glancing to the side worried
about something far more important than
solving
equations his
freedom Jong Yul re's story starts in a
small small town in North Korea a
country where your social status and
opportunities are often determined by
your family's background and history
Jong was lucky enough to be born into a
relatively well-off family which meant
he didn't face the extreme hardships
many North Koreans endure families with
ties to those who fought against Japan
during World War II or have connections
to the ruling party tend to have more
privileges jong's father saw potential
in him and played an important role in
supporting his Early
Education unlike many children who are
forced into hard manual labor or
military training Jong had the rare
chance to focus on academics
particularly
mathematics from a young age Jong showed
a special talent with numbers his father
would make him practice multiplication
tables every single day before he could
go play these early years paid off when
Jong at just 12 years old won a special
prize in a national mathematics
competition beating much older students
and catching the eye of top educational
representatives in the North Korean
regime North Korea's education system is
very strict with a strong focus on
loyalty to the regime along with
academic
subjects however jong's amazing
understanding of numbers and equations
allowed him to pursue a more focused
education in mathematics a rare path
available only to a few gifted
students because of his talents he was
granted access to a laptop loaded with
math programs to help with his training
which is usually unheard of but this
laptop was necessary to hone his skills
despite the lack of Internet and
frequent power outages Jong managed to
keep his laptop charged using a solar
panel he built himself and in the winter
he used a gasoline powerered
generator jong's mathematical skill
eventually got him selected for North
Korea's team at the international
mathematical Olympiad IMO a prestigious
event that brings together the best
young mathematicians from around the
world the training process for the IMO
in North Korea is intense because the
country sees success in these types of
international events as a matter of
national pride Jong went through
rigorous preparation
spending long hours solving complex
problems with the help of top
mathematicians in the country this
training was not just about improving
his math skills but also about building
a sense of Duty and
patriotism the regime puts immense
pressure on its participants to not only
succeed but
win jong's first trip abroad was
eye-opening traveling to Colombia for
the IMO was a rare chance since it was
his first time leing leaving North Korea
the trip was full of new things from the
brightly lit cities to the many cars
there were things he had never seen
before his team did great ranking fifth
worldwide just behind China South Korea
the US and Russia Jong himself won a
silver medal which was a big achievement
but it wasn't enough for the North
Korean regime which expected him to win
gold because of the significant
investment they made in him as Jong
stood on the stage in Colombia his mind
was racing North Korea had been pushing
his training for years recognizing his
talent and potential to contribute to
the regime's goals but why was North
Korea so interested in students like him
Jong knew the regime wasn't pushing him
for no reason Jong thought back to being
given his laptop what did the regime
gain from Minds like his these questions
filled jong's mind adding to his anxiety
as he prepared to make a decision that
could change his life
forever Jong was facing an uncertain
future with forces Beyond his control
watching his every move but unlike Jong
you can take control over one important
part of your life your online privacy
that's why we use private internet
access the world's most transparent VPN
private internet access is like a
digital bodyguard standing between you
and those trying to spy on your online
activities with a VPN like Pia you can
hide your IP address and encrypt your
internet connection shielding your
Digital Life from prying eyes with
private internet access you can also
virtually change your location just
select a country click on it and now
you're browsing from there this helps
you bypass geob blocking on streaming
services which have different catalog
logs across countries with private
internet access you can access them all
thanks to thousands of servers in 91
countries and all 50 US states for
example I was trying to watch Inception
but it wasn't available in my country so
I switched my location to Canada and
streamed it without any issues I
personally use private internet access
to keep my data secure when I'm working
remotely or using public Wi-Fi and I
highly recommend it if you value your
privacy as much as I do private internet
access is available on all platforms so
you can protect your entire household
with just one subscription and right now
at Pia vpn.com Cipher you can get 83%
off private internet access with 4
months free plus there's a 30-day money
back guarantee you would also be
supporting our Channel thank
you North Korea cyber division started
in the 1970s when many students were
sent to countries like Russia China and
East Germany to learn coding at first
this program aimed to make factories
back home more efficient however in the
1980s and 1990s Kim Jong-il realized the
potential of creating a team of hackers
for the military this team was
responsible for spying for the
government and making money the Korea
computer center was set up in the the
early 1990s as the main place for North
Korea's computer and cyber
activities the KCC was part of Kim Jong
's larger plan to modernize the
country's
technology at first the KCC focused on
creating software and Hardware but it
quickly expanded to include cyber
warfare and hacking the KCC became a
training ground for North Korea's top
academic talents teaching them the
skills needed for advanced cyber
warfare Kim Jong-un who took over after
his father decides to take the cyber
division of the military even more
seriously North Korea's economy has been
hit hard by International sanctions
because of its nuclear weapons program
these sanctions have limited the
country's ability to trade
internationally and access Global
Financial
systems in response North Korea has
turned to cyber crime as another way to
to make money cyber operations are a
lowcost high-reward way to get around
economic sanctions and get money the
regime has managed to steal hundreds of
millions of dollars through cyber
attacks on banks cryptocurrency
exchanges and businesses around the
world North Korea has carried out
several high-profile attacks that have
caught Global News
attention two of the most famous are the
Sony Pictures hack in 2014 and the the
Bangladesh bank heist in
2016 by building a strong cyber
infrastructure and carrying out these
different cyber attacks the regime has
been able to make money to fund itself
with the ongoing sanctions North Korea
is likely to continue its cyber attacks
primarily through its notorious hacking
group
Lazarus the Lazarus group is a famous
hacking group backed by the North Korean
government training and deploying cyber
Warriors who use the internet as their
Battlefield Lazarus has been linked to
some of the most significant cyber
attacks in recent internet history they
are well known for their revolutionary
hacking techniques not to mention they
have caused millions of dollars in
financial losses
worldwide the earliest known attack by
the Lazarus group is called operation
Troy which took place in
2009 this was a spying operation that
used dos attacks to Target the South
Korean government the rise of the
Lazarus group has led to a significant
increase in cyber security Investments
by both private companies and
governments all over the world companies
like Sony are now more Vigilant than
ever hiring top-of-the-line cyber
security analysts and using Advanced
security
protocols countries have started sharing
intelligence about the North Korean
cyber Warriors and collaborating on
cyber security investigations to track
and mitigate the group's activities for
example the United States have imposed
sanctions on individuals and companies
linked to the Lazarus group one of the
most well-known members of the Lazarus
group is Park chin hok a North Korean
programmer charged by the US Department
of Justice in
2018 he was accused of being involved in
several major cyber
attacks Park is thought to be a key
figure in the Lazarus group and has been
linked to the 2014 Sony Pictures hack
and the 2016 Bangladesh bank heist the
US government's charges against Park
gave a detailed look into how the
Lazarus group
operates it explained how Park and his
team used hacking methods like fishing
emails malware and social engineering to
break into their targets the charges
against Park were significant because it
was one of the first times a specific
individual was accused of carrying out
attacks on behalf of North Korea despite
the charges Park is still at large and
is believed to be in North Korea Out Of
Reach of US law enforcement his case
shows just how difficult it is to bring
North Korean hackers to
Justice in North Korea the journey to
becoming a cyber Warrior often begins at
a very young age as we saw with Jang
Yoli talented students are identified
through Countrywide testing particularly
in subjects like math and science those
who show above average scores are
recruited into specialized programs
where they receive extensive training in
computer science and hacking techniques
the training is intensive and very
in-depth covering various aspects of
cyber strategies including Network
infiltration malware development and
software development these young
recruits are taught to see the internet
as a battlefield where they can engage
in cyber warfare to further the goals of
the North Korean regime they spend
countless hours honing their skills
ensuring that they are prepared for the
sophisticated cyber attacks they will
later carry out the daily life of a
cyber warrior in North Korea is highly
demanding and structured recruits live
within facilities run by the state their
routines are strict with the main part
of their day being dedicated to coding
computer science and penetration testing
courses these cyber Warriors usually
operate in teams each member
specializing in different aspects of it
so they can fulfill any Mission they are
given they work long hours often
isolated from the outside world with
limited access to information from
outside of North Korea the state
provides them with the necessary tools
and resources including top-of-the-line
PCS and software but their activities
are closely monitored to ensure loyalty
and prevent any
leaks despite the intense pressure and
work environment cyber Warriors are
considered Elite members of society in
North Korea they receive better food
housing and other privileges compared to
the general population this special
treatment is a part of the regime's
strategy to maintain their loyalty
preventing defectors and dedication to
their
missions defecting from North Korea is
extremely dangerous with the risks of
being killed or captured so high a
typical Escape usually starts by
crossing the heavily guarded borders
normally into China since the
demilitarized zone between North and
South Korea is one of the most dangerous
borders in the world North Korea has
strict border controls that are riddled
with landmines electric fences and
guards who have orders to shoot on site
once in China defectors still have to
avoid being caught by the Chinese
authorities who often send North Koreans
back being sent back always means
punishment beyond belief those who are
found are persecuted with their family
being sent to work camps to prevent
people from defecting North Korea uses
multiple tactics one of their main
tactics is
propaganda the regime portrays the
outside world especially South Korea and
the United States as dangerous and
hostile they glorify North Korean life
and Leadership even though they are
starving this propaganda is reinforced
by strict control over
information citizens have almost no
access to foreign media and the internet
State controlled media constant ly
spread pro- regime narratives to
maintain loyalty and fear of the outside
world another deterrent is the threat of
collective punishment if someone defects
their family members who remain in North
Korea often face severe consequences
including imprisonment persecution or
execution this guilt by association
policy can extend to three generations
making it a powerful tool to control
potential defectors
travel within North Korea is also
tightly controlled Citizens need permits
to move between regions and
international travel is relatively
impossible for Ordinary People the
regime also controls food distribution
and jobs ensuring that citizens rely on
the state for their basic needs
surveillance in North Korea is pretty
much everywhere you look secret police
and informants are constantly monitoring
the people C citizens are also
encouraged and rewarded when reporting
suspicious
activities if you do attempt and escape
and are captured public executions are
not uncommon to remind everyone what
will happen if you try to get out
despite all of this few North Koreans
manag to defect each year for our friend
Jong yri the answer became painfully
clear after returning home from the 2015
mathematical Olympiad when he learned
from a friend that senior figures from a
secretive government agency were
interviewing his close friends and
relatives he instantly knew what was
about to happen the state would harness
his talent for numbers by giving him a
job as a hacker this filled him with
Dread working in one of the most guarded
sections of the military meant that he
would be cut off from society and have
no Freedom
whatsoever he also realized that if he
were instructed to join the Cyber
Warriors he could not refuse Jong knew
that he could only compete in the
mathematical Olympiad until he was 18
years old which meant he could attend
one more competition before being
recruited the very next year at the 2016
mathematical Olympiad held at Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology
Jong knew this was his last opportunity
to get out since he was a competitor he
he was not heavily supervised at the
competition and he was on friendly terms
with the teachers who were accompanying
the team after winning another silver
medal that year Jong took his chance he
walked out of the dorm where he was
staying and hailed a cab to the airport
where with the help of one of the
airline workers he found the address of
the South Korean consulate he took
another taxi there and told a South
Korean Diplomat that he wished to defect
he then spent 70 days in Hong Kong
waiting nervously while the South Korean
delegation negotiated his safe passage
to Soul after jong's defection North
Korea suspended its mathematical
Olympiad program for 2 years and now
sends a government agent with the team
to ensure that nobody
escapes Jong is now in his early 30s and
goes by a South Korean
name he studied mathematics at Soul
National University
he has still not seen his parents since
he defected
