just following blanded mathematics and I
think we're just losing all the physics
we have for physics backwards as what it
should be because all the math and we do
are Point set topology our differential
geometry all that you start with points
and then you define infimal things on
points and then you integrate but that's
not what we do in a
lab when did we first get in
contact oh jeez I I don't remember it
must have been more more more than a
year ago yeah okay well I've been
following your channel for approximately
one year MH I believe I contacted you
shortly afterward okay yeah and you have
a fantastic Channel people should know
about so it's called the assumptions of
physics or at least that's the project
name and Gabriel's going to take it over
at some point and give the elevator
pitch the F minute version so a long
elevator it's Cen Tower we're in Toronto
that sort of elevator what makes your
channel different is that you focus on
the equations and the rigor
and many people who are into
demonstrating that some conventional
aspect of physics is incorrect if
they're in the academy they do so from
the philosophy of physics angle so maybe
some interpretation of quantum mechanics
but you don't focus on that you're much
more about demonstrating with line by
line proofs in that vein you remind me
of Jacob barandes and he's from Harvard
and you're based in Michigan well I'll
list some examples for people who if you
just want a teaser of what's to come
come why is it that Heisenberg's
uncertainty or some analog of it is
already in classical mechanics under the
Proviso that you have to assume that
thermodynamics is true another is that
the action principle which the way that
I thought of it is it's a compression
mechanism so it encodes several
different equations inside and then you
unpack it with Oiler lr's equations but
you show the action principle itself has
a geometric meaning and the idea that
you can translate between Newtonian
mechanics and hamiltonian mechanics and
lonian
mechanics is false you can't there are
some systems that are only describable
in some or not translatable to the other
there's not a onetoone bje between these
guys correct okay we'll also talk about
what defines quantum mechanics so many
people think that it's commuting
variables or non-commuting
observables is that actually what
defines quantum mechanics that makes it
separate from classical mechanics and
why reductionism is incorrect you have a
video on you shouldn't think physics is
reductionistic because at some point you
get down to Atomic facts at the at the
at the fundamental level like to justify
the the the the mathematical structure
you can't just say oh there is another
mathematical structure that I used to
justify this because how did you justify
the first and another way of saying that
is that people think of physics as a a
mechanistic science that you're always
looking for mechanisms but also that's
another false view I believe you say
that because you can't look for a
mechanism in something that's
irreducible right because it's more that
if you are the fundamental level you
can't invoke a deeper level to justify
uh the fundamental level that you have
there is no mechan after that that's a
bit of a teaser some of those are
technical but why don't you go over the
assumptions of physics project right so
the the project that I the goal of the
project that I work on is essentially to
find a minimal set of assumptions a
physical assumptions from which we can
rederive the laws and we have
essentially two approach is one we call
reverse physics then we start with the
current laws of classical mechanics
quantum mechanics and so on which uh
there modern in in modern theories are
just presented as sort of a mathematical
structure and the idea is to go
backwards from that mathematical
structures and find uh physical
conditions that are equivalent to that
mathematical structure and that's why
it's called reverse physics a little bit
because it's like reverse engineering
you are taking the thing breaking apart
finding what pieces go together pieces
are independent and another reason is
because in the foundations of
mathematics there is an approach called
reverse mathematics that takes theorems
and and asks what is the minimal
subsystem of mathematics then I need to
express that theorem and and prove it
now just a moment so in Reverse
mathematics I've always wondered so just
for people who are tuning in there's a
theorem and then you usually use
assumptions to prove a theorem and the
way that I understand reverse
mathematics is instead of starting from
your axioms and moving forward to derive
a theorem you start with what could be
true and then you think about what needs
to be true in order for that to be true
well you're looking for subsystem so to
to prove a simple theorem you might not
need let's say all of mathematics you
might need just a a a smaller subset of
uh of starting points let's say so and
and you sort of by by doing that you
sort of learn more of what is the
structure of mathematics itself now I'm
not an expert in this but I actually had
a chance to talk to to one other the
people that work there and uh and so
what what I do what we do in assumptions
of physics in Reverse physics is
slightly different because we're more
interested at the conceptual structure
like what is the minimal conceptual
structure that I need to get to some
parts of the mathematics of the physical
laws but in like the spirit is the same
you're you're taking what you know what
you think is physics what you think is
mathematics and trying to uh to find
what pieces are there like the structure
of of physics itself and Mathematics
itself and uh one of the thing that then
we saw while while doing this uh uh this
work is that you can have these you know
physical assumption that are equivalent
to to the different laws uh but that
sort of gives you only the higher level
mathematical structure and what we
realize that is that you really can't
say that you understand the higher level
mathematical structure if you really
don't understand all the nuts and balls
of the more fundamental mathematical
structures and so we started another
approach which is called physical
mathematics and there the goal is really
to start from scratch and layer in each
each axum and definition and each axum
and definition has to have a a physical
justification so it's not enough to say
I have a mathematical structure I have
to say these are the things that I have
to model in the real world and this is
why I will use this particular
mathematical structure to model this
thing so why don't you give an example
right now so for example the basic
constituent that we use for in physical
mathematics we because we need a a basic
building block for everything is the
idea of a experimentally verifiable
statement a statement for which you have
a test and the test succeeds in finite
time if and only if the statement is
true so for example you say the sky is
blue you can look it's blue F at time
veryify something like the mass of the
electron is less than 10 to the minus 13
electron volt that's something where we
can go and and verify but a massless
photon as another example you can say
the mass of the photon is less than 10
to Theus 13 electron volt and that's
something that we can verify
experimentally but if you said the mass
of the photon is exactly zero that's not
something that we can verify
experimentally because we always are
bound to finite Precision right and so
uh these are the things that we want to
have as a fundamental thing we want to
say a physical theory has to uh give us
statements about the world and a
physical theory has to be fully
explorable by test by testable
statements and so those are the things
that we axiomatize we say these things
exist and they have a particular way to
be composed so for example if you take
two verifiable statements right you can
verify the end of the conjunction
because you test one you test the other
they're both finish in time then you
know that the the end finishes in finite
time and it's verified but if you have
uh infinitely many right you're never
going to you're not going to be able to
be guaranteed because it would take you
an infinite time to do it so for
verifiable statement you only guaranteed
that the finite conjunction is actually
verifiable you're not guaranteed the
infinite conjunction so the infinite
conjunction is still a statement but
it's not a verifiable statement and
again we have in the justification we
have somewhat proofs that would have
been accepted as proof probably in the
1700 but they don't follow the current
standard mathematical rigor because
mathematical rigor right now starts with
essentially elements that where the
meaning has been stripped out is just
symbols that you manipulate and so on
and when we are trying to reason on the
physical objects well the physical
objects are not meaningless marks on
paper and so we need to be able to
reason what these things are such that
then we can find this definition say
okay these things can be and so all of
these process we call physical
mathematics because at the end of the
day we will come from mathematics we
will have all the theorems and we want
to recover the mathematical structure
that we already have we don't want to
create crazy mathematical structure that
we we we don't know what they are you
want to justify the use of the
mathematical structures that we already
use correct and find whether those are
100% appropriate for the type of physics
that we're trying to disc to describe
and what are the uh the what is the
realm of applicability in those
mathematical structure so something like
the real numbers or even the complex
numbers correct which are a
Continuum do they have a place in
physical mathematics yes for example we
have a complete derivation we have a set
of necessary and sufficient physical
assumption they have to make such that a
a set of verifiable statements are going
to be identifying with uh uh identifying
essentially open sets of of the real
numbers and so we know when we can take
those things to be valid or not and
again the idea is really to construct
things that are modelization of what we
do in in sort of operational settings so
how do we Define numbers well we're
going to have a reference and then we
say something is before the reference or
after the reference so for example we
have clock ticks and then we say
something happened you know before the
third tick and after the second or you
have rulers and you have notches on the
rulers and you can say before this Notch
and after this notch or you have a a
balance scales and you have weights that
you put on one side right it always
works like this you have references and
uh the the way that these references
work is essentially they give you three
statements uh the whatever you're
measuring is before the the reference
after the reference or on the reference
in the sense that that overlaps and the
before and after are assumed to be
verifiable something that you can check
and now the question it becomes what is
the how many reference do you need and
how what is their logical relation
relationship needs to be such that all
these references are going to tell you
aha you're measuring something on a
Continuum of the real number and what is
most interesting in doing this work
appar that it's fascinating because you
really understand exactly how how this
this things work what we find is that
there are three conditions that you need
to uh to to have that are the most
important and they they it's like the
biggest difficulty is not getting the
real numbers the biggest difficulty is
to find a linear order so a set of
points that you always have have
something either before or after that's
really where all the uh sort of a harder
assumption that you that you you need to
put are there once you have the linear
order uh whether you have the real
numbers or the uh the integer is just a
matter of saying oh I have two
references can I put one in the middle
of the two okay now why is it difficult
to have an order on the real numbers
because they already are ordered right
no it's a justifying unordered with just
saying oh I have these references where
things can be before or after right so
references don't need to be or you have
references in space and you don't have a
linear order there right and so the idea
is that all the references have to be be
able to to be arrangeable in some way
such that for example if I put a
reference and another reference you know
having something that is before this
implies that something is before the
other right because the point is that
you're starting from scratch you just
say I have a bunch of statements what
are the minimal conditions that I have
on those statements such that an UR
emerg is from from these statements and
that's the hard bit so what are you
working on now what I'm working right
now it's sort of the piece that I need
in in in in between uh physical
mathematics and refer physics I need
physical mathematics and reference
physics and reverse physics reverse
physics right sorry I speak too fast and
then everything sort of merges together
so the from the uh uh uh reverse physics
side right I have a lot of uh conditions
that are uh that allow me to recover
fully classical mechanics and quantum
mechanics say in a Hodgy way that a
physicist might like but not a
mathematician and I need a place where I
can run these arguments in a more
precise way and so I need sort of a
general theory of the states and
processes that it's more abstract than
the the two theories such as I can say
these are things that are you always
need to have if you're doing physics you
need to to Def to be able to Define
States and states have to be to have
these characteristics and then if I have
a classical system I'm making this
additional assumption and if I have a
Quantum system I'm making these other
additional assumption so I I I basically
want to be able to push as much as I can
theorems that are true both in classical
mechanics and quantum mechanics push
them up to a single Theory
right to a more general theory so that I
can see these two other theories as as
instantiation of the two and so again
this is part more of of physical
mathematics because I need to identify
axioms that I have to assume to be able
to do physics in the same way that I say
well physics is about experimental
evidence so I have I need to have
statements out the world that are
testable what I want to say is that uh
physical theory has to be uh testable in
in a repeatable way right I I need to be
able to set up experiment and test it
and uh and so the uh the basic objects
that I have to describe a system must be
at the level of Ensemble because when I
go and prepare things in a lab that's
what I prepare prepare ensembles I
prepare statistical things that then I
uh make statistical man measurement and
it's on these statistical measurement
that we have the interest so this sounds
extremely practical like everything that
that comes from physics has to be some
experiment or some statement about an
experiment or an observable would the
theorem if you have a vector outside the
light cone then you act on it with the
lower end group you can rotate it to any
other Vector outside the light cone
would that be okay under yours or would
that not even be considered physical
mathematics CU it's not making some
specific experimental statement uh in
other words if you have a space likee
Vector it'll always be space like under
any Laurence transformation right that's
going to be if you have set up things
correctly right that's going to be
something that comes out from the math
uh so that's an okay statement yeah it's
it's probably come so that that's going
to be true when we are doing even
reverse physics in uh uh In classical
mechanics you do find that when you set
up uh your assumptions for classical
mechanics that by the way are not very
difficult you you need three things to
get to classical mechanics one is that
the what we call the Assumption of
infinitesimal reducibility you have a
system and the system is made of parts
and the parts are made of Parts the
parts are made of parts and giving the
state of the whole is equivalent to
giving the state of these infinitesimal
parts and so the infin tmal parts are
essentially what we think of the the
classical particles right and the whole
system is giving as a a a a distribution
over over the space of the particles be
going you're going to be able to say you
need to be able to say 10% of the system
is within this part this you know this
10% of the system is within these states
90% of the system is in the other states
so it's really a distribution over all
the possible configuration over of the
infinite asmal parts and uh because you
want these
distribution the the the count of states
the densities and the entropy to be uh
the same for different observers right
so if we if you have a set of units and
you are there and I have a set of units
and I'm here we want still to be able to
count states in the same way and we want
to be able to Define entropy in the same
way because otherwise you know entropy
would be increasing for you and not for
me and that would make sense because I
would see something that is
deterministic reversible you see
something that is not rever
deterministic and reversible that that
would not make sense so even this
constraint basically is what give you
the structure of the classical face
space is what gives you the idea of
conjugate variables and mathematically
is what gives you the the idea of a
simplec structure which is sort of the
geometrical way that we describe face
space so with that with assumption
infini reducibility we get all this
stuff and then you say now I want the
system to be deterministic and
reversible meaning that
for each initial configuration I have a
final configuration and the number of
states are mapped to each other right
then that's what's going to give you
hamiltonian mechanics it's this
preservation of volume this basically
gives you the uh the preservation of uh
of the number of states the other thing
that you need that I sort of didn't say
before uh to make all this work is the
assumption that uh uh you're describing
a system that is made of independent
degrees of freedom so that the total
number of states can be understood as
the count of States on one degree of
Freedom multiplied by the C of states
and degree of Freedom if you have these
three condition you get the classical
hiling mechanics and that's it then if
you allow an extra exemption that
basically says uh all that I'm uh
studying are actually uh
trajectories meaning that I can go from
the kinematics to the Dynamics so from
position and velocity to position and
momentum and the uh uh this transition
is invertible if you say that it's
invertible that's what gives you lron
mechanics and then if you if you go one
step further and say look both momentum
and velocity are linear structure and I
need that linear structure to be
preserved then the map between pos
position from momentum to Velocity has
to be
linear and if you do just a couple of
integrals you find that you're
constraining yourself to massive
particles under scalar and Vector
potentials so you basically find the
laws of charge particles in
electromagnetic field and uh and this is
was a surprise to me right like when I
set up to do all these things was said I
just want to understand these things a
little bit better and I had no sense
that uh from just four simple assumption
you you four simple assumptions yes okay
right it's a infin reducibility
independence of degrees of freedom
determinance and reversibility and what
I call kinematic equivalence the fact
that you can go from position and
velocity to position and momentum that
looking at the trajectory is enough to
understand what's going on at the the
dynamical level to reconstruct the
energy the momentum and all that and
that sort of gave me a a difference
inside
in physics right because I don't need
anything below to justify this
mathematical structure I don't need need
a mechanism for how we get an aonian or
how we get T it's just the definition I
have a system in front of me I can
assume that this system satisfied this
assumption in this particular
circumstances and you get the laws and
and so another thing that philosopher
asked themselves right could we have a
universe that have different laws well
uh if we have objects that can be
infinite reducible independent degrees
of freedom and all this you're going to
get the same laws interesting that's a
question that many philosophers as you
mentioned ask what would the universe
look like under different physical laws
and then there's also the thought
experiment that proves that you can
demonstrate to yourself just without
going to the Leaning Tower of Pisa that
a bowling ball and a feather will fall
at the same rate if you remove air
resistance do you know that yeah yeah
that's actually Galileo's dialogues
uhhuh so this is another myth that
people always think oh Galileo you know
didn't know whether objects fell you
know at the same rate or not went to the
Tower of fiz and dropped that and no in
his dialogue he he creates this simple
thought experiment they say okay let's
suppose that I have two rocks and one is
heavier than the other and let's suppose
that this fall faster than this now you
put them together you tie them up right
what what is the velocity of this well
you say well the the the the faster
object is going to be slowed down by the
by the slower object so the the the
velocity should be in the middle of the
faster object and the smaller object but
now you have put them together and now
it's a more massive object so it should
go faster than the faster object than we
were before right and and and also here
is the configuration is how much how
tight do you have to bind these things
such that you are going to consider
these two separate objects with with
different mass and how you know when you
tie them together that they're actually
one object of different Mass like how
tight you have to bind them right and
this of course it makes no sense and
then that's how in the dialogue he he
concludes that that all objects have to
fall at the same rate so the type of
things that that I'm trying to do is
exactly these type of things on steroids
right to to really go and find all
these sort of reasoning that you can
from simple things and build as much as
possible and that's kind of the game
that I've been playing and a lot of the
time some arguments when I start I'm
really just trying to find an argument
and and I try to find many right and uh
at the beginning they all seem
impossible because because you're not
used to it like any argument even false
one as long as you think about them
enough times they're going to seem
plausible to you and the reverse is true
even if an argument is false is true but
you are not used to thinking in that way
you still think that it's F there's
something weird about it so you you need
to sort of get comfortable with them a
little bit and say okay well this
argument that I just made for uh you
know for fun actually has some Merit and
then you find that there is a
correlation with something else and
actually two different argument becomes
the the same one and you say oh then I
must have something in fact the first
time where I said I have something is
where I was able to rederive ham
mechanics from the terministic and rever
stability in four different ways
because I could say I have determinance
because I map states one to one I could
have determinance because I preserve the
information all the information that I
know at the beginning is the same amount
that I have at the end so it's an
information theoretic argument or I have
something that
conserves uh um thermodynamic entropy so
it's reversible not in the sense that
that I do a oneto one map with the state
is reversible because the entropy does
not increase right and so these are or
or the uncertain is right you know you
think of determinist but as points in
math but we never really measure points
we really measure some statistical
distribution and and some uncertainty
around it and so if you if you say I
want something to be deterministic and
reversible then you're going to say well
the measurement uncertainty has to be
preserved because I need to sort of
describe the system at the same level of
accuracy and so I saw that however I
made the the case in those 4 different
case I would get to the same result and
I say okay now I have something stable
right because if you just have one type
of argument you can always fool yourself
but now I have four of them that are
starting from the same point and reach
the same conclusion and that tells me oh
I I can't I must not be fooling myself
now are those four equivalent to one
another M yes okay and mathematically
they're basically just assuming that the
Jacobian of the transformation is
unitary that the volumes preserve the
same and in in our book we show like we
we have all these different ways and
then you see that they're all equivalent
it's quite fascinating I think 10 years
ago or so I learned about the thought
experiment of Galileo and then I
wondered how much more of physics can we
derive from purely well you're thinking
in terms of assumptions but I was
thinking in terms of thought experiments
then there's also the Newton's bucket
thought experiment have you thought
about I'm not familiar with that button
then don't worry about that cuz I'm not
familiar enough with it to be able to
describe it with confidence but I
believe it's an argument for absolute
space it has to do with you have water
in a bucket and then you start rotating
it and then the water creeps up the
sides of the bucket making a u-shape so
you're able to tell that this is being
rotated yes and somehow that's an
argument for absolute space that Newton
gave okay and then mock takes that and
says actually Newton if you examine that
that's an argument for relational space
you probably have to talk to Julian
Barbour for makam stuff he is the expert
now for the hamiltonian mechanics do you
recover that momentum is a CO Vector yes
and the reason is quite simple and it
has to be to do with units and this is
one of the problem that in physics we
follow the math too much and the math
does not care about units but a lot of
geometrical structure that we have there
are actually there to keep track of the
unit so the the setup is basically this
right you want to be able to count
States and the count of states have to
have a unit that is independent of
anything else right and and then you're
going to have the units that you use to
identify the state which could be you
know meters angle and so on to to start
defining the
configuration and so what you need now
is uh if you only
had the the the variable that defines
the units and let's call that Q then you
would have a problem because now now uh
there would be special reference system
that for which the coun of state would
actually be the unit and uh and others
of all the others would not be the same
so you you start having special
coordinate systems that are sort of
privileged because uh you're using the
exact using units to to to to can so
what you really want to do is to be able
to change that unit and still preserve
the structure such that the the the the
the units that you use for um for the
states is independent of the units that
so you're going to say okay I'm going to
have multiple variables in fact what
happens is that I'm going to have
another variable of which the units are
the inverse of the first such that when
I make an area between the two well this
is units of Q This is units of inverse Q
when I multiply each other now I have an
invariance uhuh and then invariant is
the count of states is that the volume
in the face space then and that's the f
in the in face space so you have uh uh q
that defines the units you have K that
is the inverse units and then you say I
want to measure states with har bar and
so you just multiply K by har bar and
you get P wait why are we talking about
H bar when we're speaking about
hamiltonian mechanics or classical
mechanics right now because that's what
we use for for the unit that we use to
count States is the units of actions is
that what we use and we the the reason
that we use that because in
mechanics the units turn out to be uh
you know position times kinetic momentum
m v squ right and that's then we what we
use to to to Define units but you you're
still know need a unit to be able to to
measure these things and when you
calculate an entropy even in In
classical mechanics that you have a
distribution on face Bas you need you
know you're going to have a logarithm of
of the distribution but the distribution
is going to be H you know let's say
probability over volume and if the
volume is in unit of face space you are
in a log you have to take that out so
you need some uh you know some constants
so that you can Define where your zero
entropy is and you get the correct entr
right and so it turns out that these uh
you still need to to fix some of these
constants Even In classical mechanics
and and again it's one of those things
that uh it's quite bizarre right but
it's one of those things that if you
just take all the units down and that's
what mathematicians do you're not going
to see and unfortunately this is what we
do in theoretical physics you you we
have all the the units we throw them out
what do you mean we throw them out like
set c equal to one is that what you're
referring to yeah but it's not just
setting it to one it's setting it to one
pure number right if you set it to one
but you still have some units of of
space over some units of of time
then you're still preserving the the
physical content of what you're going to
measure because when we measure distance
in space we use different instruments
than when we measure distances in time
but that's what we do we just set
everything to one and we forget about
the units and then we lose this
structure because uh you you you don't
see you can't appreciate what is it the
the physics that the thing is describing
so what would be an example of something
where they set c equal to one or H bar
equal to one or what have you and it
turns out it's incorrect under what
you've investigated it's not incorrect
you see this is if you do the
calculation correctly and do everything
correctly is not the problem you just
lose the physical meaning so for example
do you know the dur equation yes what
does it tell you like what is it saying
so if you if in that instead of the
gamma right the gamma is these matrices
that sort of sum to one put a c in front
now that c gamma is actually a velocity
that comes from from the Boost of the
spin part so the gamma is telling you
what is velocity of the spin
going and then you have a partial
derivative you know put the H bar that's
momentum so it's velocity contracted
with the momentum of the particle equal
mc² right so it's basically telling you
all these things is telling you that V *
P equal it's going to give you MC squ
because you have the momentum which is
MV and then you have the Velocity is MV
but you're Contracting together those
those Vector the norm of the square is
going to be C so you're just saying uh
you know something that you already have
in In classical particle mechanics in in
relativistic setting that the uh the
inner product between the momentum and
velocity is equal to
mc² that's it it's just that you're
saying in in the context of field Theory
so of course you're going to use a
language that it's a lot more
complicated but the physics that you're
describing what the equation is telling
you is is just that there is nothing
there is nothing more and so what I feel
that we have done by essentially
stripping all these things away and just
following Bland of mathematics and
looking for mathematical structure for
your theing we we're I think we're just
losing all the physics there is still
there and if we did it in the way that
we used to do physics right because
you know these assumptions are just a
new version maybe like more rigorous
version of Newton's laws and the laws of
thermodynamics like we used to do
physics like that you start you figure
out what are the you boil the the the
world into these assumption that you're
making or these these starting points
and then get everything from there and
you keep track of what it is that you're
doing you you check your you know when
you're doing undergrad problems in
physics you do the dimensional checking
where you know to make sure that your
masses are masses and that sudden didn't
become velocity and so so why are we not
doing it in the more complicated
theories where we can even get you know
more confused because it's all abstract
math and so well I understand that you
want to make sure at the end that the
units match up on both sides of the
equation but I don't see what would be
an examp example of something in
mathematical physics say the standard
model we set C equals to one and H equal
to one and so on yeah and it's the most
predictive of all the models that we
have you're just choosing a specific
type of units in which you're doing the
calculation because they're more
convenience that that's what you're
doing okay what I mean is I don't know
if you saw the iceberg and string theory
that I did they understood more about
String Theory by looking at that than
talking to actual theorist okay he give
me an overview that it was better than
what other people give so go thank you
thank you at any rate at some point you
get n equals 4 super Yang Mills theory
in four dimensions and so on and
there're different results so what I'm
saying is in those results is there
something that they're doing that is
incorrect now outside of the complaint
that there is no super symmetry that we
find and this is assuming strings that a
base even though what I just said was
not assuming strings the Yang Mills case
but you get the idea so what's something
that is quite advanced in mathematical
sophistication that is incorrect
understand that for us to gain insight
into what this is saying what this means
reintroducing units is useful correct
but is there something wrong at the
mathematical level like is there
something that we've gotten incorrect I
get you so there becomes a little tricky
because that's not my job so to be able
to make that claim I would have to know
string Theory enough to be able to say
that or any other physical Theory I
don't have the the level of knowledge
that you know that any that but I can
tell you this remember when I was
talking about the real numbers the
assumption that we have to put there are
very idealized right and there is no way
that those all those assumptions are
going to hold if we are looking at
something at plank
scale and if you remember before I said
that the hard part was getting the
ordering right was not getting the real
numbers it's getting the ordering right
and so what needs to happen is that when
you go at PL scale you are going to lose
completely the notion of ordering which
also means you're not going to be able
to Define real numbers for things that
you go and measure because you're not
going to have ordered quantities so I
don't know what structure we're going to
have because I don't have enough
constraints to know what what needs to
happen I don't know what are the things
that I can assume to be valid at that
scale but I know that at that scale the
assumption that you need for the real
numbers are going to implode and
therefore I if I have a theory that says
oh yes this is going to be going to work
at plant scales and I see that they're
still using uh real numbers for
quantities they're using integration
right because how how can you have a
differentiable structure if you don't
have the structure of the real numbers
underneath right so all these pieces
that assume underneath the the the real
numbers and I I'm pretty sure all those
pieces are going to go so if you have a
theory whatever it is that that claims
oh this is going to work at plan scale
and it's still using differential
geometry real numbers and so
on from what I know I would be extremely
skeptical right but can't tell you any
specific Theory because I would have to
go and look at the I I can't what about
direct equation does it not assume the
real numbers it's a differential
equation yeah and that is also about the
quantum so how does that
work if it's easier to go to Klein
Gordon feel free to go go to Klein
Gordon doesn't any of them it doesn't
matter so the the issue there is that
you are doing even in quto mechanics
you're still using real numbers right so
you're still
making this assumption that you have
references and you can put them up and
you have a scale that it's perfect and
you know what what number is greater and
and below and uh and so yes these
structure I I would think that they have
to fail as well they fail at what point
like what does it mean that they have to
fail
experimentally that they do not uh so
here's how I think of physical theories
which is at this point very different
from what people think about the
different for me is I have a system in
front of me and I assume that I can that
some things are valid for this system so
for
example uh let's say uh in uh in Electro
electr magnes we have the the charge
distribution right and you think that as
a charge a field that is a charge
density okay well that's not what we
measure in practice right what we
measure is fin a charge and a finite
volume and then we measure the size of
the finite volume and then we can make
the ratio of the charge within the size
of the volume and then we make this you
know things smaller and smaller smaller
right and on the assumption that both
quantities are additive that is if I
take a volume I divide it into two right
then the total charge is the charge of
this plus the charge of this and the
total volume is the you know the the the
size of this plus the size of this if I
have that assumption and I make this
limit I can define a charge density
right but if I can't do that because I
can't make this limit or uh the the
additivity does not hold I'm not going
to be able to use this assumption
therefore I'm not going to be able to
say oh yes there isuse a charge density
because you see the charge density is
not the thing that physically exists the
things that physically exist is the
finite charge in finite volume and and
this is where we have all the math that
we have for physics backwards as what it
should be because all the math and we do
our Point set topology or differential
geometry all that you start with points
and then you define infinitesimal things
on points and then you integrate but
that's not what we do in uh in in a lab
in lab we start with a finite thing and
then we say oh yeah yeah I'm going to
make this thing smaller and smaller and
and then that's where you get the points
and so on but the points and all the
things exist because you're assuming you
can make the limit yes so now if you
start with the math and you assume the
points you already assume that you can
make the limits but if you can't make
that limit because at some point you get
to plant scale or because for example
the mass is not really additive in into
volume because you you have something
that goes on the surface between them so
is not true that the the sum the total
of the math is just the sum of of the
mass in the volume same for entropy your
entropy sums only if you're assuming
that things are are independent if
they're not independent that assumption
right so this is again this is my game I
need to understand what are the things
that I'm assuming at the top level such
that I can make those limits and I can
Define the the points and the
mathematical objects right and so what
does it mean that a theory is applicable
in a specific case oh it's just we I the
system that I have in front of me
happens to
satisfies those assumptions that I'm
making so do I have a classical system
in front of me well does it satisfy
infinite TMA reducibility inde
dependence of degree of freedom
deterministic reversibility and
kinematic equivalence yes I can model it
as a classical system no I cannot
modeling model it as a as a classical
system I has to use something else so
the fact that you can infinitely divide
a classical system doesn't imply points
still in the theory yes but it doesn't
mean that we have points in the reality
uhhuh so this would be a great time to
talk about what defines quantum
mechanics so go over the Litany of what
people usually say separates a Quantum
system from a classical system and then
show why that is false you have a set of
videos by the way which I'll put on
screen about this I don't I I've never
seen and this is was my problem that's
why I I started all these business is
that I never found somebody that tell me
oh for this system use classical
mechanics and for this system use
quantum mechanics I mean you have
examples oh you know if you have a
proton double SLE experiment then you
have to use these things but but physics
at the end of the day if you think about
it it's not like mathematics that you
have like one overarching Theory and
they say okay these are things that are
valid for everything right set theory
and and logic or category theory if you
like category Theory because I don't say
that people from category Theory H and
then you say okay these are the things
that are that we always need to assume
and then you're going to have
topological spaces and then we're going
to have groups and then you have things
that are both groups and topological
spaces and we call them topological
group so you have a whole hierarchy of
sort of things that you assume in a sort
of welldefined sort of uh um uniform way
of looking at things in physics you have
classical mechanics and when do you use
it oh where I have bees on a wire where
I have planets and stuff like that and
then you have thermodynamics oh I use
that you know when I have the volumes
and the gas and the Heat and then I have
uh relativistic mechanics oh I I guess I
use that when things are really fast and
then I have gravit so it's basically you
learn when you do Physics degree you
learn a bunch of problems and you learn
to recognize patterns and then you know
oh I have your problem or this problem
is closest to this one and so I'm going
to use those things right and uh and
this is what I find completely
unsatisfying so when I was a summer
student C in 1999 that I was sort of
asking myself that's where where I met
my wife there H well future wife it
wasn't my wife at the time but uh the
the point was that okay I you know I I I
was studying engineering at the time I
wasn't doing physics and I just you know
wanted to know like what are these
things I wasn't really going to to to
read you know to to the so I said okay
I'm in AER there's a big library and
what I'm sure I'm sure that what there
is going to be a book a textbook that in
the first chapter is going to tell me oh
this is what Quantum systems are and
this is why you should use this thing
and of course I went through 20 30 books
and I found so no such why don't you ask
someone I asked somebody I I got no
answers yeah yeah yeah you got no
answers or you got unsatisfactory
answers I got the answers well I don't
know I can tell you I this B
well it obviously wasn't a great enough
answer that it stuck with you oh there
was no answer like the the the most
professors that all the professors that
I talked to they admitted not having an
answer and they just point me some to
some somewhere else oh B did some stuff
go read that I have no idea and actually
the turning point for me was when a PhD
student at the time told me look you're
never going to find these answers so the
only thing that we have is the math I
can teach you the math and so he taught
me the math and I learned the math badly
like all all physicist and and it then
stayed there for me okay why do I have
that math right and uh and then okay
that's reverse engineer the math that's
sort of how physical mathematics how
reverse physics started and then I
realized well I need to actually
understand the math a lot better and
that's why but anyway we're talking
about quantum mechanics so let me tell
you what I think quantum mechanics is
and um so the short story is this is
that classical mechanics assumes that
you can take something divided divided
divided divided and you can still talk
about what what things are and studying
the the the the part all the parts is
equivalent to studying the whole so if
you have a ball you can you can throw
the ball look how the ball evolves and
describe the ball or you can take a red
marker and put a red dot on the ball and
study the motion of the Red Dot on the
ball right and so starting the motion of
the whole ball is equivalent to starting
all the possible Red Dot that you could
put on the ball all possible finite
sizes okay right because infinitees is
just the limit of all the possible
finite sizes and so when you have all
the possible fining size dimension
that's that's how you the reason I keep
having this as a sticking point is
because infinite tmal doesn't mean point
it means it's as close as you can get to
a point without being a point right so
this opens a a all another word is how
do we Define calculus because I don't
think you know when I'm doing physical
mathematics I will need to Define calcul
at some point and I don't think the
starting points that we have for
calculus can be physically motivated I
want to have a notion infinitesimal that
it's similar to what you know we Newton
used to
think uh and right now if you look at
the books of how differential geometry
is defined you you really don't have
those things you have completely
different definition that even when I
talk to other mathematicians that do
topology for example like I I was at a
conference a topology conference talking
to one of the students and ask you know
why why are you ining topology and one
of the reasons that he said was because
the definition of differential geometry
were too abstract for him and made no
sense do a mathematician to somebody who
has a PHD St so if if they too abstract
for him you can imagine for somebody you
know that has a a physics or engineering
background so I'm trying to understand
how how we can how we can actually
Define things in a way that are sort of
you know similar to this idea of of
pieces that become smaller but they
actually can we can we can do it with
modern math so we we we would Define it
in a way that a modern mathematician
will look and said okay yeah this is
rigorous this actually works right but
this is a whole other problem so we're
at physics right now we don't care
exactly what the infinite means but it's
this intuition that you had it's
something small but but it's not zero
because if it's zero and then we have
all points that are zero Dimension how
do we get the whole again okay so
getting to the bowling ball and you can
mark it with all these different points
or mark it with a finite finite but but
whatever size you want so it's arbitrary
as smaller as you can and so at that
point it means essentially describing
all the points and so on okay so this is
classical mechanics and in one way or
another in all that you do in In
classical mechanic mechanics you are
going to have this thing so oh just a
moment is this classical mechanics in
conjunction with thermodynamics yet or
is this just pure classical mechanics
it's pure classical mechanics okay so we
need to distinguish those two is that do
you in your head call that pure
classical mechanics whereas the other
one where there's the Heisenberg
uncertainty analog is something more CM
plus T
thermodynamics uh yeah so the
thermodynamics enters so this is where I
cannot give you a straight answer
because in my mind the distinction is is
yet not clear because you can
understand uh think one physical thing
and one mathematical thing physically
you can understand if I say that I what
I'm really studying are objects and I'm
looking at these parts and so on there
is already a sense that uh well I'm kind
of doing some statistics there so
exactly what is it that I'm doing I
don't know is it enough to get right I I
don't know and but what I can tell you
is yes is that this is another thing
that I think uh you know we look at it
backwards we think as statistical
mechanics and thermodynamics as
something that you add on top of both
classical mechanics and quantum
mechanics right so there is mechanics
which is the real thing and you do
statistical mechanics thermodynamics
it's all sort of deriv the derivative
thing it's not really fundament but
here's the thing as I said remember that
counter states that we need to Define to
to have classical mechanics class class
H mechanics well that's the geometrical
structure of of of classical mechanics
it's the simplec forms that allow you
essentially to count the configuration
to counter the states okay so that
thing is what you use then to calculate
thermodynamic entropy so you use that
structure to calculate the entropy now
if I gave you all possible distributions
probability distribution in face space
and I told you what was the entropy of
all those distributions like the the
shanon entropy Gibbs entropy you would
be able to recover the simplec
structure so the simplec structure and
the entropy are equivalent because
either I give you one and you can
calculate the other or I give you the
other and you calculate the first one
interesting so the geometrical structure
of quantum of classical mechanics is
exactly the structure that you need to
be able to do thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics so how can you say
that one is built on top of the other
they're really one unit the same applies
for quantum mechanics the geometrical
part of quantum mechanics is given by
the born rule the inner product tells
you what is the probability from going
from one state to another state during
measurement okay you use the born rule
to calculate the voman entropy the
entropy of of distribution now if you
take all distribution in fact if you
take in particular the uh uh the uniform
distribution over two pure States and
you look at that entropy from that
entropy you can recover the probability
of transition from one to the
other so again I could give you the uh
geometric inner product structure of of
quantum mechanics and you can recover
the entropy or I can give you the
entropy and you can recover the the
inner product they are equivalent so
again how can you tell me oh Quanto
statistical mechanics is something that
we sprinkle on top of of quantum
mechanics they're really much more tied
in so that's why you know I I I can't
make these argument fully because again
this is where I said I I need this
theory of ensembles I need something
that is more foundational to be able to
say why I have these things how exactly
they are they are related or not so
what's interesting to me is classical
mechanics seems more objective than
Notions of entropy entropy is subjective
to me because it depends on macro States
so you can Define macro States in any
which way you can say what are all the
different Arrangements of chairs in this
room but you could also say what are all
the different Arrangements of the lights
or not even Arrangements you could have
something else so there's something that
seems quite subjective about entropy
it's never sat right with me but then
there seems to be something ideal and
objective about classical mechanics now
I could just be incorrect about
entropy keep in mind that for me
statistical mechanics was an easier
course than thermodynamics and I don't
like this liquid notion of of entropy
and heat the the whole fluid mechanics
analogies when I got to statistical
mechanics it made much more sense to me
so one of the important piece that
uh thermodynamics really pushes you in
your face is that you need to define the
boundary of the
system so even if you have the same
physical system
but you have a different way that you
interact with that physical system you
have a different physical system so
entropy like thermodynamic entropy the
one that is important for us physically
depends on the way that you can interact
with the system because if you think it
like this that the whole idea of
theonomics is figuring out how much work
you can extract or put in in the system
well it will depend by how you can
interact with the system so James is the
one that really sort of uh made this
clear James James uhuh he had an example
one of his article that basically says
you know he was talking about salt
crystals and you can say I have a can
have a salt crystal and I would have a
certain number of thermodynamic
variables but I can I can put a
polarization on the on the salt crystal
and now the the the states that I'm
going to have the micro states that I'm
going to have will depend on on the
polarization so PR before I had
unpolarized States and I have polarized
states which are more because then you
can say I can do the next uh you know
instead of linear polarization you can
make I don't remember the quadruple
there you go and and now you have a
different set of systems you have more
right you have more more systems and the
entropy associated with those States is
going to be different than the the
entropy that you so this I think where
uh you have a feeling that it's some
sort of subjective yeah because it
depends on how you course scen
no it's not course scening it's how you
have to find the boundary of the
system and once you define the boundar
of the system you say I'm going to
interact with the system in this way
that's the definition of the system but
but this is true for all systems okay so
if I say I have a classical mechanic I
have a cannon ball and I studi the
motion of the canon ball everything
seems so objective yes right but because
we're on Earth if I put the Cannonball
on the surface of the Sun you're not
going to be able to talk about the
motion of the Cannonball so even when
you def classical system you you have an
ocean I have a boundary somewhere wait
why wouldn't I be able to talk about the
motion of the cannonball in the sun
because it would just vaporize and you
have no can Okay okay right and and so
with just saying I have a cannonball
you're putting a constraint on the
environment that you have you're going
to have a certain temperature pressure
you're going to have some sort of
equilibria with the environment that
allows you to be able to talk about a
cannibal interesting right and this is
true for classical mechanics and quantum
mechanics as well if I say oh I have an
electron and it's polarized spin up well
means that at some level I'm going to
have some magnetic trap where my
electron is with the external magnetic
field oriented vertically so that my
spin can be
up right if I have if I if I have it
oriented in the other way I wouldn't be
able to so that that's the idea and and
I think that's what it's actually
missing from the rest of physics you see
it's not that thermodynamic is weird
because you have to talk about the
boundary and no it's a on the other
system you're already making some
outrageous simplifying assumptions and
then you don't think about it I see and
then you say oh thermodynamics is so
weird no it's like you've put yourself
in the simplest case possible the case
where isolated right hamiltonian
mechanics where you're completely
isolated which means there is no
interaction with the assign your system
is completely closed that's the harder
assumption that that you would have in
practice because nothing is really ever
properly isolated what happens on the
surface of Jupiter will have an
influence of what we you know on your
system but you're going to say well you
know what it's small enough I'm going
ignore it but you are ignoring it and
and the problem is that is that if you
don't take these assumptions out and you
think about it you don't even know what
you ignore and then you're going to
generalize both your mathematical
structure your physics and so on two
realm of applicabilities that that don't
work anymore because because you don't
know what your realm applicability was
in the first
place Okay so we've gallivanted Around
The Cannonball let's go back to what
distinguishes quantum mechanics from
classical mechanics yes okay so uh we
said the classical mechanics is the
thing that I can think of made of small
pieces and everything works and I can
study this pieces as small as I want I
have absolutely no
problem and then you say okay uh but now
I have an electron I have an electron I
want to start the electron I can't take
a red marker and say oh I I'll put this
dot on the electron right you can't say
uh you know how do we measure electrons
I don't know you have electrons you you
scatter some photom off of it these are
the type of experiment that you do you
can't just say oh I'm going to scatter
the electron but of only of this person
right no either you interact with the
whole of of the electron or none of the
electron and is that actually what
defines a
particle I would think yes right
and and again it's uh how can I say it
depends on the
circumstance so if I'm talking about a
proton right at a certain skin at a
certain level of
energy the the the photon comes in
interacts with the whole thing and is
not going to tell me anything about the
substructure so in those particular
setting I would say aha my proton is
irreducible meaning not that there is no
substructure is that I can't probe it so
anything that I can describe is only
only at the level of the whole object
and there is no physical process that
depends on the
substructure if I am in those conditions
I can say my object is
irreducible but then I say okay now I
take photons and I probe the same object
at higher energy now I can probe the
substructure and now the thing is not a
single particle is not a single Quantum
system because I can probe the inside so
I can't just use a single wave function
the proton is not a single particle at
that point ex but the substructures they
are single particles right now it's a
mess it's a little bit of a mess to tell
you what the proton in my wife actually
studies the the uh the structure of the
proton especially on on the spin side
and the whole there is a whole problem
of the spin crisis there it's a it's
very complicated but you can't describe
the proton as a single particle and so
now you have an electron right an
electron we haven't found any scale any
energy level at which uh we can see an
internal structure so we can always
assume at least so far that the electron
is a a single reducible thing because
there is not nothing that uh that we can
set but maybe in a 100 years somebody
very clever will find a way strings
underneath I whatever and that it's not
going to be a single L now in the
example of strings you don't say the
electron is made of multiple strings you
would say that one string in some
vibrational mode is the electron so
would that be a substructure would that
technically be a substructure no okay
then forget about strings what I mean is
let's say there's something else that a
mini electron inside the electron in
order for you to be reducible do you
have to have more than one subp part or
can you just have a smaller part well
the whole has to be the sum of the parts
so as as long as you have one part
you're going to have another part that
you have to put together but then you're
also assuming that In classical
mechanics you're assuming that you can
give a state to each part independently
from the other because you're saying the
sum of the parts is setting the parts in
independently is the same the studing
the whole thing and this is not true in
quantum mechanics right so if I have a
two particles that are entangled that
system is irreducible even if there are
two particles that system is irreducible
I can't describe the system as oh there
are two parts and I can interact one
parts and study the motion of one part
no you can't do it so quantum mechanics
has a way to compose things and still be
irreducible right and so if you have
something in side what's going to happen
is that you're going to have multiple
parts and then you're going to have so
here the the Assumption what what I'm I
still have to prove again as I said
before we get to Quantum Mechanics is
sort of a physics hod pody way I'd like
to do it very precisely because I want
to be assured that there is only one way
to create this quantized objects and
right now I don't know that there is
only one way and this is why you don't
believe reductionism even though it's
associated with physics is ultimately
ultimately should be associated with
physics maybe it shouldn't same with
mechanisms no it's it's fine to have
reduction but you have to assume that uh
your physics description at some point
will stop because either we'll assume I
have a fundamental structure or in the
case of quantum mechanics I I I can't
observe below this threshold that this
is the level at which I can manipulate
the system yeah what I mean is
ultimately fundamental physics should be
about what's at the fundament so what is
irreducible and if it's what's
irreducible then it can't be reduced and
it can't be described with reductionism
right yes yeah so the point is that
either I have a a a system that that is
reducible which I I would think it's
just quantum mechanics right or I do not
but then what you're doing is just
putting the level of the irreducible
system below with right tell me about
the early 2000s now you said in 1999 you
started to think about these problems as
to what classifies a Quantum system
versus a classical or a thermodynamic
system Etc and now it's a couple years
later take us through your academic
journey and where you are in your mental
framework oh uh so I got my degree in
engineering I I was a software engineer
just because I started doing software
when I was eight and nine and when I was
the choice to do physics engineering I
said I'll do engineering first I I have
much more stable job there and and then
I had the intuition which turned out to
be correct that I will learn more things
I'm a generalist at heart so in
engineering I uh ER I studied uh control
theory information Theory uh uh System
Theory like a lot of different things
and a lot of the idea that I got from
from there actually stuck and and I I I
I I basically used every every intuition
from every I really like seeing the the
things for multiple angles and that's
why in the reverse physics I never like
to have just one uh uh condition I like
to have like so for classicon Mechanics
for one degree of I have 12 conditions
that I can say oh this is equivalent to
this and this is equivalent to this I I
really like from what are some of those
12 well four the four physical one we
already discussed uh determin
reversibility in terms of count
States conservation information entropy
conservation of uh uh thermodynamic
entropy which means reversibility in the
thic level and conservation of
uncertainty for Peck distribution those
are a physical one for uh for the
mathematical ones there are the the the
set of equations that you that you have
H you have the fact that volumes are
conserved the fact that densities are
conserved the fact that the flow is
incompressible if if you look at a phas
space how the flows goes around you take
an area this flow is
incompressible uh and then that the
simplec structure is preserved that the
pom brackets are preserved and then if
you take the flow rotate it 90 degrees
in face space the curl of that flow is
zero H I think they should be all that
but anyway so that that's that's what I
like doing because the more HS you have
the more intuition you get and you can
tie things a lot together because now I
know that oh the curl of the flow is
somehow related to the conservation of
information entropy right why is that
and then you look oh that's what's what
happening and take us through some more
of those insights that you've had where
you've examined something it could be
physics related but it could also be
math or computer science related or even
artist even you're a musician as well
even music related where you thought you
understood something realized you didn't
and then you observed it from multiple
angles and gain yeah yeah yeah so the
the most beautiful thing it's
where it's when you don't even think
that there is an explanation and then
you find it because that's totally
surprised so when we do physics we are
taught that the math is the stuff for
mathematicians right and we you know
discrete continuous what it's it's a
topology what is this it's and and and
again because I uh I wanted to re
understand these things I said okay I
need to understand what what topology is
and what I found was that there is this
link
between as I said verifiable statements
to uh to non two two open setes in
anthropology for somebody who knows not
know what anthropology is anthropology
is essentially a collection of sets for
which you can do a finet
intersection and an arbitrary un so you
have two sets you can do the fire
intersection three sets you can do but
you can't do it now there is this
translation between set theory and logic
where an intersection becomes the end
and as we said before if I have two
verifiable statement I can make the
finite conjunction the finite end which
becomes the finite intersection in the
topology or if I have a um verifiable
statement I can also test the or because
as long as I have nend statement one
terminates successfully I can say oh
that the disjunction is true and you can
test an ultimate an infinite amount of
ORS and that's the issue how many ORS
can I test because the thing is that I
need to find one element of the ore and
then I can and can drop out so if I have
countably many ores I can go and find
the one that terminates and stop but if
I have more than countably many I'm not
going to be able to do it so the
verifiable statements are closed under
the countable or right and now you see
oh there is a little bit of a difference
between the topology because the
topology tells you arbitrary or like
arbitrary Union but then you think okay
but I want my theory to be physically
explorable with uh with tests yes and
even if I give you an unlimited amount
of time the most that you're going to be
able to do is test countably many now if
you truly wanted it to be physical
wouldn't you say that it has to you put
some bound like some beckenstein bound
or some informational bound because we
only have this universe and so there'll
be the heat dep at some point and so you
put Graham's number as the ultimate
large
number yeah but remember we're creating
models when we create physical theories
we create models that are valid under
certain assumptions right so why are you
going to worry about that when at the
end of the day I'm going to worry that
I'm gonna say that I have a system that
is isolated so in other words we
currently think that the universe will
end in a heat death we don't know
because that's already assuming some
physical model so let's just say finite
and not think about all the interactions
and what I mean is that when people want
to say some large number they'll usually
say that's 10 to the 600 and that's
larger than the amount of atoms there
are in the universe they'll usually use
the number of atoms yes or maybe it
should be the number of interactions
between atoms which is a much larger
number but it doesn't matter there
exists some finite bound I believe it
could be could be Graham number yes
you're saying even to calculate Graham's
number as the largest finite bound
assume some other physical Theory and
we're trying to not assume that so we're
just going to say finite not a
particular number that's
finite no I I'm saying that I I'm
perfectly fine to assume that there are
infinitely many things because it's in
the model and in the model I can assume
that there are infinitely many things
even it's like the thermodynamic limit
you make the thermodynamic limit you say
you have infinitely many particle what
do you mean I really mean a large amount
of particles but still in the math
you're going to do the limit with
infinity it's what is the problem you do
it you know that you're making a model
so the model doesn't have to be
factually correct the model has to be a
good approximation of of what you do
then in in science you also have another
problem is that you assume repr
reproducibility if you assume
reproducibility you're already saying I
can do it one more time yeah and if you
assume I can do it one more time you're
already getting Infinity I see can we
ever do something one more time
technically speaking technically
speaking I know as I'm gonna die so no
but in the model you assume that you
assume well okay I'm not going to be
able to do it somebody else like really
we want to put the physical theory that
you know the the Sun is going to expand
and destroy the the like it's a model so
I I don't see the problem of uh so the
problem is that again you need a
justification to say that this model
like you need to know when the model
holds and and so you're basically your
model is okay I'm gonna have an infinite
amount of time I will have all these
tests it's not even infinite you see
it's arbitrary large which is not
infinite and if I have a procedure that
has to cope for an arbitrary large
amount of time because I can always do
something one more time you still need
to give me an algorithm that have you
know countably many possible tests that
that it can run even if you're not going
to run all of them but but the whole
thing defined on arbitrary n arbitrary
time is defined on countably man so at
this point in your journey it's 2010 or
oh no this I figured out in
200 how was it I don't know 17 okay so
this is quite recent okay that you were
thinking about the so the the whole the
whole thing worked like this up until
2012 which is when I moved to Michigan I
was sort of fcing around by myself
reading book auditing classes on Quantum
field Theory reading book Quantum I I
had
absolutely
no uh uh uh will interest to do any of
this I was happy to do essentially uh
um engineering within a big Computing so
I I I went at CERN and then I remained
in uh sort of big particle accelerator
and I was
doing databases uh uh wide area network
uh uh data
distribution security cyber security a
lot of different things Control Systems
uh I I I did a lot of these things in
2012 so wasn't actually particle physics
well I was in support of particle
physics what I mean is look we can work
on creating a TV show or we could work
on ensuring that the HDMI cables are
plugged into the right place they're
both working on the TV show te I'm
working within the experimen working on
the the software infrastructure that
they have or I'm working at a facility
that provides the uh the acceleration
for example in I don't remember when it
was 2008 2009 something like that I was
a brook National Lab they were creating
a new light source a light source is
basically something where uh you
accelerate a bunch of electrons and then
you shake the electrons to uh generate
photons and then those are very high
energy photons that then people use to
do crystallography all sorts of things
so it's a facility that you go you are a
researcher somewhere you have your
experiment you uh uh book your beam line
for two weeks you come there your things
you attach it you gather your data and
then then you disappear and I was there
sort of at the moment of construction H
working on the control systems working
on UI part of the control system working
on the protocol of communication with
and you were studying physics in the on
my spare time on your spare time yes
okay stealing books from all these other
people and so and also I was auditing uh
Quantum Fu theory in at Stonybrook which
is the University closer to there and so
at some point I I started you know
attending classes to see you learn learn
then I I moved in but again it was just
a hobby for me and I had no yeah I had
no uh interest or inclination I didn't
think it was my job anyway like I I
don't have the background for doing
these things and so then what happened
in 2012 we moved to Michigan and that's
where sort of the things about the four
different ways of uh thinking about H
turning mechanics clicked okay but you
had to have been doing research in that
so you were doing research in your spare
time or you were paid to do this
research no in my spare time I was just
reading book and trying to figure things
out Ah that's it and
uh it's kind of my B my mind was doing
that by itself like I it's like having a
background process I kept going uh like
I you know I see uh uh I would uh uh uh
my mind would think about these things
while dreaming and then you wake up and
say oh we figure out this stuff it's all
like this completely not not driven by
me it was like the Curiosity of my brain
and okay I'll give you some stuff and
yeah and um Tsing around completely then
in 2012 where was where I sort of some
things started to click on the classical
mechanic side before I mean before that
I was really more interested in Quantum
and then at some point it dawned on me
right that what I really wanted W want
was essentially have this dictionary
between the math and the physics right
what is the the physics represent and I
realized that to really be sure that the
diary was working I would have to go
from the physics to the math because if
I that's the only way that I know that
the dictionary is complete if from the
physics I'm able to recover the math
because if I not able to do that or I
don't know whether I can do that I don't
know whether I figured out all the
physical concept and then at that point
it dawn on me I can't do this for
classical mechanics either so it's not
that I don't understand quantum
mechanics it's I don't understand
classical mechanics I don't understand
thermody I understand anything and so
sort of that was one the first AA moment
that I paid more attention to classical
mechanics in 2012 was where I started
putting some something oh maybe even
more I don't know I would have to go and
read the but at some point those things
clicked on the classical mechanic side
and at that moment
I was still on the idea you know this is
not my job this is my not my field I
just need to find somebody who who
understands this and they can write a
paper and I don't care and uh I couldn't
find anybody to be interested lots of
strange things but anyway I couldn't
find anybody could be bothered to to
understand or to care about the physical
motivation of classical
mechanics uh which is confirmed later by
the difficulty of publishing this type
of thought but that's that's another
story so I I did that then at some point
uh sort of the the work that I was doing
as a contractor on the control system of
the
brook
fizzled and and that's the the moment
that basically said okay uh you know I
have this thing uh clearly you know if I
want to do something with it I have to
do it myself I'm never going to be able
to find somebody who takes it and does
something and so I started um auditing
class
and doing
this uh more but still in my spare time
and in a more structured way and uh with
my wife also who is a professor in
physics so she's really more academic
than me and the first thing that I did
was a proof of
concept uh we got some seed money from
the
University ER and we also involved a
person in the physics department in the
math department and a person in the
physics department
and there for me was really can we make
like a proof of concept that we can go
from scratch and get to classical and
particle mechanic a proof of concept of
the assumptions of physics project
basically yes before it was even titled
assumptions of physics correct and this
is again my I guess my engineering
thinking you know before doing something
you do an MVP yes right and so I did
that and that's where you know I I
drilled it through topology and S I said
okay this this starts making sense I can
actually like I know it can be done and
then from there I shift in and shifting
more work towards this and now I'm
basically doing it
fulltime and the reason that I'm doing
it fulltime also today is
because last uh
um summer we got a a grant from the John
Templeton foundations that allowed me uh
it's actually the first grant that we
were able to to to to do for this
because there is really no money for
this type of thing and they're finding a
small part in into this whole Enterprise
it sounds like what you're doing is
similar to foundations of quantum
mechanics and there's money for that not
much what would be the classification of
what you
do uh foundations of physics it's really
Foundation of physics and there are some
TI in with also foundations of math and
and philosophy of science it's it's
really the the that it's that it's in
the middle because the game is figuring
out when I have a problem first I need
to understand is it phys philosophical
problem mathematical problem or or or
physical problem you at the beginning
you said oh you you don't just go and
look at the philosophy say you that's
because I first of all I need to to to
identify where the problem is so for
example there is a lot of liter Phil in
philosophy that uh takes for face value
what what the physicist say that
Newtonian mechanics LR mechanics and and
hilon mechanics are equivalent because
of course you're a philosopher you read
this in almost every textbook you're
gonna say okay this is what the
physicists conclude I'll go and do it
and do my my thing but then I look at it
and say okay wait a minute wait wait a
minute lran and hamiltonian mechanics
are fully identified by one function on
the state while uh
newtonium mechanics is identified by the
forces which is one force for at De
freedom and uh I I can't have a diff
morphis the things are not equivalent if
I have n functions I can't just go to
one function in a continuous way and and
come back so there's something fishy
there and and again that's the math that
is telling me and then the math is is
informing with that so you go on the
physics and you figure out oh wait a
second when you go and derrive lran
mechanics and hamiltonan mechanics in
the book there is always an assumption
of conservative forces are we ever able
to relax that condition and of course
not and turns out that the Assumption of
conservative forces is so strong that
you take essentially let's say an N
dimensional problem into a
onedimensional problem so you discarded
a lot of stuff there right so and and
again that then we you know what the
physic is and then you okay you want to
go back to the math and say can I get
from these you know different physical
assumption can I go and reget the
different math and then it turns out you
can right and so if you if you're not
well informed on all three subjects I
don't mean you know so well informed I
if you don't have a general sense you
can't put your head as a mathematician
and think like a mathematician put
yourself aside a philosopher and think
like a philosopher you're never going to
be able to to solve this because you
don't know where the problem is right
it's like I have a software problem and
I try to fix it in the hardware you're
never going to solve it because it's a
software problem so here is the same if
I have the math that is wrong you're not
going to be able to fix the physics or
if you have the philosophy that is wrong
uh the math and the physics you you're
interpreted incorrectly they can do
whatever they want but you're never
going to get to the right answer yeah
you and I both share this generalist
mindset yeah exct yeah so you mentioned
you had difficulty publishing yes
explain
because the stuff that I'm interested is
not what most people are interested in
and I'm interested in it I know that's
that's why I have the YouTube channel
because I find that there the YouTube
channel is actually what keeps me saying
because I see that there are people that
have exactly the same question as me and
and from these like simple comment I
always suspected that these things were
different I can I can feel the
frustration of these people that went
through classes like I did the professor
who is in a hurry who doesn't have the
time to think about all these things
deeply and quite frankly he has his own
research he has to get the Grant and he
going to tell you some answer and you
kind of feel that that answer doesn't
satisfy you if there's something fishy
but you have to take your exam and you
have to move on and get a job and you
never have the time to sit there and
think and basically the idiot that
stayed there will sit on the time and
sit there and think right and and I know
that there are people that that are
interested in this thing but it's not
what you get grants for and if if you
don't get grants for it then you don't
have people that work in the field so
it's not that people aren't interested
in it or that researchers aren't
interested in it because this podcast
has a large platform of researchers who
are interested in similar subjects as
you and myself hopefully it's that the
grant agencies aren't interested in it
yes and it has been happening for so
long that the people that were
interested in these topics either they
didn't get an academic job or they had
to switch their
topic you know follow the money right so
what can be
done uh find people that give me lots of
money no like seriously it's I I I don't
know I really don't know like what what
I'm trying to do is uh again through the
channel through the activity I'm just
trying to find a community of people
that uh that sort of can help me you
know uh push and and and work on the
project because as I said like the the
ambition is oh we have to go from
scratch we derive all the math from
scratch all the physics it's an
outrageously large amount of work I
can't do it uh you know all by myself do
you analogize what you're doing to what
berch and Russell did with math trying
to find the foundations the axima
foundations it's it's a as I said it has
a similar feeli to a foundation of
mathematics and Foundation of computer
science like they both have a foundation
where the foundation is not find the
theorem of everything or the algorithm
of everything but is is to find okay
what is math how do we do proofs right
and what can do with a proof right or
what is a a computer what is a
computation device what can we do with
those things what what classes of
problems are so it's a different sort of
atiz than say axima Quantum field Theory
correct yes because I'm asking okay in
the same way what is a math proof what
is a computation what is a physical
Theory what are the minimal requirements
that a a physical Theory must have
therefore what is the space of physical
Theory and what phys physical Theory can
we possibly have and not and within this
context we put there all the theories
that we have so that they are classified
and categorized and res systematized
in the same way that mathematics is
systematized and computer science is
systematized yeah now suppose someone
with funding was watching this and was
saying okay is this more than just a
theoretical interest is there something
that you see that is practical that can
come from this such as for instance when
people were funding research more
fundamental than quantum mechanics to
qft to whatever may come Beyond they're
thinking in terms of an analogy to to
World War II where they invented the
bomb because of Investigations into phys
okay so they're thinking can some new
technology emerge from understanding
what general relativity would be like
combined with the standard model
something like that I have no idea
that's the first honest answer uh what I
know is that
first you need uh it's going to
have it's going to make teaching physics
a lot better because again you're going
to know what you're talking about and
usually usually knowing what you're
talking about helps communicating more
effectively and the other thing and this
is my feeling is that uh I can't see a
way for us to uh go past the current
theory and do the theories that people
want to do that unify things and so on
WE without doing this this work and I'll
tell you like this so imagine that you
are in the late 18 unds you studed
classical mechanics and therefore you
well I don't know if you knew manifold
per se because that maybe the concept
wasn't so cure but you have you know
that that's how you thought thought
about things with points and so on could
you imagine knowing that could you
predict the hilber spaces of quantum
mechanics the projections postul and all
this no because the mathematic is so
different the approach to the theory is
so different like the jump from
classical mechanics of to Quantum
Mechanics is too far for you to be able
to say oh yeah I I want to quantize
things I'm going to need this thing and
there at least we had the experiments
that we could do both in statistical
mechanics and then you know that tells
you okay well we need something
different and there are some hints and
so on and then it was you know just cram
some math together oh it's kind of
working then it evolved right now let's
say that okay now we want to have a
theory for plank scale or whatever those
everything to me I expect the same jump
that we had from classical mechanics
quantum mechanics and so I'm expecting
the method we need to do be completely
different uh Lord knows what it is as I
said the no differential geometry
topology I don't know what time we're
going to have a topology because that's
we need to to connect to experimental
verification but and so I can't imagine
that we just get the math that we have
right now generalized by mathematicians
to solve their math problems not for the
for the physic problems so it's not
generalized with an intent oh we are
relaxing some physical assumption we're
putting others right and I think it's
it's going to be very unlikely that
we're just going to have this magnitude
of experimental data that we had for
quantum
mechanics so from my perspective if we
don't go back and re understand
everything we re understand exactly
what's happening from classical to
Quantum such that we can have an an idea
principal idea what needs to happen next
I I I don't see it happening and again
it's not a direct thing like because I
can't work on that first first I need I
I need to it's like really you want to
build a a a a building that is taller
right that allows you to see further
that's what the the the the the the
ultimate Theory The Theory of Everything
Is Not that the Foundation it's the top
floor you want the top floor very high
so you can see everything and do
everything very good you need the
sturdier foundation on top to build
higher and this is the work that I'm
doing I'm trying to reand when you're
doing the foundation you're not going to
redo the foundation only for the top
floor you need to redo the foundation
for all the floors in between so all the
floor are more stable so that you can
build on top so that's what I'm
interested in in in reorganizing all the
things get the math right so that all
all the math that we have is physical
and all the physics that we have is in
the math we understand we have we can
read all the proofs right as a
mathematical as a physical argument not
just as a mathematical thing that you're
thr no no every step right once you know
once you have a perfect dictionary you
can reread the proof and say oh this is
what I'm doing physically I'm making the
limit by making verifiable state
statement that are finer and finer and
finer and that's what I'm doing that's
what a limit is and therefore I can do
these things what's the latest project
that's in your mind that has this
unrelenting scintilating pull to you
much like when you were in 2012 thinking
about classical mechanics and you
couldn't stop you would even dream about
it so once I've starting doing this all
my time the the the Mind hasn't been so
uh pesky but what I'm interested right
now it's it's really this uh general
theory of emble based and
basically spaces yeah and uh you're
really figuring out basic axioms and
again right now for me the interest is
to be able to do the argument of
classical mechanics and quantum
mechanics well basically I the here is
what I want to be able to
prove and let's do it like this so we
said before right that areas in volumes
in face space count the number of states
right and uh and they have a measure
they don't count the points right if I
have discrete elements you just count
the points and that's fine but areas in
phas space right when you are continue
you have infinitely many points so you
can't just say oh I have infinitely many
states because then if you double the
space like double the volume you would
have the same number of space of states
which makes no sense so you put
mathematically a measure and the measure
is going to be additive so if you take
two volumes that are disjoined and you
know you double it you're going to have
double the size perfect now imagine that
you have these volume though and you
divide them in half and half and half
and half at some point your count of
states will become less than
one what does it mean to have a region
with less than one state means
nothing not only remember if you have a
uniform Distribution on on a certain
amount of states the entropy is the
logarithm of that number right if I less
than one state it would mean I have
logarithm of a number less than one
which is negative number what does it
mean to have negative entry nothing so
this is where in another way to say okay
classical mechanics does not work
because it tells me that there are
regions with less one state what
do now what happens is that if you do
this analog if you try to construct an
analog of this and I can't understand
why nobody have ever done it and never
seen in the ler if you do the same
analog in quantum mechanics you look at
the entropy how it goes well the entropy
of a pure state is exactly zero and the
exponential of of zero is one so every
pure State count as one and you can't
have something smaller but the state
space of of quantum mechanics is still a
continuous like if you take the block
ball which is the two degrees the
surface is still continuous so what
happens if you take the surface of the
whole ball and you say how many states
there are there they're two because the
entropy is one uh two to the one is two
and if you take smaller and smaller
region you're going to have entropy that
is less than than two Sor sorry enty
less than one more than zero which means
Council States less than two and more
than one and you're going to go to one
right but that clearly cannot be
additive right and they're basically
these three conditions you want to be
able to count things right you want to
be able to count States and there are
three things that you would imagine one
is that every state count as
one and if you have a finite region of
phas space of of your state space that
should have a Finly many states and you
want the measure to be
additive well you can't have all three
because once you have infinitely many
point and you say everyone is one well
the
count of the region with DV is going to
go to infinity and so you can you have
to relax one of this and what happens is
that if you are in a classical discrete
space you relax that the the the finite
region are going to have finite entropy
finite count of States so you everything
is additive and every state is counted
one on a leag measure what you do in
face space you say well points are zero
but then I still have finite volumes and
I have additivity and qu to mechanics
you say well I remove the
additivity and there are a lot of things
that you can see that the weirdness of
quantum
mechanics comes from that addictiv but
then you see okay why do I want to Rel
lose relativity well because I need to
be able to count States every state must
be one and I find a patch with
infinitely many states on top of it if I
if I make a mixture of that I still need
the final to prein States and so this is
what I like to say that there is only
one way to create a a ensembles that
have an entropy and a count of states
such
that I
have a measure defined on a Continuum
that counts state but it has a lower
limit and so the quantization in my mind
is really putting this lower limit to
the count of States classical mechanics
does not have because you can make
things smaller and smaller and smaller
so you take a one state choppy choppy
Chop Chop in quantum mechanics the
quantization is I I can't I can't have
more less than one state
and so when you go up things are going
to look additive things are going to
look classical but when you go small uh
no that that you have this lower bound
and just to tell you so this is what i'
like to have in in this emble spaces I'd
like to be able to run that argument but
I want to be able to create this
structure in a way that I'll be able to
use for uh field Theory as well and
that's a challenge because it's a whole
problem of infinity and I want to try to
see if I have a path for quantizing
space time as well and leave it as a
possibility because in space time you're
going to have the same problem you say I
have a field Theory now I don't I I
count the number of states uh you know
in each field but then I have to count
the number of degrees of freedom and in
particle mechanics it's fine at a count
them one two three right but in a field
Theory you have a field for each point
of physical space and so now you have
you know sort of continuously many
degrees of freom you can't say that
they're infinite that wouldn't make
sense because if you double the region
of space now you would have the same
number of degrees of freen no so what's
going to happen is that you need to put
a volume measure on space and you say if
I double the volume I have doubly many
twice as many degrees of freedom right
well why don't you just use the I
mentioned this before the beckenstein
bound I need things to go smoothly to
zero I I I I can't just say at some
point Things become discrete because
that's not what's happening what's
happening is that I have something where
I still have you know all these
dense Danse States quite frankly it
doesn't even matter if it's real or
rational the important thing is that you
have a Danse do you have Dan sets and
you need to count the elements in the
den set and you can't just say that
they're infinite
all right Gabriel so we talked about
philosophy math and physics let's talk
about math and physics where does that
line lay
okay yeah so the line between math and
physics is something that I you know had
to think a lot about because since I
want to have this uh uh sort of rigorous
aromatization approach I need to
understand how do they do in math and
whether the way that they do in math is
actually good for physics if it's enough
and one of the thing that we have sort
of a wrong impression in in physics or
in engineering is that math it seems all
so elegant or pristine and so
precise and uh it feels like that
everything is there and we should
imitate math in some way but this is
kind of never going to work because the
way that math is able to be rigorous
like the way that they did it is
essentially to remove all the parts that
that are difficult or impossible to make
precise and remain only with the formal
structure the syntactic structure that
you can actually uh be precise about so
there are sort of a lot of things like
uh what they are called semantic
paradoxes like uh something like uh uh
there's the largest number that can't be
described or there's the smallest number
that can't be described in so and so
amount of characters exactly right so
that's something that if you have
meaning right is meaning is attached
meaning is always this very fuzzy things
and it always allows you to to create
some things like that and so what uh
what I guess the formalists decided
Hilbert I think was one the one that
pushes for this you say okay we'll
forget what the meanings are we just
have some symbols they have some rules
and that's it that's all that we're
going to describe in mathematics and a
lot of mathematics is now thought in
that way in one way or another and in a
sense that's sort of where the power of
math come from because if you talk about
I don't know a Bo and lce for example
well that same structure could be
representing sets of statements so a
logical structure or sets of sets or it
could have like physically could even
describe systems and sub subsystem
relationship so you can study the
mathematical structure you can study the
equations regardless of where they come
from physics bi ology economics so in
the end of the day to the mathematician
is it has the advant it has an advantage
to just drop the meaning because then
their tool are more powerful because
they can applied regardless of the
meaning and in physics we can't do that
because we have that pesky connection
with experiments and so we can't just
manipulate symbols in any way whatever
we need to know that that symbol
corresponds to a specific system
prepared in a specific way with the
things that we measure a specific things
so we always have an informal system in
physics you can't just get rid of it and
so what what the challenge is is not
saying we're going to put everything in
the format system is because it's never
going to happen the experiments are not
going to suddenly become symbols uh you
need to Define what is advantageous to
put in the formal system and what is not
and that's the hard part so it's not a
question of whether you can do it but it
becomes a you know sort of a a technical
problem sort of an engineer istic
problem how can you do it efficiently uh
essentially the game is to find the the
again the minimal set of axioms that you
want that you need actually uh in the
form that
it's as easily justifiable from the
physics because that surface right that
that line in between when you take
physic
physical informal things and you put
them in the formal things that's where
the things can go wrong once you are in
the formal system you you have the math
to to help you and so those parts and
that's the part that that I'm interested
in physical mathematics getting those
definition and justification right it's
the part that is the most difficult and
it's most difficult because I have a
feeling and I can't I I'd like to be
able to have a proof for this but again
you can't because it ties in things in
the formal system so it's difficult to
create a proof for that I'd like to have
a tight argument that shows that
whenever you're taking something from
the informal system to the formal system
that is my feeling you are always going
to make some kind of
simplification and so even a simple
concept like you know uh whether
something is an orange or not right you
go to a supermarket you can easily
identify what is an orange and not an
orange so it seems natural that oh
that's a true false statement very easy
but if you think how orange develops
starts with a flower gets pollinated and
that right and there is no point that
you can say ah this is the instant where
it actually became an orange right so
all these concept that we have are fuzzy
and uh and you're going to have to make
a cut and so if you're talking about
objects in a supermarket yeah perfectly
fine because we're not having we're not
going to have these in between and so
it's going to be either true or false
but if you're studying your biology
you're not going to that that that
statement is going to be defined so even
defining this property even defining the
statements themselves I don't think
there is a way to define statements that
are universa applicable in all
circumstances it's always a matter of I
have a realm of applicability a domain
and in that domain in that context that
statement makes sense okay you just
mentioned the word cut which makes me
think of Heisenberg cut which makes me
think of the measurement problem so I'm
curious what you think of the
measurement problem what have you found
out out what are your current
thoughts
uh I don't understand what the
measurement problem is because when I
talk to a lot of people they seem to
have a different interet so what what do
you how would you formulate the the the
measurement problem what counts as a
measurement
ah that I I I I I don't have an answer
for and it's it's again one of those
things that for me lives in the informal
system
and so I don't even know if I can
formulate something
precise right so you see this is exactly
why I asked because there is another
part that is uh why do we have two
different laws of evolution one for
measurement and one for processes that I
think can be understood oh okay but what
counts as a
measurement that what separates a
measurer from a measured
well yes so what I wanted to say is that
in this
realm what counts as a measurement what
counts as a measurement and all of these
problems are connected to the problem
that I was saying before of defining
boundaries between system and
environment because when you're saying I
have a system and make a measurement
you're basically saying okay there is a
system there is a boundary well let me
predict a problem with this is that if
we're saying that then there's
necessarily something subjective because
we're going to be the ones that are
dictating the boundary there's then the
meta measurement problem of who is
defining the system right so defining
the system is not subjective it's
objective but it's uh uh it's contextual
like you need it's
again in this context these are the
things that can happen this is what
happens at the boundary so it's not an
arbitrary when when I say I have a
system and I Define a boundary
I'm also defining what is happening at
the boundary right so it's it's not just
saying oh I'm grouping these things
together but I'm ging This Together
there is this interaction between the
boundary and the system like I need to
give you the boundary conditions not
just to solve the to define the problem
of the equation but really to be able to
define the system right and so part of
the problem of defining what a a
measurement is and and how it works and
all of this is because you are trying to
model something that goes across the
boundary which is uh even just the
information that passes from one thing
to the other and then information has to
be incord in some physical system so
something needs to happen and then in
quantum mechanics there is a thing that
actually happens doing the measurement
and this is how I think about it so
imagine that you have your block ball
for the two-state system right you pick
a a an observable right which means
you're picking an axis in some Direction
and The the points at the axis are going
to be your Ion State and all the points
in the middle are uh mixtures of of
those of those two states right so now
imagine that you start uh at any other
points right and you want to say oh I'm
going to make a measurement right like
none of these what you're going to be
predicting after the measurement is
going to be that you're going to be
either in this state or in this state so
you're be in this uh after the
measurement what you predict is that
you're going to be at a point on the
axis so what the measurement process
needs to do in one way or the another
whether it's uh through whatever
mechanism it doesn't really matter what
it needs to happen is that that point
that is here needs to be projected on
that
axis that process is a process that
increases entr right and so that's
something that needs to happen and there
are a lot of people that from other
places argue that measurement devices
are things that increase entropy you
have a metast stable state that gets
perturbed and then falls into two
equilibria right there is this sense
that you have something and you fall
into two equilibrium and there are some
people that have argue that there is
literature in that that that shows that
but I'm trying to argue it more from a
sort of more conceptual uh uh you know
again from what I need to to have to be
able to to to to make this make sense
and there's something else that
yes so I understand that this
measurement process um is a prop that
actually increases entropy H it gives it
has given me sort of a way to think
about these change of
context uh along the lines of what
happens in
thermodynamics so since you studied
statistical mechanics and you you are
happy with that you know that there are
different types of emble there is the gr
canol emble there is canol emble and so
on and in each of those Ensemble some
quantities are the ones used to actually
Define the emble so if I have a cup of
water and it's just sitting there and I
ask you how many molecules are there in
the cup of water well it's a problem
because molecules keep going out and
coming in so the the the M the molecules
are fluctuating right and uh and this is
the the the overall micro state is not
defined by by the number of molecule
it's gr canol emble is going to be
defined by temperature volume and
chemical potential but now you want to
really see and say I really want to know
how many molecules are there and so you
need a way first to stop these molecules
of fluctuating because otherwise you
can't even know which one you count is
on so what you do you close the glass
yeah and when you close the glass you
transition from a grand canonic emble to
a canonical emble and now the canonical
emble has volume uh temperature and
number of particles well defined and the
chemical potential is no longer well
defined now of course when you close
that you can't predict exactly how many
molecules are there because the
molecules were fluct fluctuating so the
final state is going to be a probability
distribution over all the possible
canonical ensembles of all the different
uh number of molecules with the
distribution exactly matching the
fluctuation that you had before wait why
can't you just say if you have a cup you
say how many molecules are in this cup
at 2 p.m. 2:1 p.m. on the dot exactly
you close it at that time yes and now
you you go count yeah is that well
defined what I just said yeah you you're
closing it we still need to do some
averaging even for a question like that
where we give a specific time at
specific time you are going to have the
problem that again things are going to
be fluctuating how how do you go and uh
and and measure it at that time can you
not just close it at that exact instant
exactly so when you're closing it yes
you went from a grand canonic emble
toble I see like you switch the thing is
no the number of molecule are no longer
fluctuating in a way you can think of
process measurements in quantum
mechanics doing exactly that so you have
your spin uh your spin system right uh
but wouldn't that have some hidden
variable associated with it the hidden
variables you can only Define them if
you're able to prepare embl that are at
a finer resolution of what you were able
to
do right so you are able to to talk
about actual number of particles and so
on in in in a in in those type of emles
because you can isolate the molecule and
talk about the parts but now when I have
a single system right I how can I talk
about the
fluctuations of the the spin in terms of
hidden variables without at least being
able to talk about ensembles that are
better specified than just a single uh
uh spin
state so to to to put it like this so
imagine that you have a probability
distribution right you could have that
probability distribution because you
have a single point that is is jingling
around or because uh you have an actual
statistical distribution something that
is actually smeared and that thing is
jiggling around or I really have
something smeared and I'm just taking a
piece of it right the ability for you to
distinguish between these three
cases means that you're able to resolve
the system at a finer level but if you
say oh my system is irreducible I don't
have a finer level you can't distinguish
between three these three
things so whether there is really like a
spin that is jiggling around or
something that is more complicated that
is jingling around or some kind of
uniform distribution that then collapses
and does something like this to be able
to distinguish those cases you would
need to again have a finer level of
description which assuming
irreducibility tells you that you can't
have so there are a lot of things that
once you
irreducibility you can get a a
conceptual level a at quantum mechanics
without so if you say okay my system is
irreducible right it means I cannot have
a perfect value for position of moment I
need to have this finet entropy that
smear things out because if everything
was at a single point I would be able to
tell you what all the parts were doing
all the parts were exactly there with
the same exact fraction of moment so you
can't say that so you need some kind of
smearing you need some some uncertainty
principle which actually in in Italian
other language is more an
indetermination principle than
uncertainty principle and I think it
capture really more more what's going on
so you need to have this system to be a
little bit un undetermined so that so
that you can say I know everything about
what's going on but once you say that I
have a distribution in in space that I
can't tell what the parts of the
distribution are doing well that thing
is nonlocal by definition because I have
something that is distributed in space
but I can't say oh I can follow one part
in space and what's is doing and so you
can only follow the whole thing the
object is non local because it's
irreducible but you're not going to be
able to have communication from one side
to the other like super luminar
communication all those things because
if you were able to detect it you would
be able to go at a resolution that it's
below this uh uncertainty and be able to
make
correlation between Parts but you can't
because the system is
irreducible so you see a lot of these
weirdness once you you know swallow the
bullet like it's like in in in
relativity you say okay I will concede
that the speed of light is constant and
then you oh m m energy is equal mass is
equal energy and all these things right
oh but it's all all from here from there
right and so I think this is sort of the
same idea the system isable you can't to
know what's going on inside okay then
I'm going to have an in principle I'm
going to have that the the thing is uh
know no does that mean that we could
have some bizarre laws that are just
inaccessible to us yes including
retrocausality or super luminal speeds
if they're not accessible to us you
can't even say whether they are
retrocausal or super luminal interesting
you can only say that because you have
set up an experiment every time that you
do this this you know this happens
before that or that so we've talked
about what's directly next for you
you're hoping to solve this problem some
the I'm I'm working on this Ensemble
space and trying to get that that math
to work out what's something you hope to
achieve in the next 10
years uh I hope to find other people to
help me clear up and and fix both the
mathematics and also the philosophy of
this like I I what I really love because
you see I I'm okay enough to scope some
of these problems but I don't know that
I will ever be able to achieve the
technical competence in all the sub
fields that I need to be able to carry
the project through I mean it's just
just a matter of time so the the thing
that I'm I've been trained myself to do
is to be a translator so that I can talk
to the the the the guy who does
philosophy of uh uh yeah that's
something else that unites us is that I
think of theories of everything as a
Rosetta Stone or it's I hope it to be a
Rosetta Stone because Academia is
designed to instead creating the
silos H they don't really know how to
talk each other to each other I I I
really had you know some problems and
philosophy I think in some sense is the
worse offender because they still have
this idea in mind mind that the
philosopher is the one that thinks by
himself in a room and then comes up with
this great idea and then this writes
this single author paper which uh right
that that is true so that for people who
don't know who are watching who aren't
researchers in physics it's quite common
and computer science and math to have
multiple co-authors but in philosophy
it's quite rare yeah and I have had this
problem that I I did find some
um uh PhD students that from that were
inst is working and and I wrote a paper
with one we we have another one that
they're sort of PhD student in
philosophy and uh and one of them
clearly said you know I can't put so
much time in this because I need to have
my single author literature otherwise
I'm not GNA take not goingon to get a
position and all that and and to me it's
bizarre because
you know you start writing the single
author paper I guess you know when
you're 20 something there is so much
stuff that I had to learn on both math
and physics and everything before I had
even something remotely interested to
say this is you know I said it before I
I didn't start doing this when I was uh
I had no expectation that I had anything
so interesting to say to go and start a
research it was only after the fact when
I had the proof oh oh I'm actually doing
something that I said okay it's worth to
me doing this otherwise I probably go
make a lot more money doing other things
uh but and so you're new you yes it's
what are you going to be able to to say
like it's it's the hard bit right now is
uh is putting all these pieces together
because it's like we have uh we have
most of the pieces scrambled around
in silos that don't know how to talk to
each other and uh and nobody's ever even
able to to see that they go together and
sometimes they're not designed to go
together because the math is designed by
the mathematician who doesn't know the
physics and the physics is thinking
about their things without knowing that
there is some other math over there and
so what I'm trying to put is like a
framework where I said okay the
mathematician says that okay that part
has to be there but the physicist says
that so that that thing can't be said
like that it needs to be and then the
philosopher says the other thing and I
guess his perspective needs to fit like
you need to put all these things in a
way that they all fit together and but
the training that they all they have
right is only from their Viewpoint and
so a mathematician might look at my
thing and says oh but why you find
things like that in mathematics yeah I
know that in mathematics you do that but
I need to justify the the AUM from the
physical and you're not interesting in
that F and and perfectly fine I'm going
to reach your structures but it can't be
the foundation of physics mathematical
structure that you put there without
knowing so what I really like to have in
10 years is to find other people like me
that are interested in getting these p
and and they can be they can be specific
technical on on one thing without having
the the general thing that's not a
problem I can keep the general thing I
can keep all the things together right
but the other person you're the manager
hiring a front-end developer and then a
backend developer they don't need to
know they don't need to know the detail
of all the yes it's exactly it's an
engineering project it's not a research
this is the other problem in in Academia
they always think that you need a grand
new idea and so and if you're an
engineer you know that most of the time
you want the simplest idea that works
and that creates the and these are the
things that I like finding it's not all
the new you know Grassman
compactification of the whatever
whatever like no the simp math that that
works and we already have a lot of math
that works and it must be a reason why
it works there must be a physical
justification of how where it works so
we need to uncover and put in things
together so if I had other people to
help me do this maybe we could finish
the project before I die and that that
make me happy there are some researchers
who are watching right now who are
probably interested where can they find
out more about you how can they contact
you so I have a YouTube channel but
that's mainly for popularizing the
research so my YouTube channel is is
called Gabriela carcassi Gabriel
carcassi it's my name and last name the
there is another YouTube channel called
assumptions of physics the research it's
where I put try to put every month sort
of me talking for an hour an hour and a
half of open problems that I have and
even there I did this June I had sort of
a a an online uh summer school on the
assumptions of physics which again is
something that we promoted through the
internet all of that is recorded So you
hear me rambling for I don't know nine
hours in all these things that saying
these are the pieces that we have these
are the pieces that that we don't have
these are the pieces and how uh uh so
there is a lot of content there and then
of course we have the website
assumptions of physics.org that has uh
all all the research we have a an Open
Access Open Source book which is uh to
me it's the thing that is the output of
the research so whenever ever pieces are
figured out they become an extra chapter
in the book so there is a a reverse
physics part that has all of classical
mechanics all the with the details all
all these conditions and how their
equivalents how they're not and then
there is the physical mathematics where
we get topologies we get uh continuous
functions and we get the real numbers
all of that is there so if somebody
wants to look at how actually things are
done are there and uh and that's the
idea I'd like to run this as an open-
source project who knows whether we're
going to be able to do it or not but I'm
trying to set up the structure more and
more like that and I'll try to try to P
push some of my work more online because
again since there might be other people
but I I don't have salary to give them
but maybe they have another position
somewhere else and then we can
collaborate well if you can structure it
in a manner similar to how open source
projects are structured people cont
little bits here and there that would be
the idea I don't know how to do it
because I don't have a template for that
but all the software development that I
did for within physics was all open
source so that that's sort of my my
nature I think that may be more
impactful than any given one of the
outputs of this project is just is the
entire templating of an open- sourced
physics project because that can then be
used that's temp yeah I know I
understand and I have to see you figure
that out I well I would be extremely
interested because I want to know what
are the limitations of Academia so the
Academia has pros and cons and what
they're pro at they're fantastic at so
don't touch that but what are the cons
and how can they be filled not to
supplant Academia but to supplement we
could have a whole other two-hour
discussion just on that topic and and
there is a lot of things from my
perspective that the type of things that
I do Academia is suited by Design but I
wouldn't even want to change Academia
because you don't change the structure
of a whole field for the project that
it's like I it wouldn't even make sense
so yeah but the way that I'm trying to
set up it's more this year we are having
the first PhD student coming work with
us at the University and he learned
about the project years ago through the
YouTube channel okay the first PhD
student for this project not for your
University
that quite a new University yes but but
that's why I started becoming more
active on YouTube because I've seen that
I have much more
impact through popularizing uh the the
research that I do on YouTube than all
the papers that I have
published so Gabriel it's been fantastic
thank you for coming all the way down
for having me thank you for coming to my
hometown yeah seriously if you want to
have another conversation on the other
on Academia that's uh I would love that
also thank you to our partner The
Economist firstly thank you for watching
thank you for listening there's now a
website Kurt jungle. org and that has a
mailing list the reason being that large
platforms like YouTube like patreon they
can disable you for whatever reason
whenever they like that's just part of
the terms of service now a direct
mailing list ensures that I have an
untrammeled communication with you plus
soon I'll be releasing a one-page PDF of
my top 10 toes it's not as Quint and
Tarantino as it sounds like secondly if
you haven't subscribed or clicked that
like button now is the time to do so why
because each subscribe each like helps
YouTube push this content to more people
like yourself plus it helps out Kurt
directly aka me I also found out last
year that external links count plenty
toward the algorithm which means that
whenever you share on Twitter say on
Facebook or even on Reddit Etc it shows
YouTube hey people are talking about
this content outside of YouTube which in
turn greatly AIDS the Distribution on
YouTube thirdly there's a remarkably
active Discord and subreddit for
theories of everything where people
explicate toes they disagree
respectfully about theories and build as
a community our own toe links to both
are in the description fourthly you
should know this podcast is on iTunes
it's on Spotify it's on all of the audio
platforms all you have to do is type in
theories of everything and you'll find
find it personally I gain from
re-watching lectures and podcasts I also
read in the comments that hey tow
listeners also gain from replaying so
how about instead you relisten on those
platforms like iTunes Spotify Google
podcast whichever podcast catcher you
use and finally if you'd like to support
more conversations like this more
content like this then do consider
visiting
patreon.com jongle and donating with
whatever you like there's also PayPal
there's also crypto there's also just
joining on YouTube again keep in mind
it's support from the sponsors and you
that allow me to work on tow full-time
you also get early access to adree
episodes whether it's audio or video
it's audio in the case of patreon video
in the case of YouTube for instance this
episode that you're listening to right
now was released a few days earlier
every dollar helps far more than you
think either way your viewership is
generosity enough thank you so much
