patreon is in crisis it's in a financial
crisis but also an identity crisis one
which risks undermining some of its most
fundamental founding principles and I
think both patreon creators and their
supporters should be pretty concerned
let me explain about six months ago I
received an email from patreon which
makes me sound way more important than I
am it was actually just a mailing list
email which was sent presumably to every
creator with a patreon page nevertheless
I received an email which was sent from
patreon to me among others the email
revealed that patreon was going to be
removing the goals feature from creators
Pages for the unacquainted this was a
function which allowed creators to set a
series of targets either for how much
money they were receiving each month or
how many total supporters they had on
the platform and it always seemed to be
a relatively popular feature many used
it as a way to incentivize more signups
by promising to make particular
in-demand bits of content only after
Crossing certain Milestones this big
Joel video about click that was a
patreon goal as were these the decision
to remove such a useful popular feature
was a bit of a shock but it was their
rationale for doing so which really
caught my attention to quote that email
which was sent personally to me goals
were originally in 10 to help creators
grow their pages but we found only 4.5
percent of creators within progress
goals were gaining more patrons let me
repeat that last bit for you only 4.5
percent of creators within progress
goals were gaining more patrons it
fascinates me that this figure didn't
come under more scrutiny at the time
there are several channels which report
on the so-called Creator economy which I
would have expected to have been all
over this but hey I guess Colin and
Samir needed to make another video about
how Mr Beast is cool that week trolling
the internet the most I could find about
this was a single tweet from Patrick
Willems and a Reddit thread with less
than 35 upvotes either no one had
noticed or no one dared talk about the
obvious implications of that 4.5 figure
that patreon might not be in the rudest
of Health the long and the short of it
is that it's not after years of
mind-boggling growth a sudden stagnation
in the number of new creators and
supporters joining the site has shaken
patreon to its core worse still the
Panic this crisis appears to have
provoked in the company's investors and
management has prompted the rollout of
sweeping changes to the platform which
not only risks exacerbating that crisis
But ultimately undermining patreon's
founding mission of enabling creators to
make a living from their work this video
has been a tricky one to make I like
patreon I think it is a good service at
its core and that its impact on the
online creative landscape has overall
been a massively positive one but to
truly understand the magnitude of the
crisis that patreon is facing and the
difficulty of finding way out of it we
need to understand the journey the
company's been on so far the story of
patreon is one of creators and
creativity yes but it's also one of
vanity venture capital investment and
stock valuations
at his heart it's something of a
morality tale about how profit-oriented
investors can corrupt even the most
exciting ideas come with me then and
witness the rise and fall of patreon
thank you so much my patreon supporters
who make this possible and if you are a
patron of busy allies hey and thank you
especially to all of my supporters on
patreon I suggest becoming a patron
don't thank us thank our patrons All
That Remains is for me to thank my top
tier patreon supporters
on the 7th of May 2013 Jack Conte
uploaded this video to his YouTube
channel it's a music video for his then
latest song pedals which is for the
record an absolute Banger all the lyrics
are taken from the names of the many
many effects pedals and Conti's music
studio and it features two separate
motorized robots nevertheless the video
is less notable for the song itself than
for what comes after it after the credit
roll Conti explains that he and a friend
Sam yam have just launched a website
called patreon it's like a Kickstarter
for people who release stuff on a
regular basis instead of people who are
just concentrating on one thing like a
movie or an album it's for the thousands
of content creators now tens of
thousands who have this beautiful
prolific output and it's for them it's
it's for us now this was a pretty book
old way to describe patreon as it then
existed far from tens of thousands of
creators at this point it featured just
three Conti himself his girlfriend
Natalie Dawn and their roommate Lauren
O'Connell but it reflected well the
ambition he had for the sight according
to company law Conti had come up with
the idea for patreon the previous
January by this point he was already a
pretty successful creator with a sizable
following on YouTube for both his band
pomplamoose and his solo career but the
finances of it all weren't really adding
up so this is an actual snapshot of my
YouTube dashboard from a 28 day period
that shows 1 million views and 166
dollars of AD earnings for those views
of course the reason that Jack Contee is
on the Ted stage here is that he wasn't
the only creative type struggling to
balance the books in the mid-2010s this
was an industry-wide problem the
internet had made it possible for
artists writers musicians and other
creatives to build Global fan bases
without needing the approval of the
corporate Gatekeepers in their
respective Industries but few had
managed to turn this online popularity
into an income a strange scenario
existed where it was possible to have a
sizable passionate following and yet
still be struggling to pay the rent by
2013 the idea that creatives might
solicit funding directly from fans had
been around for some time Kickstarter
and Indiegogo had both played host to
some pretty significant creative success
stories Jack Conte's real Innovation was
to note that whilst these sites worked
well for one-off projects like an album
or film most online creators didn't work
on that kind of staccato one project
then the next basis they were constantly
releasing stuff so he wondered what if
you took that crowdfunding concept and
rebuilt it around a monthly subscription
model it's no exaggeration to say that
patreon was a pretty instant hit just
weeks after uploading that music video
Jack Conte had accumulated pledges of
more than five thousand dollars within
two weeks of launching I was making six
figures as a creative person like within
two weeks of putting up a picture I
didn't change my videos actually my
music I didn't change my life anything I
just put up a patreon page far from
finding it cheeky or crass fans seem to
be genuinely enthusiastic about helping
to financially support the content they
loved unsurprisingly as news of Conti's
impressive sign-up stats began to spread
more and more creators were tempted to
try patreon out three creators became
six which became 15 which became 50
which became 100 until just after six
months post launch patreon was helping
thousands of creators fund their
creative Ambitions okay so far so
heartwarming the story of patreon's
founding is undoubtedly a pretty
Charming one compare it to that of
YouTube which was dreamed up to make it
easier for its Founders to find footage
of Janet Jackson's famous Super Bowl
wardrobe malfunction or Facebook which
grew out of a website for college
students to rank their peers based on
perceived hotness patreon's Origins by
contrast are just so wholesome the fact
that Jack Conte who remains patreon CEO
to this day is also a Creator himself
lends a real sense of authenticity to
the platform now there's no doubt in
Conti's creative credentials but it's
worth recognizing that patreon is
ultimately a Silicon Valley startup
founded by two Stanford graduates and
despite attempts to distance itself from
the metas and Googles of this world it's
off often followed a pretty similar path
to those less well-loved companies in
fact if we wanted to isolate an inciting
incident for patreon's present crisis it
would lie in Jack Conte and his
co-founder Sam yam's decision just two
months after patreon went live to
negotiate seven hundred thousand dollars
in investment from a venture capital
firm named freestyle Ventures for the
uninitiated venture capital or VC
funding is a form of business financing
popular amongst Silicon Valley startups
how it works is that a venture capital
firm will provide a startup with a chunk
of money in return for an ownership
stake in that company in the ideal
scenario the company will use that money
to grow at which stage they will solicit
more VC money and more and more until
when that company has proven itself a
success it will be floated on the stock
exchange allowing the VC firms to sell
their shares at a massive profit conti
and Yan have consistently and
enthusiastically embraced this strategy
by the time patreon was three months old
it raised 2.1 million dollars in
investment primarily from Venture
Capital firms and this quickly became
something of a habit over the next eight
years they would raise a total of 410
million dollars in this way whether or
not patreon would have been able to
revolutionize the Creator economy in the
way that it has without this kind of
investment remains an open question
there's no doubt that building the
company to the scale that it is today
required some Capital but at the same
time the company has always managed to
grow pretty organically
the beauty of the product is that the
more creators that sign up and start
promoting their patreon Pages the more
other creators hear about it and sign up
too either way conti and yam's decision
to hand over so much Equity to such
single-mindedly profit-oriented
investors would eventually come to
threaten many of their platforms
founding ideals but before the fall the
rise because whatever patreon's present
failings its successes are staggering I
mean just a few short years the model of
subscription crowdfunding the platform
is built upon went from being completely
unheard of to a central force in the
Creator economy it wasn't a foregone
conclusion that patreon would be the
sole dominant player in this early on it
had several competitors the most notable
of these was a site called subable which
had been launched by Hank and John Green
just two months after patreon which
worked on a very similar basis it would
take regular donations from fans and
distribute them to creators the Green
Brothers however took a much more
cautious approach to growth for various
reasons subable remained invite only
with creators having to apply to Joy the
benefit of this was that it allowed
soluble to build a sense of prestige
around its select roster of popular
YouTubers the downside was that it
allowed patreon which had enabled anyone
to create a profile from day one to
gather a momentum which some of all
simply couldn't match by the time
subable had onboarded 24 creators
patreon had over 10
000. the result was that patreon was
everywhere even the most casual YouTube
viewer or podcast listener had at least
some idea of what it meant for a Creator
to have a patreon page and what it meant
to be a patron of someone in fact
patreon often felt less like a platform
or company than a cultural phenomenon
the platformer's ultimate victory was
secured in March 2015. when Jack Conte
announced that patreon had bore subable
for an undisclosed amount in doing so it
had established an effective Monopoly on
subscription crowdfunding other
competitors like coffee limp Don but
their relative footprint was pretty tiny
all of this was surely caused for
celebration among patreon staff and
investors but its impact on creators
would be mixed patreon had changed the
game and made vast waves of creativity
possible which otherwise might have
simply been financially inviable
nevertheless the lack of any meaningful
competition placed many creators
livelihoods entirely in its hands
okay so I want to fast forward a bit
here to January 2019 and show you this
headline it reads patreon CEO says the
company's generous business model is not
sustainable as it sees rapid growth this
this headline was the result of an
interview that Jack Conte had given to
CNBC in which he'd claimed that the
company would need to make significant
changes to its pricing structure if it
was going to remain profitable this was
an intriguing statement at the time
patreon was on top of the world with 128
000 creators using the site in fact
according to that same article patreon
was on track to process 500 million
dollars in pledges that year given that
at the time it took a flat five percent
cut of all pledges after processing fees
this would have given it a total revenue
of 25 million dollars after the cost of
processing payments had already been
taken into account which given that
processing payments is the main thing it
does
oh
of course few would bemoan patreon
making enough money to pay its staff and
turn a profit but remember those Venture
capitalists from earlier by 2019 patreon
had raised 105 million dollars in
investment much of it from VC firms and
Venture capitalists are rarely content
with a bit of profit the risky nature of
their Investments means that they need
those which are successful to be really
successful the industry rule of thumb is
that a successful startup should provide
a return of 10 times the initial
investment profitability for patreon
meant turning that 100 million dollars
into one billion dollars besides that
this might impact patreon's relationship
with creators first emerged as early as
2017. when the company posted this
update to its official Blog the update
revealed plans to shift the burden of
processing fees from Korea creators to
their fans well this would supposedly
have saved creators some money on the
back end involved supporters being
charged an additional 35 cents plus 2.9
percent in fees on top of every pledge
the backlash to this announcement was
brutal creators turned on patreon
complaining that the fixed portion of
the fee specifically stood to
disproportionately impact smaller
backers some of whom for which it meant
a nearly 40 price hike more than this it
just seemed to go against the culture of
the site pushing creators away from
drumming up lots of smaller donations
and towards soliciting fewer but much
larger pledges after six days of
creators threatening to leave the
platform and fans canceling pledges the
changes were scrapped with Jack Conte
forced to personally apologize for the
fumbled rollouts but concern among
investors that patreon was being too
generous in setting its fees didn't go
away two months after that 29 CNBC
headline then patreon came back with a
new proposal rather than hiking prices
for fans it would instead increase the
percentage it took from creators but the
company had previously claimed a flat
five percent after processing fees it
would now offer multiple plans a
no-frill's light plan would continue to
be charged at five percent
a so-called Pro Plan which closely
mirrored the previous offering would be
charged at eight percent finally a
Premium plan aimed at larger creators
would be charged at 12 percent
these fee hikes were in many ways far
more Brazen than those which had been
proposed previously nevertheless the
company managed to avoid a mass exodus
by grandfathering in existing creators
and what it called its founder plan
which remained at five percent obviously
there was still some risk that this new
pricing structure would deter new
creators from joining the platform but
events were about to conspire to turn
any predictions about patreon's future
on their heads alright let's do this one
last time on the final day of 2019 the
World Health Organization received
reports of 44 unexplained cases of
pneumonia in Wuhan China by February the
infection that had caused those cases
had a name covid-19 and by March cities
towns and Villages across the world had
gone silent as quarantine and lockdown
restrictions can find people to their
homes these were Bleak times a lot of
people were scared for both their health
and their jobs but at the same time
folks had a lot of time on their hands
which meant two things for the Creator
economy first a lot more people sat at
home looking for stuff to watch read or
listen to and second a whole bunch of
folks who now have the time to explore
their own creative Ambitions the result
for patreon was a huge influx of both
creators and supporters over the
previous 12 months patreon's growth had
been dwindling but in just the first
three weeks of March 2020 more than 30
000 creators joined the platform fans
responded with almost a million new
pledges the kova 19 pandemic almost
served as a second launch for patreon it
led to a whole new wave of creators
discovering the site and benefiting from
the unique relationship it enabled them
to develop with their fans for some it
provided a crucial Slither of income
during trying Economic Times for others
it provided a whole new career path but
remember those Venture capitalists from
earlier in September 2020 Jack Conte
uploaded another update to his YouTube
channel patreon just raised 90 million
bucks woohoo this is super exciting this
new round of investment pushed the
company's valuation to 1.2 billion
dollars then less than a year later
Conte uploaded another video patreon
just raised 150 million dollar Series F
round of financing at a four billion
valuation that's right patreon was now
supposedly worth 4 billion dollars
suddenly Jack Contee was everywhere
again hailed on podcasts and at
conferences as the man who was
shepherding creators into a new era of
prosperity okay let's try this we're
gonna just repeat after me
okay now try this yes
this characterization was very much of
his own creation he repeatedly claimed
that his company being worth 4 billion
dollars was the sign of a coming second
Renaissance
there's a feedback loop that started a
couple years ago that's Now cycling on
itself faster and faster and I believe
it's going to lead to an explosion in
creativity back at patreon itself the
exact team were preparing for world's
domination they poached a new Chief
product officer from Instagram who first
fired a bunch of staff and then
announced a massive hiring push which he
predicted would see the company double
in size by the end of the year and then
well the worst stage of the pandemic
subsided people were allowed to leave
their houses and see their friends again
that massive surge in creators and
pledgers turned out not to be the start
of a new era but the result of a very
specific set of circumstances which had
now passed and for a company which had
now absorbed more than 400 million
dollars in investment
that was going to be a problem
foreign
of lockdown restrictions patreon's
growth has slowed massively for four of
the five years between 2016 and 2021 the
total number of pledges processed
through the platform had grown more than
60 percent year on Year by the end of
2022 that number had dropped to just 7.5
percent of course in a sane world this
wouldn't necessarily be bad news the
platform at least was still growing
after all just at a much lesser rate
companies can't grow forever and this
should be okay but remember those
Venture capitalists from earlier that
final set of VC firms had bought into
patreon a valuation of four billion
dollars
but stagnating growth quickly made that
number look laughable in September 2022
patreon senior vice president Carlos
Cabrera sent a memo to staff revealing
that patreon's valuation had dropped a
staggering 70 the company swiftly laid
off 17 of its Workforce enclosed whole
offices in Dublin and Berlin and here's
where things get worrying for patreon
creators and their fans
because the VC firms which bought into
patreon will still want growth and if
growth isn't likely to come from
increasing the number of people using
the site it's ultimately going to have
to come from increasing the amount of
money that patreon makes from the
creators and fans who are already there
at this point we need to return to those
reconfigured Creator plans from 2019
which were born of a previous era of
stagnation for patreon because on
reflection they're kind of exploitative
see when most businesses grow they can
usually expect to benefit from what are
called economies of scale if you're an
artist who wants to sell t-shirts with
your designs on them it's generally much
cheaper per unit to get 100 t-shirts
printed than it is to print 10. this
means that the larger your business
grows the more profit that you're able
to keep per unit that you sell patreons
create data plans flip this on its head
the light plan has since been
discontinued meaning that small to
medium-sized creators are most likely to
sign up to the pro tier this will see
them charged an eight percent platform
fee on all pledges but if they grow to
have a sizable number of supporters then
they might find it useful to have access
to a patreon partner manager or multiple
admin accounts for different members of
their team by signing up to the Premium
plan however these creators not only end
up paying more to patreon through having
more pledges for patreon to take a cut
of but also paying a higher commission
per pledge my point here isn't to elicit
a grand wave of sympathy for creators
who are making huge sums through patreon
although I'm sure it's frustrating if
you've got a team and bills to pay I'm
more interested in what this tells us
about patreon's business model take a
look at this graph which I made using
data from graftrion it plots descending
percentiles of the 222
126 creators who have at least one
public supporter on patreon against the
percentage of the total number of
pledges which those percentiles receive
as you can see the distribution is so
skewed that you can barely even see the
plot if we crunch the numbers themselves
we find that as of April 2023 more than
25 of public pledges process through
patreon went to just
556 creators that's just
0.25 of the total all creatable more
than 50 of pledges went to the top 1.75
in fact the bottom 80 of creators
received just 10 percent of all pledges
now none of this is patreon's Fault
neither is it much of a surprise
audiences have always tended to
agglomerate around a relatively small
number of artists and creatives but it
does explain that seemingly backward
approach to the pricing of patreon's
Creator plans despite the impressive
top-line figures which Jack Conte loves
to quote about the total number of
creators using the site patreon is
actually heavily reliant on just a few
thousand top earners and there are signs
that it's business model going forward
is likely to focus more and more on
extracting a larger chunk of cash from
those creators the Blogger and author
Corey doctorow likes to talk about he
calls the initification of online
platforms intuitification refers to a
kind of mission creep which seems to
affect all profit-oriented platforms at
some stage in time it happened to
Facebook to Instagram and is currently
happening to Twitter sorry X 2. in the
broadest possible terms in shitification
describes the process through which
platforms pivot their attention away
from provide leading a beautiful
reliable service for their users and
towards ensuring a strong return on
investment for their shareholders this
usually takes place through the
introduction of a stream of new features
which rather than serving to improve the
offer which initially Drew users to a
site instead exists solely to increase
Revenue this has certainly been in
evidence at patreon over the past few
years where a somewhat chaotic drive to
launch new features seems to have taken
over there's been patreon lens they
since discontinued attempts to mimic
Snapchat stories feature merch for
memberships a print-on-demand service
which allows creators to offer
merchandise as perks for their
supporters patreon video which enables
creators to upload videos directly to
patreon rather than embedding them from
YouTube or Vimeo not forgetting the more
immediately controversial patreon
Capital which reportedly allowed larger
creators to take out loans from patreon
to be paid back through a garnishing of
their future earnings
since I started writing this video
patreon's gone even further and
announced the upcoming launch of what
it's calling the new patreon this
appears to be an attempt to turn patreon
into a replacement for creators websites
and mailing lists it will add a new free
membership tier to all creators pages in
addition to a digital shop which will
let creators sell individual videos
podcast episodes and more to fans who
aren't necessarily signed up as regular
supporters if all this seems a little
chaotic it apparently reflects the
company's culture behind the scenes an
article published in the information
earlier this year during interviews with
over 20 current and former patreon
employees and those interviewees painted
a less than flattering portrait of Jack
Conte as an incompetent and terminally
disorganized CEO who is constantly
jumping from one idea to the next in a
manner which creates huge problems for
the developers tasked with bringing his
ideas to life nevertheless there are
some commonalities between these
features firstly whilst most are pitched
as making life easier for creators they
actually serve to further lock creators
into patreon's ecosystem patreon
creators are already heavily reliant on
patreon itself Jack Conte likes to boast
about the fact the creators have access
to their supporters email addresses you
get the email addresses of your members
you can download them in a CSV and take
them somewhere else but the reality is
that for most creators the sheer hassle
of migrating to a new platform would
likely lead to a considerable loss in
supports these new features take this
even further patreon previously prided
itself on its interoperability building
or commissioning its own Integrations
for Discord WordPress May
features like patreon video and the new
patreon however work to replicate these
services within the platform itself now
this might be more convenient for some
creators but It ultimately increases
patreon's hold over them if patreon can
convince creators to replace their
websites and mailing lists with its own
proprietary features it can make it much
much harder for them ever to move to a
different platform more important to the
process of incitification however is the
drive to increase revenue and in
addition to further tying creators to
patreon many of these features come with
slightly sneaky additional charges we've
already discussed the manner in which
patreon's current Creator plans serve to
extract proportionately higher fees from
more successful creators and merch for
memberships follows a similar strategy
whilst its high cost but product might
be part of the course for
print-on-demand services the scheme also
requires users to hand over an
additional three percent of every single
penny they make through the site
regardless of how many supporters
actually join tears with merch attached
further whilst you might have thought
that native video was a pretty standard
feature for an online platform in 2023
patreon also plans to start charging
extra for that at the beginning of next
year as someone on the founder tier all
of this makes me a little suspicious
about whether the new patreon might be
used as an opportunity to bring longer
term creators over onto the newer and
more expensive Creator plans too
alongside unnecessary feature bloat and
increased charges however the ultimate
consequence of insertification is the
degradation of the core features which
initially Drew users to a a platform and
patreon's chaotic drive to build new
revenue streams certainly appears to
have led to a failure to maintain or
improve the site's existing core
functionality that being the processing
of regular payments from fans to
creators because for most people all of
these extra features are entirely
Superfluous as part of preparing for
this video I ran an albeit entirely
unscientific poll on my YouTube
Community tab which concluded that the
vast majority of patreon supporters
check the site monthly or less
as one user put it I don't care about
patreon updates it's just a banking
website to me but with its attention
elsewhere maintenance or development of
this core functionality appears to have
stalled in August 2023 patreon had a
nightmare of the day firstly an update
to the platform's payment infrastructure
caused a significant number of
supporters to be billed from an address
in Ireland rather than as had previously
been the case California this led those
supporters Banks and credit card
providers to reject those charges as
fraudulent if that wasn't bad enough
patreon's internal systems then recorded
those users as having canceled their
pledges needing some creators to report
massive losses in support we're still on
the very same day a seemingly unrelated
issue led patreon to block many creators
from caching out their earnings see
patreon requires creators outside the US
to use a service called payoneer to
retrieve the money they earn through the
platform payoneer has always been a
pretty clunky service to use with an
opaque schedule for converting payouts
from US Dollars into one's local
currency but a problem with how patreon
sends money to payoneer left some
creators unable to withdraw their funds
at all for over 48 hours for a lot of
creators either of these events
happening would have been frustrating
for both to have happened on the same
day was terrifying on the one hand
rejected payments were causing them to
lose supporters whilst on the other
problems with payoneer made the money
from the transactions which had gone
through impossible to get hold of over
on the platform formerly known as
Twitter creators and their fans directed
A justifiable out of anger Patriot after
a decade of convincing creators that it
can be trusted upon to administer a
portion of their income many surely felt
that the company should have built
processes to ensure that either of these
failures were impossible let alone both
in a manner which tracks perfectly with
Corey Dr Oz in shitification thesis it's
hard not to come to the conclusion that
all the time and effort patreon has been
spending developing questionable new
features to increase their revenue has
caused them to neglect the key service
which made the site popular in the first
place even if those features weren't so
obviously designed to extract more cash
from creators many users would still not
care about them continuing to view
patreon solely as a regular digital
temperature but if a desperate chaotic
drive to increase revenue for investors
leads that primary function to fail then
it's only likely to hasten the
platform's demise not save it at the end
of the day this is a question of
priorities patreon has always tried to
set herself apart from other platforms
particularly using the fact that it was
started by a genuine Creator to suggest
that it always has creators best
interests at heart the patreon pr team
must have been over the moon when a 2021
interview with Jack Conte for The Verge
was headlined patreon CEO Jack Conte on
why creators can't depend on platforms
but the company's recent trajectory
serves as a reminder that patreon itself
is a Silicon Valley platform company
which partly as a result of loading
itself up on Venture Capital money has
found itself forced to engage in
practices identical to those of other
platform companies there may still be
plenty of patreon Staff who care deeply
about creators and creativity but by
desire or necessity the company as a
whole has come to treat them primarily
as vectors of Revenue to be maximized I
hope for the sake of creators who rely
on it the patreon or something like it
can be salvaged because I love patreon's
core mesha whilst my own income through
patreon has always been fairly small
having some Revenue which isn't tied to
sponsorships or viewership has allowed
me to make much bigger risks in the
topics that I cover than I otherwise
would have been able to the demise of
patreon would certainly make for a much
more boring online landscape with
creators forced to work to lower budgets
and be much more views oriented in what
they make I sincerely hope the platform
manages to refine its way but whether
that's possible in a situation where the
company is so beholden to investors
remains to be seen
in fact it's the risks of relying on
third-party platforms like patreon or
YouTube which motivated me and a bunch
of other creators to launch are premium
streaming service nebula nebula is a
creator-owned platform in which we have
a collective say over which features get
developed this enables us to ensure that
the platform continues to serve creators
and our wonderful audiences rather than
being bent into weird shapes to suit the
demands of venture capital investors it
also means we get to sponsor our own
videos as is happening here and work on
cool exclusive content too in fact if
you're anything like me you're a massive
fan of Lindsay Ellis and Lindsay's
latest videos on the Lord of the Rings
BT and Guy Fieri are exclusive to nebula
with more to come in the near future all
three of these videos are insightful and
fun and perceptive in ways that only
Lindsay is able to be and they join a
whole host of other exclusive
Productions from legal eagle second
thought Wendover Productions and many
many more in addition to this nebula
subscribers now also get access to
nebula classes this includes my class
how to research like a PhD student in
which over 16 lessons I share my
strategies for finding good sources for
efficiently reading large amounts of
material and for taking and organizing
notes which will be useful for years to
come whether you're a student an
aspiring Creator or just interested in
how these videos come together I think
it's full of really useful advice for
how to go about working on a large-scale
research project making videos at the
scale that we do is pretty expensive
they take huge amounts of time and kit
and costume and software to bring
together so if you want to support us to
keep making the best videos that we
possibly can then I would be so so
grateful if you'd sign up to nebula you
using my personal link
go.nebula.tv forward slash Tom Nicholas
this will score you a full 40 off an
annual subscription meaning that you can
access all of that exclusive video
goodness for just two dollars and fifty
cents a month some of that money goes to
fund even more exciting Originals well
some of it comes directly back to us to
support our work that link again is
go.nebula.tv forward slash Tom Nicholas
I'll see you over on nebula but now time
for some thank yous thank you so so much
for watching this video I hope that it
has been worthy of your time it was a
really interesting one to make and I
hope that came across in your watching
of it as ever if you know of someone
else you think might enjoy or get
something out of this one then please do
consider sharing it with them I'd be
super grateful for that uh now time to
do some uh slightly ironic maybe
sheepish thank yous to the people who do
support me over on patreon uh and to get
access to uh early little bits of my
videos as I'm working on them uh copies
of scripts weekly updates on what I'm
working on uh and much more if you'd
like to join those people you can find
out how to do so at patreon.com forward
slash Tom Nicholas and if you sign up to
the top tier you'll get your name read
out as I'm about to do for Richard for
Alan Gan for Gary dick on Spain Bill
Mitchell zc Reese Alexander blank Neil's
buildgard Sophia R Sergio Suarez
Nicholas jackmart strange weekend
Ricardo Fernandez de Cordoba Richard
rapoon Amit Singh paraha Gabriel Coke
demelzer Jimmy Dunn Christopher Cowan
Fiasco linguine and Sarah Morgan thank
you so much to all of you for being
signed up to my patreon and I will see
all of you in the next video
