given that we are biological creatures
why do we need meaning why do humans
need to do all this extra work in order
to be satisfied with
life well uh I have to tell you that um
I've been going through a uh since the
publication of the book I've been going
through a serious reflection on this
question again uh and going uh deeper
into it um there's many levels of
answering that question at one level
uh meaning has to do with sense making
it has to do with how we properly pay
attention to the right kind of
information that can allow us to
reliably solve a wide variety of
problems and a wide variety of
domains and that's one aspect of meaning
that sort of agentic aspect um but uh
consonant with that is we've we need to
be connected to other people because
most of our problem solving is done in
connection with other people so there's
an initial sensemaking Dimension this is
often talked about as sort of coherence
in the meaning in life literature does
your world sort of is your sens making
making sense to you is is how I
sometimes put it like uh the sense
making is what you're doing sort of
automatically and when you reflect on it
you go yeah that makes sense my my world
isn't absurd or things like that and
then um we need to feel connected to
other people because most of our um
problem solving uh is done via other
people that's our great superpower
individually biologically as you framed
it we're pretty pathetic animals you
know a really angry dog can take us out
um and so our superpowers we can
coordinate together um and and you know
get some train some of those dogs and
sharpen some of those sticks and then
kill anything on the planet uh and so we
need to be connected to other people and
that brings with it its own special
problem the my friend Greg Enriquez made
sort of prevalent um we developed the
superpower of connect and coordinating
called language and language does
something really really powerful in in
helping us coordinate but it also does
something really novel it makes uh our
the content of our
minds uh accessible we're sort of
exposed to each other in a way in which
no other organism is exposed to its con
its fellow uh creatures and so we have
to also develop this way of balancing
between coordinating with other people
but not being Overexposed so we have to
develop relationships of trust and
forgiveness and belonging and we have to
balance between being individuals and
having an individual identity and a
group identity so that's all Central to
uh
meaning and then uh beyond that uh we
fall prey in both of those domains to
massive self-deception um I don't pay
pay attention to the right things I misf
frame you I'm biased in my attitude
towards you and so uh we have to do a
lot to correct that we have to try and
ameliorate that and what that means is
we also have to be connected to
standards by which we can correct
ourselves standards about what is most
real what is best what what what is most
beautiful um and that that's a deeper
kind of connectedness that's kind of a
connectedness to what we consider
ultimacy so I've tried to show you how
all all of these things are all
important dimensions in uh why we have
to pursue uh meaning in life I've become
increasingly dissatisfied with the
standard psychological construct cult
meaning in life to measure and talk
about all those all those dimensions in
a in a in a coordinated fashion can you
talk to me about the sort of established
body of work when it comes to meaning
and how you diverge from that or what
you would suggest as an improvement yeah
so um the standard met tricks are around
sort of four dimensions really three uh
one is coherence which I mentioned which
is does your sense making make sense to
you um uh another one is purpose that's
not well posed uh because if you think
standardly of how people think of
purpose purpose is you're working
towards some ultimate goal that's a very
dangerous way of framing meaning because
if you never reached a goal your life
was meaningless and if you reach it
going forward you're pretty meaningless
and I discovered that way back in high
school and that sort of really bothered
me and um so I think they're what
they're talking about more is
orientation and then orientation is a a
more important way people have to feel
not disoriented but oriented in the
world um and then uh the next one they
talk about is significance that you have
things in your life that aren't
transitory ephemeral
shallow uh but that seems to be just
sort of one side of this this deeper
thing which is called mattering you need
to feel connected to
something people typically use the
metaphor bigger than yourself I want to
be connected to something larger than
myself right um they don't mean that
literally because that would be
ridiculous uh you know attaching you to
a locomotive engine doesn't give you a
profound sense of meaning in life so
what's going on there is I would argue
something like this
there's a deep connection between the
sense of bigger and more real and let me
try and give you an everyday example of
this when you're in a dream world you're
in this little world and it seems so
real to you and then you wake up notice
we have all these waking up metaphors
and Enlightenment metaphors you wake up
and from that larger world you can see
how the earlier world the smaller world
is limited in biasing you and warping
and thwarting you uh in in in in you
trying to uh get a flourishing life and
I think that's what people are really
struggling with when they're talking
about mattering about being connected to
something larger than themselves and
it's this sense of uh realness which I
don't think is properly captured uh just
by the psychological notion uh of
mattering um and here's the fundamental
thing I mentioned that uh meaning is a
has to do with being connected to
something that's more
real uh than yourself in some important
ways because it helps uh make you feel
more real to
yourself now that's a problematic notion
to think of as just purely I'm just
describing something like a psych like a
standard psychological phenomena this is
actually if you'll allow me one
technical term this is a normative term
uh meaning is a meaningful life is not a
descript when I say your life is I'm not
just describing it I'm praising it I'm
saying there's something fundamentally
good to it it's meeting some standards
of evaluation but those standards of
evaluation are completely absent from
the standard psychological model that
would be the Crux of that's one of my
two main
criticisms um and and so in a very deep
sense the meaning in the standard
meaning in life um psychological model
is completely divorced from the
cultivation of wisdom and virtue and if
you look across all the religion and
philosophical traditions that's not the
case they're deeply
wound you know wound together bound
together right the cultivation of
meaning and the cultivation of virtue
and the cultivation of wisdom are
profoundly intertwined stoicism in fact
said they're exactly identical um which
tells you how strong some positions have
been on this and the psychological model
is missing all that the second one is
uh the psychological model and this is
ironic because it's talking a lot about
connectedness but it doesn't talk about
the
connectedness what I mean by that is it
only talks about the individual agents
attitudes it doesn't talk about how the
world is showing up for them so let me
give you an example of how this can go
wrong you can ask somebody you know H
and you ask them the standard sort of
questions on meaning in life and they
have friends and they have family they
have work projects so their life is
pretty meaningful above average but you
ask
them do you think your world's very
coherent do you think the world makes a
lot of sense you have a lot of trust in
the world is the world presenting itself
with a lot of beauty and depth to you
you'll get no you'll get people saying
exactly the opposite and and
see and then if you ask people is your
meaning in life actually bringing you a
lot of peace is it really integrating
you well as a person is it reciprocally
opening you to reality like no because
people are experiencing a lot of burnout
a lot of and a lot of betrayal
they're losing trust and faithfulness in
their institutions and in fellow people
right and so they there's a famine of
people being able to get into the Flow
State and able to have that basic trust
and forgiveness with others fellowship
and a sense of faithfulness um is
massively diminishing I just saw a
report that um Americans trust in the
Supreme Court is at an alltime
historical low it has never been so low
um and of course that is only preent I
think of what's Happening all throughout
the Western World and so the meaning in
life construct is leaving out all of
this that's really bedeviling people in
a very very very powerful way um and so
I think the meaning in life construct
gets a little bit about how our agency
works and contributes to meaning in life
but it's leaving out a lot let me put it
one last sentence and I'll
stop the issue isn't just about finding
information relevant it's about can you
enter into resonance this is what Rosa
calls like this relationship that is so
centrally lacking in most of our life
this is does your meaning in life allow
you to reciprocally open does it take
you into the depths of the psyche and
align them does it take you into the
depths of reality so you feel you're
meeting standards that allow you to
correct yourself according to what is
true and good and beautiful is it doing
any uh of that that's resonance and then
resonance also needs to be transmuted
into reverence are you are you
ultimately oriented to what you consider
ultimately most real uh because that's
the that's the that's the that's the
judge behind everything else that we're
evaluating so sorry that was a wrong
question but I not at all not at all uh
the realness point I think is very
interesting I maybe it's a contemporary
problem because of how much people are
mediated by their screens maybe this is
worsened by the fact that we're atomized
and isolated into our little Droid boxes
and we spend a lot of our time on our
own maybe it's because of a lack of
connection to Nature and or and Dread or
whatever it might be but I would guess
that a lot of people have this sense
that their life is surreal and not
surreal in the I can't believe how
amazing it is I'm so blessed
everything's going right but in a I
don't necessarily feel fully connected
and grounded to the experiences that I
have dayto day my mind and my feet don't
rest in the same location all that much
you could maybe call it presence um but
it's sort of it's more than just
presence presence is necessary but not
sufficient it's it's the connection to
it it's being able to feel like I can
reach out and grab it like things are
happening and the things that are
happening are uh they're important and I
have some sort of agency and they affect
me and and that they're actually going
on as opposed to kind of like everything
being a sitcom and it all just sort of
playing out in front of our eyes so I
want to I want to really dig into sort
of things becoming really real and and
sort of where that comes from I think
that's important I I I think that is the
thing that's uh
uh quintessentially missing from the
psychological construct that's the sort
of ultimate uh Norm within the normative
Dimension um because you can undermine
any of this if like any of these
relationships that are giving people
meaning and life can be immediately
undermined if there's a sense of
betrayal or that that was an illusion or
they were being deceived right explain
ex can you think of an example of that
so there's a standard one I use
um so and I've done this multiple
multiple times and it's never failed to
work so it's not quite a scientific
study but it's pretty good so I ask my
students how many of you are in really
deeply satisfying romantic relationships
romantic relationships are the culture's
current surrogate or at least one of its
surrogate Idol idolatrous surrogates for
God and culture and virtue it's like
you're supposed to find the one and
they're supposed to do everything and
you're supposed to transcend yourself
find familiar uh uh fulfillment in it uh
which of course leads to the weird thing
that people value uh romantic
relationships sort of most of all right
now except maybe with their kids um yet
romantic relationships are the source of
most suffering and a lot of mental
health disorders um and so that tells
you we're we're we're we're treating
something we're putting too much
pressure on something okay so let's take
that we've got this thing this is like
our cultur tells you this is where it is
at this is where you find it I asked
them okay how many of you're in such a
really satisfying romantic they put up
their hands they say okay now I'm only
addressing the people who are in
relationships so the rest of you sorry
you're not in this now but for those of
you who put up your hands how many of
you would want to know if your partner
was cheating on you if that meant the
absolute dissolution of the relationship
and almost all of them like somewhere
between 95 and 100% reliably put up
their hands and I say well why why like
you like you could continue to go on and
enjoy the relationship ship and get all
the pleasures out of it and all the
companionship and all the sexual
gratification like what like why and
here's my students and they're at the
University so they're hard bitten with
cynicism and postmodern nihilism and
everything and all this sort of stuff
and they without a beat say to me well
because it wouldn't be
real it wouldn't be real and then that
removes all of the other ways in which
it is contributing to meaning in life
for them that's an example example of
what I
mean so good so good and intuitively
everybody knows that there is this sort
of sense of honesty the honesta that you
need to that you expect and uh you know
who was the experience machine who did
the experience machine nosic Robert
nosic yeah it's not too dissimilar I
guess to the experience machine but it's
a much more Salient example that
everybody knows um yeah would you
how how would your experience change you
know The Truman Show might be another
example of that where you know you're
going around living a good life and
everything seems fine but what if
everybody else was an actor well I
wouldn't want that yeah why the to you
the sort of felt sense nothing would
have changed it's the exact same like
yeah yeah no but there's something about
sort of intention there's something
deeper there's something
Beyond not just the sort of Arian what
do I get out of this situation it's what
what is the intention behind that what's
the meaning exactly and notice his name
which is really Central true man it's
about truth and it's not about just
conceptual truth it's about like being
true to right uh true to his Humanity
true to reality and of course he's
willing to break through the wall right
remember he's sailing on the on the
little sea to break through the wall um
and be and and you know and the same
thing was offered in The Matrix when
Morpheus says all I'm offering you is
the truth right like you you um and and
the villain of course Cipher which means
a symbol without any depth right he
wants to go back to the Matrix and and
and we know that's why he's a villainous
person because he's betraying the
commitment to reality and to his own
Humanity just lingering on what you said
before about the difference a lot of
people I think will use purpose and
meaning almost interchangeably even
though when when you think about it it's
not quite but the two kind of come as a
a package pair they're a twin pack of uh
of values that a lot of people talk
about when you were mentioning about how
if you use the word purpose if you don't
achieve it your life is worthless and
once you do achieve it if you do achieve
it what do you do next it seems to me
the difference between purpose and
orientation is the same as between
destination and journey yes that one is
moving you in a direction and it's kind
of an endless game it's an infinite game
uh whereas the other by Design the
purpose is this thing unless you do some
jiggery pokery with your purpose and
create some sort of like instrumental
purpose my purpose is to show up every
day in a manner it's like yeah give
whatever don't litigate me don't
litigate me out of what most people mean
by purpose um yeah it it feels like that
attachment attachment to
outcome yeah and and I think when you
when you as soon as you talk I think
that's exactly right Journey rather than
destination I think and playing the
infinite game rather than the finite
game uh car's notion I think that's
exactly what I'm trying to convey what
also comes up when you when you get back
to the notion of
orientation uh you you you start to
connect uh what can be isolated by the
term purpose you start to connect back
to well what like what ultimately
orients you is what is what's true what
is good what is beautiful um whereas
purpose can be very egocentric it can be
what I most want to have um H whereas
orientation is reality Centric what do I
most need to be in order to be in touch
with reality to be deeply in touch with
myself with other people uh with the
world um and see a lot of
people have kind of and you see this in
sort of the rampant rise of cynicism and
nihilism and popular media because of
massive of burnout and betrayal and
 um people have sort of given up
on the world in some ways um and the
problem with that is that's not optional
our model of who and what we are is
inevitably bound up with our model of
who and what the world is and um so the
degree to which we find the world an
incredibly scary place is a degree to
which we we create sort of an ins an
insular model of ourselves we withdraw
and we withdraw and we withdraw and we
withdraw uh the problem with that is uh
that's the behavior ultimately of an
organism in pain um and in distress and
the fact that we don't recognize it as
that isn't the central of central
importance we're withdrawing um and
that's the that's the move of pain and
distress that's the fundamental move of
depression so even if you don't feel
depressed you're already behaving in a
depressive uh manner what do you make of
the recent uptick in depression and
anxiety uh how this sort of relates to
the work you've been looking at so uh
Chris and I Christopher Master petro and
I we talk about uh three kinds of
responses to the meaning crisis one is
just a
reactive uh sense of like despair uh you
see this in depression anxiety uh
increasing rates of suicidality in
places that are marked by affluence
which is a very strange Paradox uh given
our current cultural way of thinking
about things um loneliness um addiction
all of these things are uh people
basically falling into some kind of
drift towards despair in powerful ways
the number of those friends you have is
going down reliably decade by decade
even though the number of social
connection to power is going up
exponential um things like this we're we
we're obviously we're doing it the wrong
way we're doing more and more that's
giving us less and less um so that's one
group then there's there's a replacement
strategy where people try to replace the
kinds of things that used to give this
normatively charged sense of orientation
and meaning in life and give us ways of
cultivating wisdom and virtue therein me
religious and philosophy people are
trying to replace that with you know
with things like you know the Marvel
Cinematic Universe which they which they
investigate they identify with they go
to they often dress up as these people
or put uh markers of them in their home
and they they protect this universe with
a religious fervor so there has been
rage self-righteous rage at how
Hollywood has destroyed these universes
I agree with the aesthetic criticism by
the way I think H has just desroyed a
lot of these things but people aren't
paying enough attention to why does this
matter so much why do you spend hours
online leging like this that's a that's
a replacement strategy and of course
people are also doing this can do this
in the political Arena uh they can do it
with pseudo religious ideologies they
can do it with this weird amalgamation
of conspiracy theory and spirituality
called conspir ity on both the left and
the right neither pole has any Monopoly
on
foolishness um so there's a lot of that
um and then there's a replacement
strategy which is where you see hopeful
responses uh to the meum crisis you can
see the rise of an ancient Roman
philosophy sism becoming super important
you can see um uh the PS adelic
Renaissance the mindfulness Revolution
the rise of biological practices in
communities around the world all of
these are are showing that um there was
also a healthy
response what was interesting is how Co
was such a cleaving point right because
it
showed that how many people have what
lack what's called existential
resilience soon there the normal routine
that keeps them busy right buy unto
death uh soon as that gets disrupted
they are confronted with some people
were confronted with an ays of
meaninglessness um and they dove into
conspirituality and all kinds of stuff
other people uh turned to a replacement
strategy and they started you know
attending online mindfulness courses uh
starting to read some
philosophy so it's it's a very it's a
very complicated response uh to the
meeting I'm interested in the role of
the individual on their own and you know
even beyond the sort of connectedness
interconnectedness thing the fact that
uh seeking meaning as a a purely selfish
Pursuit and um I Heard a quote the other
day which I loved which was after a
while you just get sick of yourself and
uh it really made me think um about that
step change that a lot of people go
through from just living for me just
thinking about me to trying to serve
a Pay It Forward perhaps and pass it on
and that that perhaps comes along for
the ride is a byproduct of getting older
but yeah I'm interested in the the self
versus uh um selfless element here
excellent um and and this goes towards
another criticism I have of the standard
meaning and life construct it's
completely egocentric in its orientation
it should be asking questions like how
much are you making meaning for other
people how much coherence and Beauty are
you bringing into the world and it
doesn't ask those questions and that's
exactly right and you see the self
centered orientation is extremely
problematic obviously there's ethical
problems and we get you know we get the
increasing uh growth of spiritual
bypassing as an as a growing
psychological problem uh so people
pursue to
spirituality um as a way of avoiding
their important economic and ethical
responsibilities and
obligations and I think and you know and
and spiritual bypassing is an offshoot
of this large this growing group of
people spiritual but not
religious so if you look into the
academic literature on spiritual but not
religious like people who do the
anthropology and sociology of religion
what they'll tell you is spiritual means
the spirituality means the religion of
me
that's what it means it's you're doing
all the standard religious Behavior but
you're doing it uh toward for you and
towards you and by you and evaluated by
you and that's extremely problematic
because um autod didactically we're
really bad um so have you noticed for
example you're very good and this shows
up metabolically in terms of even of of
cognitive effort you're very good at
pointing out the biases in your friends
and other people you're really good at
it you are by the way you are really
good at it the objective evidence shows
you're really good at it um and you do
find it relatively easy and what that
evidence also shows is you're really
crap and I'm really crap at doing it for
myself I'm really bad at finding my own
biases my own self-deception now that
doesn't let's be clear what I'm not
saying that doesn't remove the
responsibility for addressing those from
me of course not but that that I'm not
saying that you we are still always
individually responsible for our vices
so I want that clearly stated but what
what it shows is and this is something
you know that we've known since Socrates
and and we emphasize until recently in
current scientific practice you are my
best source of self-correction and I am
your best source this was supposed to be
the engine of democracy but we've lost
that uh too and so the degree to which
we become withdrawn and self-centered is
the degree to which um we are going
to uh fall prey to self-deceptive
behavior and the degree to which uh we
might not pray pray proper attention to
the Deep interconnections between our
spirituality and our
responsibilities how can people work out
if they're being
self-deceptive by Design we're good at
deceiving
ourselves yeah uh but we're also really
good at uh uh determining it in other
people that's the
counterbalance uh so you have to you
have to practice a lot with other people
um and then you have to imitate what
it's like with other people with
yourself until you get good at doing it
by yourself um and then there's a lot of
things you can do to that do that so
something that might not seem obvious
that actually relies on that mindfulness
mindfulness practices like meditation
are a good way at becoming aware of how
you are biased in how you're paying
attention but how did you get that
ability well you got that ability by
doing the following right when you're a
kid you imitate how adults because you
trust them they're credible to you you
imitate how adults are taking a
perspective on how you are taking
perspectives in the world and allowing
them to correct you and you imitate that
and imitate that and imitate that until
you can take a perspective on your own
perspective that is
corrective that's metacognition to use
the technical term and that's what
you're exercising in mindfulness but
that's that's a broad lesson to be
learned you practice dialogically with
others until you can do it internally
and reflectively the whole point of uh
of of Socratic philosophy you hung
around with somebody like Socrates and
you did all of this Socratic you know
question and answer and Exploration with
him and then eventually
you got to the ability where you could
do it by yourself an tanes who was
considered the foref founder of stoicism
when when asked what he had learned from
Socrates he said well I learned how to
dialogue with
myself he didn't mean talk to himself
because we do that automatically all day
long he meant that he had so practiced
it and imitated it so that he had
internalized it so he had an inner
Socrates that was quite competent and
pointing out to him his own and
self-destructiveness
what we we sort of touched on it earlier
on but I'm interested in how how
contemporary of a problem a lack of
meaning is and you also said about how
as people become more affluent or as
Nations become more affluent uh problems
of meaning seem to increase I mean what
what what uses are in us all trying to
attain chase after affluence if all that
comes along is a heavy side order of
meaninglessness
that's a good question uh Rosa talks
about the fact that we're in kind of
what he calls Dynamic
stability um I talk about it as a
frenetic frozenness we have to put more
and more effort in not to make things
better but to make sure we don't fall
behind or miss out um of course and this
is what's predictive of the massive
amounts of burnout and Han talks about
how how we we've we've become we're not
so much oppressed and exploited by other
people as we are exploiting our elves
and oppressed by ourselves it's the Red
Queen fallacy right yeah exactly exactly
um and and so I think again if you asked
people and you use the standard metrics
they'll tell you well I know I'm I have
connection to I care a lot about my kids
and I care a lot about my friends and
work's important to me you know blah uh
and so you'll get that but if you ask
them like and we know burnout is arising
the number of close friends you have is
going down people's sense of trust in
others and in institutions is massively
declining so again that's why I keep
pressing on this you have to ask this
question really really carefully uh and
I think around those issues of burnout
and being busy unto death um and uh you
know sense of ever increasing
and betrayal I think that or or if you
want to put on the other way a famine a
famine of wisdom scarcity we don't know
where to go we we we find it very
difficult to get into healthy flow
situations we have addictive and Ma and
maladaptive forms of flow uh generation
like video
games um we we we lack Fellowship
Fellowship isn't friendship we've lost
the whole category of getting together
with people uh that we basically trust
because we all participate in something
that we all are committed to together
like what used to happen in the church
or the mosque or the temple or the
synagogue Etc we've Lo we've lost all of
those things and again we've lost
faithfulness we we've become
increasingly short term and so it gets
harder and harder for us um to be
faithful which means sticking in with
things staying connected to things
because of their realness even though
it's at times very unsatisfactory to do
so um and so you know this shows up in
the fact that people are finding it
harder and harder to maintain long-term
relationships you mentioned there about
kids and I'm going to guess that most
people would say a source of great
meaning or one of the greatest sources
of meaning in my life has been kids have
you guys considered the base rate
reduction in the age of people becoming
parents and the number of people
becoming parents that I I've got it in
my head a friend uh messages me semic
consistently when I do uh q and A's on
the show uh and he's very interested but
he's a dad of two uh an old school sort
of Irish guy and uh he says so many of
your audience just need to have kids
like they're asking questions and as am
I about fulfilling my higher purpose
about you know enacting my Logos forward
about how why why can't I give myself a
break why is it that I never really seem
to be connected to the achievements that
I have in life etc etc etc uh and I
think you know what the sort of subtext
of his point is lots of those problems
are fixed or pale into insignificance
once you have children uh I guess two
questions then first off meaning crisis
and associated with uh declining levels
of um people becoming parents and then
the second one is there
something wrong or shallow or or
compensatory about leaning on your
children to provide you with me meaning
in
life yeah this first of all excellent
question Chris eat and how the West
really loved How the West really lost
God talks about the fact that the
countries that are the most um secular
in their orientation are all are are is
predicted by how much people are living
atomically individually Alone um and
whereas more religious communities uh uh
tend to be related to people who live uh
in more extended family kinds of uh
situations uh this goes towards a lot of
research that puts I think puts to nail
uh in the coffin of the idea that people
are religious because they're stupid um
and intuitive and not rational um so uh
some of the best research done by Jas
and others who by the way are atheists
shows that's not why people are atheist
or religious that's not what predicts if
people are atheist or religious in fact
you get weird anomalies there's kind of
a very weak correlation between how
analytic people are and how irreligious
they are but you get important anomalies
like in the United Kingdom uh analytic
thought is more predictive of being
religious than
non-religious and so the the whole
Enlightenment mythology still espoused
by people like Dawkins uh and others um
just doesn't that's not what matters
what matters is how many remember the
kid we were talking about earlier and
how you get metacognition you have to
trust right you have to trust you have
to entrust yourself to Credible others
people that you trust because you can't
believe this but you have to trust that
they can see things you can't see and
and what seems like senseless behavior
to you actually has a deeper you know
meaning to it a deeper function right
and that requires you know typically uh
you know uh We've relied on families to
give us those kinds of entrusted
relationships but we've we've narrowed
the family down to the nuclear family
the nomadic nuclear family um and that
has seriously eradicated a lot of ways
in which we could get meaning in life I
think he your friend is right uh in the
sense that children are are are very
powerful indicators especially of how
meaning in life is not about wealth
because you have a child and your wealth
goes down
man uh the other one is it's not about
subjective well-being
uh especially at the beginning having a
child crushes all the measures of
subjective well-being you're not
sleeping you're not eating um you're wet
all the time you're under high stress
because the baby's crying the person who
you thought loved you the most in the
world hates you right now your partner
uh uh and yet so that shows you the two
things our culture tells us are
necessary and sufficient for meaning in
life are neither necessary nor
sufficient for meaning in life so I
think having children is important
children or Orient you non-
egocentrically you have to go from how
is everything relevant to me to how am I
relevant to somebody other than myself
um and I think that's a big that's those
are important moves uh for meeing in
life uh although isai as I've been
arguing not captured by the current uh
psychological measures um now I would
say he's wrong and you're right about uh
we can turn our children into Idols too
and we've Di that uh Jonathan you know
hate has made a good career out of
pointing out how an idolatrous
relationship to our children uh in which
we made them the be all and end all of
existence and helicopter parenting and
uh you know and trying to wrap uh you
know protective layers around them so
they never suffer hurt or pain has
actually you know destroyed them in some
very important ways and he's got a ton
of research to show this I know most
people don't like caring that uh but
um it it seems to be the case and so we
have to be careful about that I think be
having children is a powerful way of
reorienting you I think our meaning in
life uh the way I've been talking about
it evolved out of our capacity to be
parents uh but it's not enough to be a
parent because if you're just a parent
and here's my point that I've already
made you're still withdrawing into your
own little
circle and you can be having K children
uh and not really caring about the world
now what's interesting of
course is children make you care about
the world or at least they should make
you care about the world um and then
that's my final point which is being
able to care about things in the right
way and really focus on what's the
really real I mean that's
wisdom um
and your friend sounds like a good
person so for whatever set of reasons
they probably were wise parents or at
least wise enough um that's not that's
not necessarily the case so you could
get sort of intense feelings of
meaningfulness but you could be an
incredibly foolish parent and I think
that's very
problematic yeah the I had Dawkins on
the show maybe four months ago something
like that and we had a live event we had
a discussion in uh in Austin Texas where
I hosted him and he was lovely uh but I
I got stuck we both got stuck twice in
two nights in a row first live on stage
in front of his his audience and then
again the next day when we did the
podcast and I mentioned
how derating the St story
behind religion whatever it is that
people choose to follow because you
can't prove it or it can't be proven in
the manner that you want it to be able
to be proven doesn't reduce its
Effectiveness it doesn't make it any
less useful even if the level of
truthfulness the bar that you want it to
reach is something that it can't do and
uh I've been obsessed over the last
couple of years with things that are
literally true but figuratively false
and figuratively true but literally
false and um yeah I I kind of
feel I get a sense in the Zeitgeist that
people are sort of turning away from the
very hard cold sterile uh well it
doesn't matter it has to be literally
true at at at all costs uh that that
doesn't seem to quite be the case and I
wonder whether that is born out of a we
kind of had a crack at this we tried to
simultaneous equation our way through
coming up with answers to Big questions
and maybe I just need something that
works even if I Can't Describe to you
why it
works okay well that's a tall order but
uh I I I I do want I do feel I have a
responsibility to respond
um you have to be careful about um uh
this notion of Truth um it's very
one-dimensional uh that's being used by
Dawkins um it's about uh evidence that
convinces you that a proposition uh
should be believed um I think that's
important I'm a scientist and that's
what theories are built out of
scientific theories in the in the
scientific sense of theory not in the
everyday sense which is completely
opposite to how scientists view the word
theory so I think that's important and
Dawkins is a scientist so of course he
values that but of course that's not the
those are not the primary ways we feel
in contact with
reality um um so evidence isn't the same
thing as
relevance um
so your skills are they have to be true
to thing like your aim has to be true
it's a different sense of Truth you have
to be able to make things present to
yourself and you have to be able to like
interact with the world in a way that
reliably uh gives you some degree of
agency in the world that's really
important to you in fact I would put it
you that if you had to choose between
your skills and your beliefs you'd give
up your beliefs rather than your skills
um and they're a big part of how you
sense what's real this is knowhow and
this goes into your procedural memory
but you talked about it a bit earlier
and and this is important
um we also have like what it's what I
call perspectival knowing what it's what
it's like to be you here now in this
situation in this state of mind and that
has a different this is knowing by
noticing it's knowing by being present
um it's how you're sizing things up
what's your take on things how you're
framing things all that sort of stuff
now notice uh so my partner she she was
gone recently because she was at a yoga
retreat getting her certification to be
a yoga instructor uh we're going to run
Retreats when we're both
retired and so um now I still had all my
beliefs about Sara I still belied that
they were all true
right a and I still have all my skills
for interacting with her in place and
everything but she wasn't present to
me and she that's oh and we you there's
a sense of that lack of presence really
matters to us and there's a sense and
you can just feel it right now there's a
sense of this is
real because it's present it's present
there's this power of presence that
matters to us that's not captured by
propositions I could State all of the
propositions all day long about Sara
that didn't make her present to me I
wonder whether that's why longdistance
relationships are often difficult
exactly that's exactly right and then
beneath it is
this this what I I've called
participatory knowing this is knowing by
sort of imp placement being in place
like you have a like you have you belong
it's not just a space it's a place you
belong you fit the space and the space
fits you so it's a place for you right
and and and and this is often very
unconscious but you you lack it uh for
example when you're
homesick um or or or you lack a certain
version of it when you're lonely um and
this really contributes to your sense of
real have you ever gone that thing where
you've traveled to another country and
it's all exciting and interesting but
you don't really feel like you're
properly in place you're getting a bit
of culture shock and and then it starts
to feel less real to you it starts to
feel surreal to you to use your and see
so what Dawkins is is forgetting he's
forgetting all of those other aspects of
realness that matter um if what we want
is to be in contact with reality and
secondly right it it it's not that that
he's forgetting all of those he's
forgetting that our access to those
nonpropositional kinds of knowing is
largely done through What's called the
imaginal okay so for example I'm present
to you I hope okay do you can you
literally see into my
mind no you're imagining it now it's not
Imagining the way you're imagining a
sailboat where imagination is taking you
away or distracting you from reality
you're looking through your imagination
because you're trying to have Insight
look into my mind now let's make it even
more freaky that space inside your head
where you are aware of yourself is that
a literal
space nope is it just a a fable is it
just false no because you get real self-
knowledge in fact that's Central to you
being a rational being so that's
imaginal it's fictive or Richard Dawkins
open a science book oh look here's on
page three here's the solar system Sol
Solar System model of the
Adam that's almost completely false yet
we teach it to kids why do we give them
this image because the image trains
their perspective taking gives them
skills so that they can get to the place
where they can then get the deeper
propositional knowledge the imaginal is
irremovable from the way in which we
need to train the nonpropositional in
order for us to get those proper
connectedness to reality
that allows us to find the causal
patterns that establish the
propositional the the scientific kinds
of
claims what about people that think
meaning is a thinking problem a lot of
us spend a lot of time in our heads
we're learning this is somewhere between
philosophy psychology sociology all of
these things I think the only place I
have to experience these things is is in
the head a little bit in the body and
that gets fed up through my head as well
can we fix this by just thinking our way
out of the problem no I mean especially
we think of thinking as just running a
lot of propositions together and making
sure they're coherent and Computing with
them that's not going to work as I said
most of this most of what we're talking
about here when we're talking about this
kind of connectedness this sense of
belonging the sense of implacement is
happening right it's
happening in an a completely embodied
fashion it's happening non
propositionally like your skills you
have the skill of swimming can you get
access to that skill without swimming or
doing something imaginal no you can't
right what about you know what your
State of Consciousness is like you have
a kind of memory for that episodic
memory like did you take a shower this
morning and you sort of remember and you
sort of you relive it for a moment right
that's different from your knowledge of
our cats mammals you don't relive that
right you have to like there's whole
aspects of you that you can't get access
to unless you're doing it imaginary and
that means embodied like
this is all dependent on the fact that
you're
embodied The View
that that this is just sort of a matter
of not having the right
propositions look look here's how it's
fun here let me give you a concrete
example this is from Thomas
Nagel all of the arguments for reality
being absurd aren't actually good
arguments this came out and uh you know
really I think the movie is really good
by the way everything everywhere all at
once but all the all the arguments in
there are well everything all at where
you know everything everywhere all at
once that makes your life meaningless
well
how well because there's so much it
makes this insignificant but if it makes
each part insignificant how can the
whole have significance that doesn't
make any sense do you if if all these
little individual parts are made
insignificant by this huge collection of
all the parts how does the huge have a
better standard by which it renders all
the parts so meaningless like well I'm
so small if I blew you up to a Galaxy
would that make your life more
meaningful well you know what I'm doing
now doesn't matter won't matter a
million years from now so that means
what's happening a million years from
now shouldn't matter to you now like
none of these arguments actually work
they're really bad arguments they
self-destruct that's not what drives
absurdity what driv
absurdity is right when there's a clash
between your
perspectives when you have this Thomas
Nagel tells this wonderful story and he
wrote this way back when when we used to
the dark barbaric days where we had
answering machines that were actual
machines that were actually in your home
and things like that because we couldn't
carry our telephones around with us and
he tells this thing about you know uh
Tom who realizes he loves Susan and he
and he he calls Susan up and the he
hears some the receiver get picked up he
says Susan don't talk I have to tell you
I love you I love you I love you and
then he hears Susan is not here right
now
right and notice she laugh and laughter
like humor is that there's a contrast
between the two perspectives there's the
personal perspective of his of his life
and the impersonal perspective of the
machine and there's a clash there humor
is when you're when you're on the cusp
of authority and I got to meet John C by
the way what sort when you're on the
cusp of absurdity and Monty Python was
brilliant at that right they could take
you to the edge of absurdity and then
what you do is you have a weird Insight
that relieves the
absurdity but if I if you can't
relieve the clash between perspectives
with an Insight because that's what
Insight does it relieves a clash between
perspectives then you will experience
absurdity now I ask you Chris can you
think your way into an
it huh I don't
know well if you have you ever needed an
Insight yeah and realized it just wasn't
coming yes many
times Insight doesn't work that way
Insight doesn't work propositionally you
can't infer your way into an Insight in
fact it looks
like the the parts that are responsible
for insight and the parts that are
responsible for inference are kind of
like an opponent processing with each
other let me tell you why I say that
when we're doing bad inference that's
because we're jumping to a
conclusion that's Insight Insight is
when you jump to something when you like
it you call it Insight when you don't
like it you call it jumping to a
conclusion you see they're like insight
has to do with changing your perspective
altering your perception and attention
but also participating in a process that
is self organizing you don't make an
Insight you don't just uh receive an
Insight you participate in a
self-organizing process so so this is
why you can't think your way through
these things thinking matters don't
misunderstand me propositions matter I'm
not saying they don't but it's not just
a matter of running good arguments
because that's not where the P the
primary problem lies I remember you
saying that uh some truths are only
knowable through transformation oh
totally
and uh I was having a great conversation
last night and we came up with this term
of unteachable
lessons and an unteachable lesson one of
the best unteachable lessons I think is
money and success won't make you happy
yeah and you know it is a unique
category of lesson
where nobody gives the people trying to
teach it
sympathy uh they're derated in a manner
that uh no teacher would typically
accept and I'm yet to I I I I know of
nobody who has arrived at that
realization logically they've arrived at
it experientially um I was trying to
think about some other uh ones that are
not too dissimilar I think
um don't don't be uh suede to falling in
love with somebody who looks very pretty
but has no morals or anything sort of
deeper to do with you you know it's very
much the thing that I kind of came to
realize at least with the some of the
unteachable lessons I'm sure there's a
million um but the ones that I'd found
were ones that sort of lyic were very
seductive in one form or another they
were about status they were about ACC
claim they were about resources they
were about sex they were about power and
um that was so Salient that what you end
up with is
this you're at War there is one Higher
version of yourself that goes ah I
remember the last time that got into a
relationship with a girl that was pretty
and kind of didn't really have much to
say and we didn't really have much to do
or whatever and you know that that
didn't end too well but you know she's
just so hot I can't not think about and
then you know the same with yeah
everybody else says that sort of money
and success didn't change any of the
internal voids that they had but that
was them I I will be able to thread the
needle in a different way and uh I just
I thought it was so funny that uh
unteachable lessons came to me last
night uh knowing I was going to speak to
you today and the some truths that are
only knowable through transformation I
thought that was a nice uh a nice
parallel that's powerful I like that um
yeah la Paul's work on transformative
experience uh that
um yeah be because we don't
know who we're going to
be and what's it going to be like to be
that other person until after we gone
through the transformation so we can
have all the propositions we want we can
even have some relevant skills but the
perspecti The perspectival Knowing
knowing what it's going to be like the
participatory knowing who are we going
to actually be we won't know that until
we undergo the transformation and so we
draw very poor conclusions uh because uh
we've been sort of educated for quite
some time since
dayart
um that truths are just accessible to
calculation we should just be able to
calculate all possible truths um and
that was to overturn an older religious
idea that no no many truths are as
you're indicating very powerfully many
important truths are only disclosed to
us after we commit to undergoing a
fundamental
transformation I and I think that's I
think that's deeply right um now the
issue around this is well if you're
ignorant what do you do and then here's
where the imaginal comes back in right
um so let's use one of La Paul's
powerful examples having a child you
don't know what it's like to be a parent
until you're a parent and we were kind
of talking about that a few minutes ago
you can read all kinds of books but they
really don't help that much right and
you can even practice some skills uh
sort of in your head or on your friends
or something
um but what do people do then well what
I've noticed is a lot of people do and
some people are even noticing that other
people do this is they get a dog they
get a dog and they pretend but it's not
really pretend because it's actually a
dog it's an intelligent living being
that needs your attention and your care
and it's very demanding and I'm helping
to raise a dog right now and you know
and so they get a dog and they treat it
like a little person they name it and
they talk to it and they you know
sometimes they'll even give it its own
room and have family pictures and the
dog is included um and so this is what's
known what I've been calling serious
play what we do is we set up this Lial
place that wincott talked about this
this transitional place where we're
neither fully apparent but we're not
just single anymore we're in this like
Lial place where we're doing this very
serious play by this kind of imagining
through the dog not imagining a dog but
imagining through the dog what it would
be like to have a child that I'm
responsible to now the thing about the
dog is it's still an element of pretense
because it's not a human child and so
you can do things with a dog like you
can say after 3 weeks no I'm not up this
isn't really for me and then you can
find a new owner for the dog and nobody
thinks you're a particularly immoral
person but if you do that with your kid
now I'm three weeks in no no this isn't
for me I'm gonna find another here do
you want my child people think there's
something and and as they should there's
something dramatically wrong with you so
we use we need serious play which is an
imaginal practice in order to try and
get a taste uh for uh so that we can
properly commit ourselves to the
Transformations that will disclose those
unteachable truths so let me give you
more concrete example that goes back to
your your first
thing I'm going to use myself as an
example so I'm going to make myself
vulnerable
here I've not been what I would call
successful in my romantic life I have
lots of relationships some of them very
long term but um in many ways they um
they did not bring out the best in me
and I did not act my best within them
I'll I'll put it as succinctly as I
could so after my second isn't that a
point of vulnerability second marriage
fell apart I'm on good terms with both
of my exes by the way um but um I
realized that I had been doing what you
were talking about I had a type that I
found particularly attractive and this
was probably driven largely by genetic
darwinian factors we sound like Plato
now with the monster in our genitalia
right
um and I decided I was going to change
my attraction radar I was going to go
not go to as a women that immediately
were Salient to me sort of
physically um and
instead um I tried to break against my
type which wasn't Easy by the way
especially when you're like feeling so
vulnerable and that you'll never be
loved again because the relationship is
ended and all that crap that that little
thing says in your
head and I found this woman when she
found me and she wasn't my
type and because of that and because I
really wanted to be different on how I
entered into
relationship I allowed myself to be
attracted in ways I hadn't be attracted
before and I fell in love with her soul
and then only did I realize and now to
my
great joy do I realize she's actually a
very physically attractive woman um and
my type that I find attractive has
completely shifted because of that um
and that was powerful for me um and I'm
not holding myself out as any kind of
Exemplar for relationship advice um I'm
saying that sometimes we have to be
willing uh to
overcome um our automatic
salience uh
projector um Salient what grabs our
attention what arouses us right um if we
want to actually find deeper connection
and meaning um and and
um this woman and I SAR and I we have
made a lifetime commitment to each other
uh because
we have found that we reliably bring out
the good in each other which is actually
the basis for a
relationship um and we realize that that
is what you should base a commitment on
not is this person satisfying all of
your wants and needs not is this person
you know helping you with all your
projects and helping you to
self-actualize and all the stuff that we
say in California um but is are the two
of you reliably bringing out the good in
each other such that I I I I texted her
today and I said I love that I get to
know you more and more and while
realizing that I'll never completely
grasp
you and so
that that is something I would I did not
have access to As Long As I was going
according to what I typically found
Salient it's a beautiful story and uh
I've been thinking a lot recently about
um why do you think that you know what's
best for
you like why is it that you have you
know you had this assumption I have a
type I have a type I have a type and uh
there's a a need for control there's a
desire for control there you know I have
a predictive model of how things are
going to unfold I can therefore have a
good example of the the trajectory I
know exactly where this is going to come
into land kind of is and I know that
maybe a couple of times this evidence
has shown you're actually denying
evidence especially if you've had a
couple of these things occur and you go
well ah those ones didn't quite go the
way that I wanted to uh and this is
something different well maybe different
could lead to a different sort of an
outcome it's like ah no I I I'm pretty
sure that the same will somehow lead to
a different kind of an outcome and um
yeah as in a world where people want to
control they do not like the idea of not
being able to fully predict where things
are going to come into land uh
reminding everybody myself included that
you are not necessarily the best judge
of what is best for you you don't
actually always know you can't always
predict what's best for you and that's a
a lovely example of a time where perhaps
you
were you were right to be wrong in that
regard yeah thank you for saying that I
mean one of the Hallmarks of modernity
given to us in the from the period of
the European
Enlightenment is this U sort of uh
putting on a pedestal uh uh
enfranchising
autonomy uh self-government it's con
biggest virtue um and and there's value
in that again because autonomy reminds
us that uh we are
are we are simultaneously our best
friends and our worst enemy um and and
we are responsible for um the content of
our behavior and our thoughts and and
our affect and so that's important and I
don't want like I I don't want to just
go back
but it's also given us this and there is
no other word for it a lack of humility
it's given us an arrogance that we
always know what is best for us um and
that's simply not true in fact we are
really bad at Discover bring our own
self-deception we are really bad at
affective for what's called affective
forecasting we're really bad at
predicting what will make us long-term
happy and what will be make us long-term
really really sad we're really bad at
that we're really bad at it um we we're
really bad at it because we fall prey to
hyperbolic discounting that's a fancy
sounding term it means we find present
stimuli very Salient and long-term
stimuli very nonsalient this is why it's
hard to lose weight and it's hard to
study and all those kinds of other
things because the chocolate cake is
there or the party is there and health
and you know the exam or would off in
the future um and by the way you can't
argue yourself away from uh that
hyperbolic discounting it doesn't help
uh uh giving people lots of reason and
evidence uh for why for example why they
should save for their retirement doesn't
really help them do that but if they do
some serious play by imagining their
future self as some a family member that
they've always loved and taken care of
and they form that effective bonding
then they'll start to save for the
retirement kind of thing um so there are
lots of ways in which we are not um the
best Authority we have to we have
to we have to become adults in which
we've right in which we take
responsibility but and that's important
and I don't want to denigrate that but
that's only one half of maturation John
rusen I think is
uh right when he talks about the the the
main part of maturity is facing up I
like that phrase it's beautiful facing
up to reality um and facing up to
reality is
humbling you're looking to something
when you're looking up that's a humbling
stance and you're facing it you're
confronting a reality that is making you
look up right and
so that is an attitude in which you
realize that you don't know
best um so how's for
example as things started
to succeed for
me um
I you know I uh I had the Veri
Foundation but I I was blessed by
terrific people but I asked them to act
as a count a constant check on the fact
that I could fall prey to you know
self-aggrandisement all hubus arrogance
all the proclivities we see in social
media people
um and they and I I I I I committed them
to this because I did not trust that I
would be a good
enough person for determining that issue
and this and there we've done things
specifically uh like we pivoted away
from voices with REI and I was doing all
these videos and we just do now a couple
videos a month and I've become very
clear we now have What's called the
lecturn my role I'm a teacher teacher
people are not my fans they're not my
followers they're my students if they
want to study what I've what I'm
teaching that's my role that's who they
are and I'm emphasizing quality over
quantity um a lot of things to try and
prioritize uh virtue over success and
that initiative wasn't my initiative it
was the initiative from uh uh Ryan
Barton and Christopher MTI Petro at the
Veri Foundation but as soon as they said
it
um I recognized that it was true so
thank God for
that this is one of those moments my my
background when I first started the show
was a sort of productivity bro uh world
I was very much trying to Wrangle chaos
and have the right notion template and
the morning routine and time blocking in
the calendar and all of this stuff
trying
to create some sense of organization out
of what had been a pretty sort of messy
20s and um it's funny that even in
things like this you know we're talking
about Transcendent we're talking about
you know uh accounting for the various
machinations and ways that your ego is
going to pervert the incentives and you
know your higher calling and what how do
we really pay this forward in the best
way and so on and so forth and what it
comes down to in some ways are an
operational set of principles like that
you need some hard and fast rules you
need to actually put some bright lines
in the sand and sort of draw those
around you and um I've got it in my head
sort of thinking about uh people for
whom that approach is very seductive uh
I would probably put myself in that
category that um again if I just have
the perfect to-do list template then all
of my problems will be sorted etc
etc let's say that somebody is
operationally pretty effective when it
comes to that sort of stuff what are
some of the practices that you like that
you use the most yourself to get you out
of that kind of mode to get you out of
the mode of logic of reason of
rationality of logistics of operations
and get you into a more embodied or
dread Joy kind of sense because I feel
like that's
important so we've been talking this
ultimately goes back
to sort of a compilation put together by
Nathan Vanderpool who I was wor working
with we talk about dime
uh we talk about these four dimensions
um the dialogical I'll come back to each
one in a minute the imaginal which I've
been talking about a lot uh the mindful
both meditation and contemplation SED
and and moving and embodiment um so you
need these four dimensions you need
practices in all four of these
dimensions and you need you need sets of
practices because there is no Panacea
practice uh practices have uh uh
strengths and weaknesses and you need to
align them so they're correcting and
compensating for each other so one of my
standard examples is meditation is
training attention meditation is you're
stepping back and looking at the lens
through which you're normally looking
through at the world you're trying to
pay attention to your mental framing
this is meditation the problem with that
is you need to determine if any
intervention while I stilled my mind
well does that allow you to see better
into the world and you have to do
contemplative practices where you look
out and see if you're seeing the world
more deeply more clearly that you have
to to and fro between them you have SE
seated practices where you're sitting
right but then you should do moving
practices where you're trying to carry
mindfulness into your movement so I do
like taii Chan um and things like that
you need imaginal practices where you're
engaging your imagination
not in for
entertainment uh but you're doing that
serious play that allows you to taste
what what it might be like to be
somebody other than who you currently
are and uh what how you might uh What uh
how you might ident uh identify with
that um and and those are very important
practices uh so um biological practices
we have a bunch of those we have U oh
let me give you an example of uh an
imaginal practice lexio deina which is
reading a text in an imaginal fashion
you're not just reading it to get
information you're trying to create the
you're trying to take up the text as a
serious play as something imaginal
through which you're trying to see the
world differently Pi a different way
taking perspectives you haven't taken
before and what and taste what the
transformation might be like that that
text is providing you that other voice
that other perspective the sage that
you're reading is like a parent to a
child as the adult as a child is to the
adult the adult is to the sage and
you're doing this imaginal work uh in
order to try and undergo a
transformation that's that's a kind of
imaginal practice lexio deina uh you
want to do diic practices we have a
whole bunch we've been teaching on um
the awaken to meeting platform where you
can go now and there's a whole uh
website where yeah where you can do all
of the
practices you can take courses there's
drop in things U my good friend Taylor
Barrett by the way that is now running
autonomously separate from John Riki I
get nothing from that other than the
satisfaction of knowing that some of my
ideas have been put into practice um and
Taylor's a good friend of mine um and so
we have what a practice called dialectic
into dialogos which is how can you talk
how to how can two people enter into
this Mutual midwifing this Fellowship
where they're trying to give I'm trying
to help you to give deeper birth to
yourself and you're trying to help me
we're trying to do that in a
reciprocally opening fashion and how can
we do it with like three three or four
people so that sort of gets into a a
shared Flow State where we start to be
drawn into those kinds of lifegiving
conversations which we've all had that
because they take on a life of our own
and they take us to places we didn't
think we could go to and we don't
necessarily end up agreeing but we all
say wow I never thought I could get here
and I couldn't have got here on my own
we we those kinds of practices uh we're
we're just putting the final touches on
a practice we've been working on
cultivating developing for the past year
or so uh in which you teach people a
Socratic practice of go into something a
deeply personal problem you're hopp and
then how can you go through a set of
with the help of other people's a set of
Transformations on your perspective and
also on your sense of identity so that
you can go from it being your personal
problem which is just yours to an
existential dilemma that is probably
shared with many people and then once
you get at the level of existential
dilemma the tradition can talk to you
and tell you what virtue might be
relevant to the existential Dimension
and then you can then address that part
of it and then that you bring that back
into and transform your personal problem
uh we're doing uh things like that uh
where where can people go where should
they go if they want to check out more
of that uh awaken to meaning uh.org it's
a a platform that last thing which is
called the socratic search space we're
just going to roll it out in the next
month or so uh the dialectic and
dialogos you can do that philosophical
Fellowship you can do that you can learn
about lexio deina meditation
contemplation uh various other kinds of
practices that's so awesome John I
appreciate the heck out of you I really
uh I have to say as well it's it's
beautiful to see you smitten uh and uh
it's it's really it's really lovely it
genuin is mate uh you know I I think uh
good people deserve good relationships
and I'm very glad that you've managed to
find yours so uh what can people expect
next you've kind of rounded out this
chapter you I how when was the first
meaning crisis video put on
YouTube uh February
2019 okay yeah so a good half decade
Journey on one
thing well the book is only part one
there's part two coming out uh which is
the second half um that'll have even
more revisions in it because all the
scientific work on relevance realization
has gone through a lot of revision and
and collaboration with other people
publishing papers like this year um and
stuff like that um the uh the next thing
is um well I've got a bunch of books
coming out I've got a book on while I'm
working on Einstein and Spinoza's God um
and then a book called reimagining
religion um and then uh book by Greg
Enriquez uh we're we got a lot of that
written on U on Consciousness that's
coming out uh the big project is um the
philosophical Silk Road which is going
to be my next big multimedia Endeavor um
it's going to be sort of at four levels
of PR presentation one
is well it it's based on this thesis
this is what's next I I made a
fundamental mistake in uh Awakening for
the meeting crisis um I thought you know
the the solution was to engineer an
ology of practices a religion that's not
a religion failing to realize that's
exactly the framing that I was
criticizing
throughout so I felt prey to a very
serious performative contradiction um
because I realized like what like like
that example of the living conversation
the sacred you can't manufacture it you
can't engineer it it has to show up with
a life of its own or it's not the sacred
it's not that that Fountain of
rejuvenating meaning that is deep
transformative of individuals and
communities but what's happening and
what I've seen since all of the
connections were that were formed by
Awakening from the main crisis is
communities around the world and and
things happening in in academic uh
cognitive science and philosophy and
psychology and and biology what I call
the Advent of the Sacred it's like
sacredness is trying to be born in a new
way for us I think as a response to uh
it's the I'll be Hegel here for a second
so this is my only technicality this is
the velt gist the spirit of reality
that's challenging the Zeitgeist the
spirit of the times of the meaning
crisis and so I want to do this I want
to in fact it's not I want to do this I
feel
called to do this one of the things I'm
going to do is I I I want to try
and teach by undergoing a pilgrimage I
want to go to the various places in the
world world where the sages of three
great Traditions that sort of built
comprehensive ways for people to deeply
dialogue with each other the neoplatonic
tradition that runs through Christianity
and Judaism and Islam so I want to talk
about right I want to talk about you
know Maximus the Confessor or Nicholas
of kza I'm gonna go there or Clement of
Alexandria or Sardi the the Sufi right
I'm going to go there and I'm going to
walk and and talk and live um and and
really undergo and try and make myself
vulnerable to hearing these people I'm
going to go to India you know with all
of
the vanta and everything wrapped around
it and Van is like wrapped with Tantra
and jism and and original Buddhism and
then uh I want to go to Japan uh because
there's Zen because Zen integrates
Buddhism and dosm and Shinto and and get
all three of these like what would it be
like to do the philosophical Silk Road
create a lingua philosophica so we could
engage in these not just an Ecology of
practices but an Ecology of tra
traditions where we could really deeply
talk to each other and people can travel
and and transform and maybe return and
recover their home or travel and find a
new home that's going to be the up the
upper level then below that is going to
be a lecture series like Awakening from
the meeting crisis where I go through
each one of these thinkers H and and
explain them in great detail and then
below that is going to be specific video
essays on uh more technical topics like
comparing the non-duality in vidanta to
the non-duality in in in Zen for example
or neoplatonism and then below that we
have What's called the Codex we have a
whole Bank of
volunteers taking all of my language and
they're like a a Wikipedia of it where
there's and it's at it's it's being
written at multiple levels of
accessibility somebody in grade 10 uh
completed High School all you know all
these levels there's cross referencing
there's diagrams there's practices you
can undertake to get a deeper
understanding of the concepts and so
there's going to be these four tiers and
there's going to be like a narrative
structure and an argumentative structure
right and a reflective structure it's
going to be this and and and the hope is
that that and that a lot of the teaching
will not go just in what I'm saying but
what I'm undergoing and and how I'm
being
transformed um there's going to be
people that are going to travel with me
at various places and meet me at various
places um and the hope is to open people
up to the Advent of the Sacred so they
can
uh properly Orient to receiving it so
that we can um
really uh transformatively Trust each
other in the way we need to in order to
address the meeting crisis well I'm glad
after taking on such a medium-sized
topic you're taking it a little bit
smaller for the next fil very very
reassuring that you're going to keep it
keep it nice and Niche uh John I
appreciate the heck out if you may I
can't wait until you get whatever you've
got coming out next out and I would love
to bring you back on whenever you're
ready uh I'll always come back and talk
to you Chris uh thank you for very much
and thank you for allowing me to
shamelessly plug my new book which I
really appreciate everyone should go and
check it out I appreciate you mate thank
you thank you so much Chris do you think
that your algorithm on YouTube is a bit
of a God is able to know things about
you that you don't know about yourself
well the YouTube gods have selected this
episode specifically for you bespoke so
go and go and check it out
