the world to come will be different from
our
expectations The Arc of human history
informs the trajectory of our
future we need to know who we are and
how we got here the e ology biology and
physics to know which paths remain open
to us and which lead to dead ends 4 and2
billion years ago Stardust coales to
form a planet a billion years later
simple life
emerged by 500 million years ago a
profusion of Life had exploded on our
Blue Green Planet fast forward 66
million years ago and dinosaurs were
taken out by our planet's most recent
mass
extinction and small shrew likee
survivors continued an evolutionary line
that would eventually become
us of all our homed ancestors one
species would ultimately remain Homo
sapiens a creature variously curious
creative kind cruel Cooperative
competitive combative and
clever when Earth's climate warmed and
stabilized around 10,000 years ago Homo
sapiens tribes who pivoted on mass to
Agriculture and pastoralism out
reproduced their Hunter gather
cousins unbeknownst to them and to most
of us this was a planet changing event
sustained by new agricultural Surplus
these early humans slowly spread out
around the globe expanding trade and
technology for thousands of years the
average annual growth in the size of the
human economy would be unnoticeable from
one generation to the
next by the 16th century however more
complex social organization and Advanced
navigational technology kickstarted a
unique period in human
history yet even with these advances
human cultures remained powered by
biomass and the muscles of humans and
our draft animals limiting
growth until in the early 19th century
10,000 years after the Agricultural
Revolution humans discovered how to
extract fossil energy and
materials from under Earth's surface to
boost their
economies this new discovery of
geologically stored sunlight in the form
of coal oil and gas changed
everything for the first time human and
animal labor played second fiddle to the
power of these new energy
sources when combined with a machine a
gallon of gasoline could output the same
work in a few minutes as a person
laboring for an entire
month we increasingly replaced manual
human tasks with machines at a tiny
fraction of the
cost the result higher profits higher
wages and cheaper
Goods sudden access to this bank account
of stored carbon energy turbocharged our
populations access to good services and
technology and quadrupled our economic
growth rate yet Humanity's great
acceleration was still ahead in the
latter half of the 20th century with
this new power source and an upgrade
from coal to higher quality liquid oil
the human economy's average growth rate
doubled yet again to now over 30 times
what it had averaged during the the last
few thousand
years compared to a global labor force
of around 5 billion real
humans the machines and work powered by
access to buried carbon
energy added the equivalent power of 500
billion human
workers access to these fossil energies
and materials brought billions More
Humans into existence and brought
billions more out of poverty and led to
the creation of new
myths institutions and
expectations our ancestors lives were
tightly linked to the Natural flows of
the Earth the Sun the rain and the
soil but during this moonshot of growth
and consumption our fundamental tether
to Nature was first
neglected and then for
gotten the main inputs to our economies
were now mostly
free we merely had to pay for the cost
of their
extraction not the cost of their
creation their true worth nor their
pollution to our ancestors the benefits
from carbon energy would have appeared
indistinguishable from
Magic and instead of appreciating this
giant one-time windfall we developed
stories that our Newfound wealth and
progress had emerged purely from Human
Ingenuity we had become energy
blind energy is and always will be the
currency of life animals were the First
Investors obtaining a larger energy
Surplus gives an animal a competitive
Advantage for survival and
reproduction this role of surplus energy
is a core driver of the natural world
and dictates what can and can't
happen we rarely think about it or talk
about it but we're all alive during the
carbon pulse the few hundred years where
humans are drawing down Earth's energy
battery millions of times faster than it
was trickle charged by D
photosynthesis fossil hydrocarbons at a
vast scale have enormously increased the
Surplus energy available to human
economies pulses by definition don't
last forever high quality ores and
Energy deposits are now mostly things of
the past plenty remains but it's of
lower quality and both more costly and
ecologically destructive to extract
in nature there are countless examples
where energy exists but the effort to
obtain it is so large that the meal is
effectively off the
menu in our lifetimes Society will have
to redirect increasing amounts of our
energy Surplus towards obtaining the
Surplus itself leaving less affordable
energy to support many of our current
economic
activities one day the energy it will
cost to extract energy will be so large
it won't make sense to do so even though
resources remain energy depletion will
act as a growing tax on human
Societies in this unprecedented era of
large Surplus we have excelled at
combining energy and materials into
technology and inventions that improve
The Human
Experience new technology can allow us
to use resources more efficiently or it
can transform natural flows into energy
but mostly technology just creates new
ways for humans to consume and builds
higher future requirements for energy
and
materials things that are more complex
require more energy when we add nodes to
a supply chain each connection requires
energy to
maintain the complexity of our globally
interconnected system system currently
requires the equivalent of 170 billion
light bulbs constantly turned on Burning
Brightly powered by the carbon
pulse even rebuildable technology that
harnesses the sun and the wind grows our
total consumption and has not yet
reduced the use of carbon energy
globally most people believe that money
is real wealth yet everything we spend
money on requires energy to mine create
deliver run maintain and dispose of in
this way money is ultimately a direct
claim on energy and
resources our economic stories assert
that with more money we can create more
of anything the truth is we cannot
create
energy we both extract it and burn it
faster by using techn techology and
printing money natural Capital
particularly energy is the true
foundation of our monetary systems as we
create more money we don't create more
resources we merely access them
faster the highest sustained growth rate
of human economies ever before and
likely ever again peaked 50 years ago
when oil production growth was at its
highest but but rather than living
within our means we found creative ways
to extend growth for a while
longer we created complex Supply chains
Outsourcing the heavy lifting to
countries with cheaper labor we turned
to debt in a large way to maintain high
levels of consumption a behavior that
accelerated in 2008 and has gone into
overdrive since
2020 debt allows us to spend resources
from the future and call it economic
growth this phenomenon has become so
pervasive in the last 50 years that we
think it's normal to consume today and
pay
tomorrow the developed World Is Now
using debt to enable the extraction of
things we couldn't otherwise afford to
extract to produce things we otherwise
couldn't afford to
consume this strategy has an expiration
date because all this new money will one
be spent on real things requiring
energy enabled by an extraordinary but
temporary energy Surplus the human
economy is now over 1,000 times bigger
than it was just 5 centuries
ago most of the benefits of this
one-time geological Surplus now flow to
a fraction of people not to the rest of
living humans nor future Generations
as we extract minerals and burn fossil
carbon to support modern living
standards their Wast streams are in turn
diminishing the life support systems of
other species and future
beings the impact of our Global energy
metabolism on nature has been tragic and
is now accelerating resulting and among
other things animal Bird and Fish
populations dropping by 50% since the
1970s plastic now weighing more than all
animals on land and in the sea and a
child born today being expected to
outlive Earth's coral
reefs as a culture we have recently but
almost entirely financialized The Human
Experience not only have we parse the
rich fabric of human life into a single
monetary marker but in doing so we've
used the wrong
prices the price of money is wrong
because we grow it with a keystroke with
no tether to finite natural
Capital the price of energy is wrong
because we don't treat it as the
extraordinary Irreplaceable resource it
is nonrenewable on any human time scale
and in setting prices on everything
we've lost sight of the large L cost
their use has on Earth's
ecosystems this biophysical story is all
connected in an emergent and unexpected
way as the carbon pulse boosted our
economies our institutions and
governments self-organized around
expectations of
growth now 8 billion members of a social
species collectively seek profits which
are linked to energy which is linked to
Fossil hydrocarbons and
minerals growth as measured by increases
in GDP is now required for
stability we have arrived at a place
where we as a culture have outsourced
our decisions and planning to the
financial system the Market's compulsion
to grow now outcompetes any alternative
Paths of wisdom or
constraint the system is no longer in
anyone's
control the human species at least to
this point has become a Mindless
insatiable energy hungry
superorganism the superorganism is an
emergent phenomenon of the animals that
comprise it us
human beings are related to all other
creatures on Earth we are the product of
an unbroken chain connecting to the
first life which means that hidden
beneath our stated motivations of what
we do every day in industrial society we
are driven to pursue the same
neurochemical brain rewards our
ancestors pursued this has huge
implications for our behaviors our
economies and our future
reaching for our phone to see if someone
liked our Facebook post or to see if
Bitcoin is up or down aren't really our
goals we are in reality just seeking the
same brain rewards that led to success
for our hunter gatherer
ancestors dopamine is a molecule that in
animals and in humans leads to
motivation and action in a materially
rich modern world the habituation to the
action of consumption leads to the
wanting of things culture-wide being
stronger than the reward we get from
having them this is a fundamental
problem for an economic system that's
turning billions of barrels of oil into
microl lers of
dopamine as a carryover from ancestral
tribal life we are highly tuned to
social signals comparing ourselves to
others seeking approval acceptance and
jockeying for status with material and
now digital wealth as today's primary
status signal consumerism is now largely
based on having as much or more than
those around us rather than focusing on
what we may actually
need modern humans are still tribal
beings we staunchly support those in our
ingroups and easily ostracize outgroups
from trivial divisions like sports teams
to political affiliation race or
nationality our Evolution has primed us
to blame other humans for situations we
don't like or
understand we have Rich creative and
colorful imaginations that reside in the
virtual worlds of our
minds the human brain can imagine and
verbalize Limitless combinations of
physical
impossibilities sustainable outposts on
Mars self-perpetuating energy machines
and an Economy based on physical
consumption growing continually for
centuries in ancestral times these
Virtual Worlds overlapped with the
physical worlds we inhabited making us
more content and effective as a tribal
unit but in a culture of vast material
wealth information overload and social
media it's increasingly difficult for us
to separate fantasy from
reality when these individual Virtual
Worlds connect with the virtual worlds
of others the result is widespread
shared beliefs that money is real that
our current wealth is due mostly to our
cleverness and that technology will lead
to Limitless
growth when we look to others to try and
understand our complex modern world as
social beings who said it becomes more
important than logic or the quality of
the evidence celebrity and group
affiliation now matter more than truth
our Stone AG brains are no match for the
social media algorithms that now
constantly hijack our
attention modern media Outlets prey on
our evolutionary inclinations for
novelty and ingroup defense via
capturing our attention and turning
clicks and shares into
consumption computer algorithms
optimized for profit are splintering our
society by reducing attention spans
accelerating addiction polarization
apathy and mistrust in science a
metaphorical technology worm driven by
exponentially improving artificial
intelligence is silently eating our
minds humans are creatures with finite
lifespans the future is not a priority
to us
emotionally instead we are focused on
the very short term this weekend's plans
this quarter's earnings this term's
election the next set of compelling
images were urged to scroll to we often
promise to make big changes starting
tomorrow until tomorrow becomes today
and the cycle repeats delaying any
actual change
like other biological organisms humans
seek gains and are averse to losses we
look for undervalued stocks to invest in
sales on new shoes or two for one
cocktails at happy hour unlike squirrels
or cheetahs we are an extremely social
species we coordinate as families small
businesses corporations and nation
states to maximize our virtual Surplus
dollars which we then spend on real
things our core economic and
environmental challenges stem from a
mismatch of hunter gatherer Minds
inhabiting a competitive consumer growth
culture together these human universals
have led to incentives and behaviors
which have created created a metabolic
superorganism whose objective is
disconnected from the well-being of its
parts
us it is tempting to look at how we live
today and conclude that this is how
humans
are but modern society is only a single
brief example out of thousands of
successful Arrangements in human history
humans alive today don't choose to be
hierarchical or greedy many of our
choices are constrained by the economic
system we were born
into our current High consumption High
inequality High technological
distraction and low levels of daily
human connection are a direct product of
the carbon
pulse though human brains don't change
quickly under the right circumstances
our behaviors and cultural norms can
move at lightning speed our species is
incredibly adaptive when we're
challenged the way we've been living is
an anomaly but we take it for granted
because as individuals it's all we've
ever
known going forward a lifestyle adapted
to lower energy use will reconnect our
virtual and physical Worlds by necessity
Our Lives will become less Global more
interpersonally engaged and more
Tethered to Natural
flows as a species a global
superorganism is not our destiny who we
are has brought us to this precipice who
we are capable of becoming as individual
ual and as a society will be the
question of our
time we are alive at a time of Wonder
Peril and
possibility ahead are a million unknown
destinations some dark and for boing and
some welcoming and
beautiful many of us sense that
something is different something is
coming but we lack a shared
understanding of the path that brought
us here and of the terrain ahead which
future we expect depends upon which lens
we use to see the
road modern society is polarized
stressed and overwhelmed with
information good and bad as a result
common points of view are lenses focus
on the road just in front of us for the
view to the future we defer to
culturally accepted guides who are
confident they know the way
forward through the lens of an economist
for example we see a glorious Road
leading to growth that never stops any
scarcity of energy or material inputs
will be solved by Price signals creating
incentives which increase our
productivity and growth the economic
lens shows us that human Ingenuity and
the market will solve
everything a financial lens translates
stock markets at all-time highs as a
sign of society's Health portending a
rich and virtuous future with enough
financial Capital we'll be able to build
roads to
anywhere a technology lens promises a
shiny Road of comfort novelty and
prosperity enabled by Future inventions
in Innovation artificial intelligence
and a vibrant metaverse will sidestep
any energy or resource constraints we
envision future humans Breaking Free
from the confines of Earth and enjoying
high-tech Lifestyles where the biggest
problem is Runaway
robots these lenses are all optimistic
but misguided all these lenses are
energy blind the real paths ahead can
only be seen by integrating energy
awareness with Biology sociology physics
and everything science has discovered we
need a systems lens to read the map a
systems lens reveals the holistic story
that explains Humanity's path in pursuit
of the same emotional experiences of our
ancient ancestors we transform materials
and energy into Technologies that make
our lives more comfortable and fun we
keep score of our progress using money
which has become a psychological standin
for all the things our ancestors valued
the massive scale of Humanity's
consumption is evidenced by the excess
CO2 being absorbed by Earth's oceans and
atmosphere the emergent result is a
metabolic
superorganism with oil as it hemoglobin
transporting goods through the arteries
and veins of a global supply network
like a shark needing to swim to get
oxygen flowing through its gills our
current economic system has an
imperative to grow in order to satisfy
prior Financial commitments We Can't
Stop nor can we slow down or the system
will
crash a systems lens reveals that the
road ahead is closed to our current
cultural expectations yet we continue to
Bear Down on the accelerator wearing
systems lenses removes the blind spots
created by any single issue
lens global economic growth will never
meaningfully decouple from energy
consumption it cannot because the
world's GDP by definition has always
been a proxy for how much energy we burn
if we were to grow the global economy at
3% a year as most governments and
institutions expect we would use as much
energy and materials in the next 30
years as we have in the past
10,000 stock markets are poor guideposts
for Prosperity when inflated by
government and Central Bank support all
the cash stocks bonds and Pension funds
in the world will need energy and
materials to be cashed out and turned
into real wealth creativity and
Innovation will be Central to human
Futures but modern technology requires
huge amounts of energy to build and to
operate as long as GDP is our goal
efficiency gains from new technology
will serve the super organism
transitioning from fossil hydrocarbon to
rebuildable energy won't change this
Dynamic ultimately in addition to using
different energy we'll need to use
energy
differently seeing our future through a
systems lens changes everything we have
spent the last century harnessing
enormous amounts of fossil energy to
build a world of complexity like nothing
seen before in the coming Century
Humanity will EXP experience a great
simplification there will always be
energy on Earth as long as the sun burns
but the amount of surplus energy
available to human societies will soon
be
diminishing as the extraction of
geologically stored energy becomes more
difficult everything we're used to in
society will become more costly or less
available we are not planning for this
because it's never happened before the
onset of the great simplification will
be financial and economic turbulence
followed by contraction when we can no
longer grow fast enough to maintain all
the increased Financial claims economies
will recede to a scale that can again be
supported by physical flows without
credit complex Global Supply chains the
related High consumption lifestyles and
many of the conveniences and freedoms we
take for granted in this era of abundant
energy Surplus will
diminish the ensuing simplification will
be among the most significant events
ever experienced by our
species those who look through A
System's lens can serve as early
Visionaries of a simpler life with new
ways of relating to technology to
consumption to each other and to Earth's
ecosystems there are many pathways
wending through a great
simplification some are wise Humane and
even preferable to what we have now some
are so dark as to be nearly Unthinkable
yet it is precisely thinking about these
Pathways and actively choosing among
them which offers the only realistic
hope for a long and meaningful human
future Nature has gifted us with a
productive and beautiful home the
ability to understand how we got here
and the creativity to imagine which
paths are possible the future need not
be dystopian but cleverness alone will
no longer suffice for the next leg of
our journey we will need
imagination foresight empathy and above
all wisdom to navigate the path to the
Future that is
arriving the Great simplification
