okay we need to talk about this last
week open aai announced their new model
03 and Tech Twitter went absolutely
insane there's a lot of talk about it
online and if you don't know how to make
sense of it all then it can lead to you
feeling pretty uncertain about the
future so what's so special about 03
first off it scored with
87.5% accuracy on the ark AGI Benchmark
which is a significant improvement from
previous models and as you can see the
graph it's going exponential now without
the model even being out yet there's
just been more talk online about what's
been being talked about which is that
jobs won't exist in 2 to 5 years there's
different time ranges that people are
talking about could be 2 years could be
5 years could be 10 years depends on how
you view the situation because we don't
know the future now the main questions
I'm interested are will we be considered
insects to our AGI overlords if AGI can
do everything humans can and more what
the do we do if jobs won't exist what do
we focus on if we want to thrive so I've
been studying this for a few years now
trying to make sense of it in my own
head and of course you get flooded with
a bunch of different perspectives so
I've collected the ones that I believe
are one the most optimistic and two the
ones that just make the most sense so I
hope that I can give a positive
Viewpoint of this and allow you to make
better decisions going into the future
because right now your behavior matters
more than ever sitting around and doing
nothing that is going to lead where it
would have led in the first place and
has been leading so if you're doing
nothing then please do something but
this is for those that want to do
something now there is a difference
between Ai and AGI AI is the thing that
we have right now some people call it a
ni which is artificial narrow
intelligence and AGI is artificial
general intelligence which depending on
the definition means that it is on par
with human capabilities it can do the
same things that humans can do so to
understand AI first we need to
understand the origin of that term if we
want to understand what it means for us
so before the term AI there was the term
cybernetics which was popularized or
just talked about by Norbert weer in
1948 in his book cybernetics cybernetics
the term is ancient Greek for helmsmen
or another word for governor and it's
the idea of automatic self-regulating
control in a system acting sensing and
comparing to a goal is a fundamental
Loop to intelligent systems now his key
Insight was that the world should be
understood in terms of information that
complex systems like organisms brains
and societies error correct toward a
goal and if those feedback loops break
down the system breaks down in other
words entropy so the the easiest and
most simple way to understand
cybernetics is think of if you are the
captain of a ship and you are heading
toward a lighthouse you're trying to get
to to the lighthouse and the wind blows
you off course to the left so you steer
right and then you Veer too far right so
you steer left and you error correct to
get to the specific goal if you're an
unintelligent system or an unintelligent
person you're going to get blown off to
the left and then you're going to keep
going to the left and you're not going
to reach the lighthouse we talked about
this in my video how to become more
intelligent than 99% of people and this
cybernetics alone is illustrative of
naval's quote the only real test of
intelligence is that you get what you
want out of life so as we'll discuss
error correcting toward a goal is really
just how you get what you want out of
life the problem is the difference
between Ai and AGI where AI they it
isn't the governor of its own system you
still have to assign it the context the
goal the everything else in order for it
to do what it does the main Mark of AGI
in my mind is the ability to discover
unknown goals and pursue those goals
through error correction in other words
AGI is the governor of its own system
now here's the important part 2 years
after Weiner's introduction to
cybernetics he published the human use
of human beings this book is now out of
print but the central idea relevant to
today's world is that we must cease to
kiss the whip that lashes us weiner knew
the danger was not in machines becoming
more like humans but humans being
treated like machines does that sound
familiar so this is what AI is it's a
cybernetic system that needs a governor
it needs to be assigned the goal so what
we know as AI today in its current
manifestation which is pretty much chat
apps like chat GPT and agents are
becoming a thing and swarms are becoming
a thing they're just very they're not
very common or in the public eye but for
the general use case that most people
use it for which is to Google search
something that they could find the same
information online in maybe 10 more
seconds if they understand how to Google
if you don't understand how to Google
information which is a skill in itself
then you won't know how to get the right
information out of chat GP there isn't
too much of a difference in what the
normal use case of AI is right now
compared to what you could do in the
past but these chat apps and AI right
now lack one crucial trait which is
agency if you haven't watched the Devon
Ericson podcast that did extremely well
and was very popular a few videos ago on
my channel I would encourage you to
watch that to learn about agency and the
importance of it AI is a specialist that
needs a generalist a tool that needs a
master AI is useful for achieving a goal
it is assigned like playing chess or
beating go as long as AI must be tested
or assigned a goal to determine its
intelligence it is not even close to
human intelligence the one thing I'm
seeing right now that is making people
kind of freak out is that AI is starting
to learn how to error correct toward
different goals but if the if it's still
a program that is told to discover
unknown goals then that's still a goal
and it is still not the governor of its
own actions the the system is not
complete it's not Universal but it's
still incomplete now if you want to know
what I mean by this and how powerful AI
can actually be I'm not against AI I
actually think it's quite powerful in my
own workflow especially if you know how
to use it but in cortex our writing app
and notetaking app cortex AI will be
going in by the end of January so you
can try that out if you just want to see
cool ways to use AI because I think
we've cracked the code for social media
content newsletters Etc like the the
content that our cortex AI spits out
with our prompt engineering is better
than any that I've seen on the market
but that's the exact problem most people
have been trained to be specialist tools
not Innovative humans in control of
their journey in the unknown it's no
wonder they're scared of replacement
they should be since the day they were
born they've been assigned goals and
have error corrected to fit the mold
their parents wanted them to fit in go
to school get a job retire at 65
entrepreneurship yeah right save your
money get good grades and listen to
Authority take the safe route stay
subservient to the dominant system
system and before you know it your mind
will scratch and Claw its way back to
the life that it was sold to be
comfortable you may have the occasional
desire to change the depth of your soul
crying for you to break free but the
coat in your head is so powerful that it
quickly squashes that feature mistaken
for a bug now do you see why I talk
about this in almost every video whether
it's related to AI or not just human
agency and rejecting the conventional
path it may sound like I'm beating a
dead horse at this point but specialist
conditioning is arguably the greatest
destroyer of humanity it's the destroyer
of creativity and without creativity
there's no life there's no meaning
there's no happiness because happiness
comes from solving problems so the
question is what's the solution we'll
get to that but we have a bit more of
this story so around the 1960s a new
perception of Technology started to
emerge the perception was that by
inventing computers a universal computer
we had externalized our central nervous
system we' externalized our brains or
minds or intelligence so that we're now
operating within one Collective mind we
have all potential information at our
fingertips and now if you want to get
spiritual or Phil philosophical about
this with idealism or Consciousness I
think it's a fun mental exercise to do
but we're not here to dig into that
today so unfortunately we don't hear
much about cybernetics today and it's
interesting because this new perception
of Technology fueled poor incentives in
other words people wanted to profit off
of this and someone in specific John
McCarthy didn't like Norbert weiner the
the person behind cybernetics so he
coined the term artificial intelligence
and became a founding father in what we
know today which I feel like is kind of
messed up I like the term cybernetics
more but now let's talk about the good
stuff because with the meteoric rise in
the talk about intelligent machines it's
kind of left us wondering if we're
significant or not that's been a
question for a long time is there
something significant about being Being
Human and for being the only species
that has made it to the moon or built
Rockets or done what we've done there
has to be something there
right now I've been studying David
Deutsch a lot recently I feel like his
teachings and philosophy are very
relevant to what's happening right now
and David was influenced by Carl popper
and both of them believe there is
something significant about being human
and our significance lies in our ability
to create knowledge he considers us
Universal explainers and Universal
Constructors these are certain types of
beings in reality so it starts with the
need for creativity the process by which
all knowledge that is created happens
through conjecture and criticism trial
and error variation and selection in
darwinian terms so in other words
guessing and correcting On's guess is
how you accomplish anything you set your
mind to this is how we learn innovate
make progress and understand almost
anything in the universe the difference
is that humans can set their minds on
anything not just the goal it was
assigned it can discover new goals that
shape the perception of opportunities
allowing our mind to error correct
toward that goal so along with this
thing of being a universal explainer is
the fact that we are capable of
understanding anything within the laws
of nature or the laws of physics we
create explanatory theories that reveal
the Deep structure of reality allowing
us to guess and predict in a more
efficient way that breed faster progress
with time now I don't know if this is
how deuts uh thinks about it but in his
book The Beginning of infinity he kind
of he doesn't reject them but he
proposes a better option compared to
reductionism and holism where
reductionism is breaking things down
into parts and seeing the parts as
significant holism on the other hand is
thinking in holes and seeing the holes
as more significant but with David
Deutsch and someone like Ken Wilbur with
his integral Theory it's about both it's
it's a I don't David probably wouldn't
agree with this term but holons Arthur
kler coined the term holons which stands
for whole parts and his Insight was that
everything in reality is a holon it is a
whole part like atoms to molecules to
cells to organisms so on and so forth
spanning everywhere or like me to this
room to this apartment complex to this
city to this country to this nation to
the world to the cosmos etc etc each
thing is a whole and it's a part or it's
a part within a hole and a hole within
itself and these parts and holes emerge
transcend include all of these other
things so the Insight here being that we
can understand any hole and we can
understand the parts within the hole and
if we can understand the parts within a
hole and the hole itself then we can
build that thing now the big problem
with AGI is that we don't know what
creativity is yet we haven't cracked the
hard problem of Consciousness we don't
understand the parts in the whole of
that thing therefore we cannot build it
and it's very unlikely that we're just
going to m Mash things together in a way
that isn't consistent with how they're
built and expected to emerge
spontaneously as it is in us this
knowledge allows us to understand things
we've never directly experienced like
stars and galaxies we can understand a
rocket even if we've never built one and
if we can understand it we can
eventually build it if we have the
knowledge to do so there is a logical
sequence of steps or order of operations
and each step requires you to have the
knowledge for that step in your
practical life you can't achieve
something for the simple reason that you
either don't understand it or don't have
the knowledge to achieve it for high
agency humans this is liberating for low
agency machines this is blasphemy and
this is what many people get wrong about
AGI AI or artificial intelligence is an
incomplete system that must be assigned
a goal like many animals or low agency
employees are programmed to a GI or
artificial general intelligence is a
complete or Universal system like a
human who is not limited to a small
subset of things that are possible AGI
may have more computational power or
memory but there's no concept that it
can understand that we can't ourselves
and that doesn't rule out the fact that
we can use Universal computers or
augment ourselves with more computation
in memory the point is that you can
achieve anything within the realm
possibility but only if you have the
knowledge to do so you are not doomed to
the default path of society or the rule
of AGI because because if AGI is Agi you
are AGI you're practically the same
thing one just has more computational
power but computation isn't the only
difference SL similarity so we need to
understand the five human capabilities
and if AGI can become on par with those
or surpass those so we understand our
place in the
world now the thing with all of this
with AGI and even ASI which is
artificial super intelligence is that
people can't settle on a definition for
it so I'm not going to talk about ASI
here because frankly I don't know and
absolutely nobody knows whether it's
going to be a thing or if it can even
become a thing or when it's going to
become a thing for AGI that's kind of
Within Reach and it is possible so the
questions here are are human
capabilities actually limited do we not
have the capability to learn and do
anything that AGI could do ultimately
are there any limits on what we can
think and how we think mainly we need to
pay attention to computation
transformation variation selection and
attention as noted by AGI researcher
Carlos dardia he's also influenced by
deuts and you can find him on YouTube
it's AGI with Carlos so all of these
ideas are kind of a culmination of his
deutsches poppers Darwin's others so the
first is computation and the question is
is there any limit to what we can
compute and the answer is no because
once you have a universal computer in
your hands then it's it's just a matter
of time and memory to compute anything
so if agis have that then they have as
much computational power as us and
therefore no advantage over us and even
further if we can augment our brains
which I also don't see outside of the
realm of possibility and something that
we can build then we will remain on par
with AGI as it accelerates and I think
once AGI becomes a thing we can't tell
this now we don't know but once it does
become a thing I think we're going to be
pretty enlightened as to how
underwhelming it may seem as it's
happening as things do throughout your
life it's like one major spark one ooh
okay that happened now it's normal life
our mind adapts to these things and one
thing that I haven't touched on just yet
is David Deutsch's belief that uh
problems are infinite that there will
always be problems to solve and that
problems are soluble and if happiness
stems from solving the right problems
then that is our source of happiness is
to create so problems are infinite
knowledge creation is infinite in that
aspect so when AGI becomes a thing
things may speed up things may go
exponential but when you zoom out on the
graph over the course of 50 years that
exponential curve may just look like a
normal line that we're going through
right now that happens all the time it
depends on how you zoom in and zoom out
of History to see what's going on when
you zoom super far in right now yeah
it's an exponential curve and it's scary
but once that thing actually comes along
and problems can be solved faster we're
only going to be exposed to this new set
of problems and only then can we decide
what we're going to do and what our role
or job here is now after computation is
transformation and this is one that I
personally find fascinating so
transformation is creation we can turn
raw materials into Rockets given the
right knowledge and the thing with this
is that human hands and bodies seem to
be particularly good at transforming
things because they can perform any
sequence of operations even if we can't
do it we can build the thing that does
it humans are generalists that build
tools to survive in any environment
nature is a very harsh place if we
didn't have jackets or shelter to live
in a freezing environment we would die
within 3 hours people see nature as this
like hospitable and sacred thing and I'm
sure there is hospitability and
sacredness in it there is it's the
biosphere if that thing gets wiped out
or we don't build another one then the
new sphere doesn't have any ground Hons
right parts and holes if the parts get
taken out from under the hole then the
hole ceases to exist so human life
ceases to exist if the biosphere ceases
to exist that was a tangent but the the
point is is that we've built rocket
ships and telescopes we can build the
thing that builds the thing so the
question here is with transformation is
there a limit to what these basic
operations can do when strung together
in the right way and again the answer is
no if humans could teleoperate a gorilla
or a squirrel as Carlos puts it there is
a sequence of steps to build a rocket
with time now it's not particularly that
a squirrel can build a rocket but
imagine if Elon Musk was the person
teleoperating that squirrel he has the
knowledge to do it he could find a way
to build the rocket not with just the
squirrel what would Elon mus do right
he'd get the team he'd get the materials
he'd get the resources there would be a
way to do it given time this is what
many people Outsource in their life is
that if they want to achieve something
they eventually hit a roadblock and then
they can't error correct to hit the goal
and then they quit altogether when there
is a string of basic operations that you
can do to achieve anything you want in
life within the realm of possibility now
the thing here is time transformation
takes time it doesn't matter how fast
AGI can compute and a singularity won't
change that just as the Big Bang didn't
or the enlightenment didn't the
enlightenment didn't put rockets in the
sky the big bang didn't put rockets in
the sky it birthed a new set of problems
a new set of ideas and new potential for
knowledge so far the AGI worry seems to
be stemming from a fundamental
misunderstanding of what reality is now
the last three variation selection
attention all have to do with how to
create knowledge in other words it's
about navigating idea space or the
unknown because we can compute and we
can transform but do we have the
knowledge to do so can we acquire the
knowledge to do so knowledge serves two
functions the first is to make specific
things happen preferably good things of
course rather than bad things the second
is to capture patterns in in reality
this allows us to store information in
an efficient way so that we aren't
always starting from scratch in our
Pursuits we understand big picture
Concepts like the sun rising and falling
each day and Seasons changing every so
often and without this understanding
much of our lives would fall apart we
wouldn't make cumulative progress so
capturing patterns in reality allows us
to plan by proximity we understand that
we would freeze to death in a cold
environment so we don't go into the cold
environment until we have the tool to
survive in that environment and
something like a jacket or a hotel is
just a deposit of knowledge the other
thing with this pattern recognition and
efficiency of understanding is that in
the future I believe that we're going to
be speaking a a slightly different
language than what we are now we're
going to speak be speaking in this more
abstracted highlevel layer that allows
us to understand things that fall under
it when everything becomes this natural
language type deal like us uh speaking
natural language to spit out code from
an llm AS language evolves as it does
we're going to be speaking in a much
clearer more efficient way that allows
us to navigate idea space of the future
because if a lot of the problems that we
have now are solved and we're open to
this new set of possibilities and
knowledge and if language paves the road
of thought like thought can only go as
far as the language allows we're going
to be speaking a different language so
that we can perceive different things
now we've talked a lot about idea space
but idea space is what you have to
explore in order to to create knowledge
so the idea space think of it as the
unknown you can think of the unknown as
a map there's light spots on the map
think of in a video game like your uh
mini map where there's light spots on
the map and those are the areas you've
explored that's the known and then the
dark areas are the unknown the places
you haven't explored yet and the dark
spots are where your potential lies if
you just operate within your bubble of
comfort or your comfort zone or the
known all the time then you aren't going
to discover anything new you're not
going to be happy you're not going to
find meaning you're not going to have
problems to solve the map or the unknown
is a surface area for ideas that can be
discovered and tested against reality to
verify their validity when those results
do not move you closer toward your goal
or move you further from that a problem
is revealed and you must error correct
toward the goal so the first part of
this is variation is there a limit to
the number of new ideas we can come up
with to survive and Achieve what we set
our minds to with computation we can
navigate the entire space of ideas with
agency we can take any step within that
space and eventually stumble across a
good idea after many bad ones with
creation we can move in unique ways like
flying over a forest rather than walking
through it so by creating new things and
creating new knowledge it allows us to
explore this unknown or just this idea
space in new ways to find new ideas you
find ideas in the sky rather than on the
ground because now you can fly through
the sky so we can understand anything
create anything and discover an infinite
set of new ideas to solve an infinite
string of problems again AGI can do the
same and we are both Bound by the laws
of nature but any possibility inside of
that is Within Reach now after variation
comes selection we can come up with any
idea but can we find the good ones the
potential problem here is that it is
difficult to make cumulative progress
without learning from mistakes it
wouldn't be fun to start off from
scratch if we wanted to build an
electric car after a gas car we wouldn't
be very developed as a species as
universal cybernetic systems we can
become more efficient at navigating idea
space to avoid wandering lost we error
correct so again there's no fundamental
difference between AGI and humans here
now the last part is attention this one
is specifically from Carlos deag Guardia
and I like it because I have a book
called The Art of focus that actually
goes into a lot of the deeper nature of
attention it's not a very scientific
book I feel like when people some people
Purchase start of focus they're like oh
I'm going to learn how to do deep work
no it it's more so my life philosophy so
one other aspect that humans take for
granted is our ability to change our
focus by changing our perspective when a
problem occurs where does your attention
go if you want to build a rocket does it
help to ask the old gods to do it for
you or can you change lenses to view the
situation in a way that allows you to
perceive opportunities what I'm saying
here is that in the past even now when
you encounter a problem people's minds
often default to the the worldview or
belief system that they were programmed
to believe in when people have money
problems they think oh they start
praying to God and asking for help and
while that can help Orient your
attention in a way that allows you to
overcome that problem it usually isn't
the best lens to actually solve that
problem I'm not saying that it's an
invalid lens or an invalid belief system
or worldview I'm just saying that it's
not the overarching one that's going to
solve all the problems in your life to
me that's more of a a sense making or a
meaning mechanism to allow you to to
find peace and Clarity just in your
place in the world in terms of solving a
problem like money that's a completely
different skill set and belief system in
order to do that well and efficiently
and not waste a lot of time and so this
presents a massive problems for humans
is just Paradigm lock in ideology
because we do have the ability to change
our perspective when new problems come
up and by attaching to a specific
ideology you box yourself into this
narrow set you can't explore idea space
very well or very far so in other words
humans have the ability to put on a
spiritual lens to find peace and a
scientific lens to find progress and any
other lens in between one big problem
that I see a lot is just identifying
with a purely ascending philosophy
because that's no different from being
an incomplete system that will fail to
solve certain sets of problems
spirituality is a great lens or tool
it's a very big picture lens or tool
that you can expand into when you need
to when you're not focused on a problem
it's kind of like the it's like the
solution to everything is to surrender
to every problem and just hope that it
passes You by or to release tension but
it sounds big picture but reality isn't
that myopic it's a good solution and
it's a good tool but a bad Master for
many problems in your life and it also
just fails to integrate you're you're
focused on the whole it's holism right
that that is more significant than
anything in the world but you're
neglecting all of the parts that make it
up it's not integral you're practically
rejecting survival and by doing so you
cause a lot more pain and suffering that
you're trying to solve with a solution
that one isn't a solution and two isn't
the best way to go about solving the
problems it's very one-dimensional so
with that said all of that said AGI does
not seem like it can surpass us very far
especially if we can become very similar
to AGI which is I would assume a big
part of the future but the question is
okay what do we do this doesn't help the
fact that Life as we know it will change
jobs will be replaced and the unknown
creeps nearer so in my opinion the only
option is what it has been the entire
time to dive
in let's start from a recent tweet from
Naval rant be a Creator and you won't
have to worry about jobs careers and AI
now as I've discussed in like 80% of my
videos and as nval eloquently put here
the answer is to become a Creator
specifically a value Creator now when I
say this many people assume that I'm
saying become a content creator like
this myopic little job that people want
to become now when they grow up because
it seems like you just don't do anything
you just talk to a camera all day and
it's definitely not a business model
with certain skills that you need and it
it's not you just sit around and you
record videos all day and you're good to
go so no being a Creator isn't about
posting content being a Creator is about
digging down to the essence of your
being in the reason behind most of your
actions which is to create something
worth using to be valuable to feel as if
you have a place in the world to feel a
connection to something greater than
yourself to contribute and with
creativity something we don't understand
yet so let me string this together to
just help it click the word entrepreneur
is a French origin it comes from the
verb entreprene entreprendre I'm not
French which means to undertake or to do
something in the 16th centur when
translated to English it became a noun
referring to a person who undertakes a
business project so in other words an
entrepreneur is someone who is doing
something it is not a title or label but
an act it is the commitment to a high
agency life a commitment to doing things
without permission from someone else to
set your own goals and navigate the
unknown to achieve them and in lies the
problem people want to be told what to
do when that's exactly what will get
them replaced that doesn't mean to stop
learning from other people it means to
not treat any form of a job skill or
career as an end this is going to be
something extremely important in the
future is not attaching to one specific
way of doing things or one specific
outcome for your life everything's going
to be changing a lot faster problems are
going to emerge knowledge is going to
emerge we're going to be pivoting left
and right things are going to seem so
unstable unless you understand how to
navigate that or unless you're a high
agency person who can handle that
there's going to be very little
certainty in the future and that is an
amazing thing that is not a bad thing at
all so in this sense a Creator is
someone who is creating something it's
not a title or a fancy new kind of job
where you can sit in front of a camera
and do minimal work it is a way of being
and it just so happens that the highest
leverage place to create right now at
least is on the internet it is the path
of high agency you don't need permission
to create something and post it on the
internet you don't need permission to
navigate idea space and find the
information you need this may change in
the future but that only reinforces the
point no matter if it's the internet or
Intergalactic space the answer has been
and always will be to become a creator
of course and as we've learned that
doesn't mean it's easy that doesn't mean
you can skip trial and error that
doesn't mean that one course is going to
give you all the answers because that's
not how the mind works that's not how
time works that's not how AGI will work
when we're exposed to a completely new
set of problems where the our current
level of intelligence isn't going to do
it now I'm kind of obligated to promote
my tour writer course and one person
business Launchpad course because it's
highly relevant but I just want to make
the point here about the content creator
thing like don't go into this to become
a writer or a content creator or a
oneperson business or whatever it may be
those are Concepts to help you
understand the parts of that compose
that thing it's supposed to equip you
with a new way of looking at things and
the skills to achieve certain things in
your life so if you want to achieve
those things in your life then yeah
toour writer one person business
Launchpad can help you but they're
they're not a one they're not a quick
fix you still have to error correct
toward a goal you're not going to do it
for 30 days and gain a billion followers
at once you're going to learn how to
write and you're going to get better at
writing and you're going to learn the
skills that require to start a business
and you're going to get better at those
skills it's it's a a commitment for life
to error correct in a high agency
Direction and that's what creators do
they solve the infinite set of problems
that life presents without problems
there is no creativity without problems
there is no purpose pain and suffering
stem from the inability to understand
problems and more so relinquishing your
ability to solve them a world without
creativity and purpose is a world
without life now the mark of a sovereign
individual is that they learn how to
learn they have an evolving vision for
the future they build a meaningful
project as one stepping stone they
identify problems that prevent progress
they generate ideas and test solutions
they become more efficient with time
they deposit their creation and
knowledge if valuable they are rewarded
by the monetary system of that Society
if not valuable they eror correct until
valuable and lastly they never ever quit
because someone else's Vision trumps
their own do it all write design market
sell film code be the generalist you
were born to be be the orchestrator of
ideas the governor of thought AI is
simply a tool that now allows you to
learn and do all of these once it
becomes your master you lose nobody can
tell you what to do in the future but
has it ever been any different at this
point we're just talking in circles
you're looking for the quick fix as
always when the quickest fix is the
longest path the principles haven't
changed and they're not going to change
in the future you just haven't taken the
leap thank you for watching if you want
a free life reset planner just join my
newsletter and it'll get sent to you in
the welcome email link in the
description for all of those sign up for
cortex AI stuff is coming late January
mobile app desktop app and offline mode
are being uh dropped throughout January
if you sign up for cortex you'll receive
an email with all of those things and
you can join the Discord as well all
right thank you like
subscribe bye
