the point is ladies and gentlemen that
Greed for lack of a better word is good
greed is Right greed works I walk
through these cities the cities of the
Western
World London New York and sometimes it
resembles the most poverty stricken
cities of the East there's been a
breakdown a betrayal of the social
contract in Western life
are you depressed or is it just c a p i
t a l i s that
I we live in a society and this
particular brand of society is dominated
by never-ending consumerism endless
competition and the pursuit of profit
slaves worked all the hours they were
awake for their entire
lives I think like if they can do it so
can I and while existing in this Society
a lot of us have found ourselves
grappling with a profound sense of
emptiness we wake up we work to survive
and consume to feel whole and yet the
promises of capitalism Prosperity
happiness fulfillment these things seem
increasingly Out Of Reach In America
consumerism and individual success are
celebrated as the highest forms of human
achievement yeah I just want a house in
Florida but why I I don't know and on
the surf it sounds great but if you just
look a little bit deeper it can feel as
though the very soul of society is being
hollowed out once you peep game and lock
into the fact that this overwhelming
system ties our human Worth to economic
output what normally happens is that
instead of feeling like you're the
villain in your favorite film that's
glorifying white collar crime we're
usually left with anxiety
disillusionment and a creeping sense of
nihilism that questions whether any of
it matters at all is anyone else like
too aware is there any meaning left to
be found in a world governed by profit
margins and consumption the rise of
nihilism and that's a belief that life
lacks intrinsic meaning has become an
increasingly common response to this
existential crisis so I'm not surprised
that a lot of people are so lonely when
they're like I don't want to talk to
anyone I don't have any hobbies I don't
have any friends I just want to stay
home and like be on my phone and not do
anything add in a hearty Americanized
portion of unfettered capitalism and it
doesn't take too long before you start
to get that lonely sterile Millennial
beige feeling inside that hints at the
idea that indeed yes meaning has been
lost in the endless cycle of production
and consumption and yet amongst this
existential dread a counterforce emerges
tragic optimism tragic optimism is
rooted in the belief that meaning can
still be cultivated even in the harshest
realities for me it provides a framework
for surviving and even thriving within a
world that often feels void of purpose
and so in this essay we're going to
explore how capitalism has eroded our
sense of meaning fueled a crisis of
nihilism and how tragic optimism can
offer us a pathway forward we're going
to lock in and take the time to examine
how through resilience community and
critical reflection we can begin to find
meaning and a deeper sense of purpose
even in the most nihilistic of
circumstances by tracing the roots of
capitalistic nihilism unpacking the
philosophy of tragic optimism we'll
figure out together how to survive and
maybe even thrive in a system that seems
indifferent to human well-being so
welcome dear friends to the tragic
Optimist guide for survival in
capitalistic nihilism as always I would
like to preface this video that I don't
know  and I just sharing my thoughts
with you on how I've learned to navigate
this rock for the oh so brief amount of
time that we are here I first discovered
tragic optimism at 9 years old while
covering the Holocaust in my fourth
grade social studies class taught by Mr
Bell so Mr Bell if you ever see this MVP
I won't trauma D on you but what I
learned in that class has stuck with me
and carried me through the darkness of
my entire life and so now I will share
it with you dear watcher on a more
slightly morbid so trigger warning but
in a very tragically optimistic hopecore
fashion I recently found out from a
cultural perspective that black women
have regularly had some of the lowest
self opt out of life rates in the US
despite being some of the easiest
targets that get dog piled on black the
black women the black women are the
least attractive of all the races black
girl some of those black it's like
and I don't know I don't know that just
gave me a little affirmation that you
know should you also want to get some
tea or get cozy maybe fold that pile of
clothes on your bed or you know load the
dishwasher and Yap with me about it that
when it comes to perseverance and
navigating through the darkness should
you want to do that maybe just
maybe your girl might be on to something
part one what is capitalistic nihilism
as we touched on a little bit earlier
capitalistic nihilism is that creeping
sense of disillusionment when you
realize that your life your value your
sense of self has been reduced to
transactions it's that feeling that no
matter how much you work or how many
things you acquire there's always going
to be something that is deeply missing
it's a hollow the material success
cannot faill and we see it all around us
we see it in the endless amount of ads
we see it in the grind stop breathing
like a bunny rabbit a bunny rabbit is a
victim and it breathes in and out so
quickly you can see its stomach going in
and out we see it in the obsession with
hustle culture or pushing for the next
paycheck teens should spend at least
five of their teenage years just trying
to become successful and so before you
start hating in the comments let me say
this it literally takes $82 a day to
make the average yearly income in
America you need to start three passive
income streams and master the 46 chaty
BT tools that just launched in the last
6 minutes by midnight tonight
generational we or you can feel it in
that emptiness that comes after yet
another purchase that was supposed to
make everything better but it didn't
this isn't just a feeling it's a symptom
of a system that prioritizes profit and
productivity over human well-being a lot
of people have been sold the idea that
fulfillment comes through what we can
buy or what we can achieve but the more
that we try to fill that void the larger
it becomes Let's Take Fight Club for
example fight club serves as a pop
culture mirror into this experience the
main character shares how his life is a
series of consumer choices and career
accomplishments but but none of it makes
him happy advertising has is chasing
cars and clothes working jobs we hate so
we can buy  we don't need in his
disillusionment he becomes consumed by a
desire to break free from that very
system that traps him by descending into
violence this is capitalistic nism in
its most raw form it's the realization
that the system was not designed to
fulfill us but rather to keep us
endlessly chasing a carrot that's always
Out Of Reach a very brief history
capitalistic nihilism isn't new so we're
going back to the Industrial Revolution
and this is when people were first
reduced to Mere instruments of labor on
a mass scale happened very much before
them but this is the first time on like
a mass scale driven by Machinery we're
starting to see more and more
documentation of the connection between
people and their work beginning to fray
as workers were turned into cogs in the
industrial machine and so no longer was
work a source of identity or a source of
Pride instead it became something that
stried people of their Humanity this
alienation as writers like doeski and N
pointed out started to breed a profound
sense of purposelessness a nihilism that
questioned if any of it mattered if life
was only reduced to production and
consumption later on in America James
Baldwin took this critique further
highlighting how capitalism didn't just
dehumanize people through labor but also
through the racial structures it upheld
and so for black Americans who had long
been stripped of their Humanity through
chatt slavery the system was
particularly brutal not only did it deny
them human rights but but it also
excluded them economically Baldwin's
thoughts on capitalism and race were
pretty clear and striking but if you
actually pay close attention his ideas
go beyond just race his critique of the
American dream wasn't just about the
ways in which black Americans were shut
out of the promise it was also a warning
to the entire nation to anyone who would
listen about the fragility and emptiness
of that very dream been a breakdown a
betrayal of the social contract in
Western life and people are grabbing for
things and all on to what they think
they can get and stepping all over their
neighbors because they are Panic
stricken what they comforting themselves
with material
things yes when people do that something
is beginning to crack people hoard all
this because they don't have anything
else but they don't really believe in it
Baldwin understood something that the
rest of America is only starting to wake
up to now and it's the reality that
capitalism dehumanizing Tendencies are
not confined by race though race
certainly sharpens the impact what I
think of his words it comes as a great
shock to discover that the flag to which
you have pledged your Allegiance has not
pledged allegiance to you now if you
choose to listen it's very easy to see
that these words don't just speak to the
black experience but to the
disillusionment that so many are
beginning to feel today the system was
never built for human fulfillment and
now more people across all backgrounds
are starting to realize this and the
alienation and despair that Baldwin
spoke of in the context of black life
under capitalism are now being felt more
Broad ly as the system fails to deliver
on its promises to everyone we see this
in the growing disillusionment with work
as more people in American society
question the value of grinding
themselves down in jobs that offer
little to no return especially since the
pandemic which I personally feel forc
them to sit still for a lot longer than
most people had for the very first time
and we started to see that
disillusionment again in the rise of
quiet quitting the rejection of hustle
culture where people are now starting to
push back against the idea that their
worth is directly tied to their
productivity it's fair clear that
Baldwin's critique of America was always
bigger than race it was a critique of a
society that defined success in terms of
material wealth while leaving its
citizens spiritually and emotionally
bankrupt and so as America wakes up to
the reality that the pursuit of profits
has hollowed out what truly matters
connection purpose and fulfillment we
are confronting that same nihilism that
James Baldwin warned us about the system
wasn't built to serve us but to exploit
us and the American dream though once it
was very aspirational it now feels like
an illusion what's different today is
that this disillusionment once confined
to the margins and marginalized groups
is spreading to the
center  on Big D that was the true
original definition of woke before it
was adopted by right-wing pundits and
conservatives would you mind defining W
because it's come up a couple times and
I just want to make sure we're on the
same
page so I mean woke is sort of the idea
that
um
I this is going to be one of those
moments that goes viral I mean woke is
something that's very hard to Define and
we've spent an entire chapter defining
it it is sort of the understanding that
we need to re to totally reimagine and
re re redo Society in order to create
hierarchies of Oppression
um sorry I it's it's hard to explain in
a 15c sound bite to be woke was to be
aware of the very reality that people
are waking up to right now the
structures that promise Prosperity are
showing their cracks and more and more
people are realizing the Deep
existential costs of chasing something
that was never meant to fulfill us and
Baldwin's warnings about capitalism's
dehumanizing effects were never just for
black Americans they were for all of us
he saw the writing on the wall as many
others did and now as more people wake
up to the emptiness of these promises
everyone else is starting to see it too
capitalistic nihilism is no longer a
fringe experience it's becoming a
defining feature of Modern Life in many
places in America we're no longer we no
longer live for Community or connection
or self-fulfillment we live to survive
in that system that defines Us by our
productivity and as Baldwin pointed out
the shock of realizing that the American
dream was never truly meant for us is
what fuels This Modern sense of nihilism
so all this to say What's Happening Now
isn't new it's just a broader Awakening
more people are beginning to see that
the system isn't built for human
fulfillment it's built for economic gain
and the alienation that doeski
characters felt in the industrial era
and the spiritual emptiness that n
predicted are now our widespread
realities as the cracks in the system
become impossible to ignore as we dive
into capitalism's effects let's examine
its personal impact part two the impact
of capitalism on the individual
well-being in the race for American
success I want to make it very clear I
live in America I'm speaking in the
context of America I have little
experience in other cultures but because
I live here I'm speaking of our default
particular brand of unfettered
capitalism and what it encourages which
is a never-ending pursuit of profit
individual achievement and competition
we know this nothing groundbreaking here
mental health and capitalism capitalism
thrives on the idea that anyone can make
it if they work hard enough yet this
narrative while inspiring on the surface
hides the mental strain it places is on
individuals we're told that our worth is
tied to our productivity that to rest is
to fall behind and that our value comes
from how much we can accumulate the
constant need to succeed to keep
climbing the ladder often leads to
Stress and Anxiety when your self-worth
is tied to your job performance and your
ability to mass wealth or if you deserve
to go to the doctor or not every setback
feels like a personal failure this is
why burnout has become so common
especially in our country where work
life balance is seen as a luxury rather
than a right if you really want to get
mad watch the movie where to invade next
I'm just going to leave it there full
stop the gig economy which is often
pushed as a flexible work alternative
often just makes the problem worse
because it creates an environment where
workers are expected to always be on but
without the security or stable income or
any of the benefits and so this leaves
individuals grappling with stress and
uncertainty and a deep sense of
exhaustion that just kind of sits on the
surface of their daily lives but it's
not just the stress and bur out that
capitalism Fosters that'll get you it's
the growing epidemic of loneliness and
isolation the drive for individual
success often at the expense of
community is what leads to an erosion of
social bonds so in a society that
prioritizes self-reliance and
individualism asking for help is seen as
a weakness and we have become a nation
of isolated individuals working harder
increasing productivity but being paid
less and connecting less and so the more
disconnected we become the harder it is
to form the kinds of meaningful
relationships that Foster mental
well-being and this isolation is
exacerbated by the rise of social media
where we're constantly comparing
ourselves to curated versions of other
people's lives where instead of
fostering genuine connection we're left
feeling like we're always falling short
which further erodes our mental health
the rise of individualism and its
consequences one of the most
misunderstood aspects of American
culture is the notion of rugged
individualism rugged individualism is
the idea that success is achieved by the
individual without the need for
Community or government support and
while this idea the idea of this idea
can be empowering it also comes at a
cost and it's the erosion of community
bonds because it results from
prioritizing individual success over
Collective welfare that weakens the
social support systems that are vital
for mental and emotional health there's
a common misconception that the
degradation of society is due to a shift
away from traditional or conservative
values but reality the unraveling of
community bonds is more about the
unchecked rise of individualism people
aren't turning away from each other
because of inclusiveness they're turning
away from each other because they've
been conditioned to believe that
self-reliance is the only way they
believe that everyone on the Block
should each have their own lawn mower
instead of everyone pitching in and
sharing in maintaining One lawnmower and
then pulling the money that everyone
would have spent towards indiv idual
lawnmowers towards something more
beneficial for the whole Community like
a community garden um community garden
supplies maintenance organizing
community events block parties to Foster
connections supporting Local Schools
youth programs creating a community tool
library for sharing other equipment Etc
you get the picture we are more
concerned with having a better lawn than
our neighbors to do anything like that
this version of American individualism
has created a culture where we are
isolated even when we are surrounded by
others where connection is secondary to
competition this is perfectly evidenced
by this clip Hindu Garb at the our
neighborhood swimming pool that my
daughter is asking I'm trying to explain
she's like you know what like and I
don't even know what country I'm in in
my own neighborhood I just I don't I
don't know where I am it's you know I
mean the number of when we go on a
family walk the number of pakist
Hindu all these different not just
ethnicities but religions with with
visible religious outfits on um because
at the end of the day again it's not
about whiteness uh but at the end of the
day if things get rough I don't know if
my Hindu neighbor is going to fight to
save the lives of my children it never
occurred to him even as a pastor to just
talk to his neighbors or just get to
know his neighbors when a community is
sacrificed in favor of self-sufficiency
people are left to Bear the weight of
their struggles alone and as the gaps
between the wealthy and the working
class widens productivity increasing
while wages remain stagnant those at the
bottom are increasingly told that their
failure is their own fault further
deepening feelings of inadequacy and
alienation lack of empathy and ethical
considerations as capitalism promotes
self-interest empathy begins to diminish
we start seeing each other not as fellow
human beings but as competitors or Worse
obstacles to our own success and so this
erosion of empathy can make it easier to
rationalize behaviors that would have
once been seen as unethical whether it's
cutting Corners at work or it's
exploiting others for your personal gain
the drive for profits often leads to
ethical compromises both in our personal
and business question for you dear
Watcher what happens when a society
starts to prize business stem and
finance degrees while at the same time
denigrating degrees based on humanities
or ethics what happens when we glorify
the ability to make money over the
ability to think critically about what's
right and wrong we end up with a culture
where success is defined not by moral
Integrity but by profit margins in a
country where the economy is separated
from social influences the values that
hold us together begin to break the
glorification of exploitative success in
case y'all didn't know white collar
crime is my Roman Empire it's no secret
that our media glorifies the kind of
success that often comes at the expense
of others movies like Wolf of Wall
Street celebrate the exploits of White
Collar criminals turning them into
cultural
icons whenever I see a movie or a TV
show portray these crimes as smart or
edgy or fun I swear it makes my eyes
start to Twitch what's most troubling to
me is how the glorification of
exploitative success shifts societal
values people begin to believe that
bending or breaking the rules is just a
part of making it resonate with knew
that what greed is good was going to
mean to Gordon Gecko and Wall Street and
no that whole part was I mean I was the
bad guy because I was I was the villain
it's always shocked me how many people
on Wall Street have said oh man you're
the reason I became a stop BR and I said
I said I went to jail man I went to jail
oh no no it's all right you know going
on the American dream Once synonymous
with hard work and honesty is now
increasingly associated with getting
over on people or getting ahead by any
means necessary here we also have to
confront the uncomfortable question can
billionaires truly be ethical when you
quantify how much a billion dollars is
compared to the average salary how many
lifetimes it would take for most people
to earn that much what I have found is
that most people who defend billionaires
sit in two camps either they don't
understand what a billion is or they
somehow think that they will also
eventually be billionaires they're just
down bad right now but it's coming but
peep game and lock in if you spent
$1,000 a day it would take you more than
2700 years to spend a billion dollars
2700 years let that sink in and
hopefully you can begin to see the
Staggering inequalities that are built
into the system when America is the
country with the most over 800
billionaires to give you a clearer
picture now is it possible to amass such
wealth without exploiting people or
resources this is a question we have to
Grapple with especially when income
inequality continues to rise social
ramifications and extreme outcomes the
social fabric of our country is fraying
under the pressure of this
individualistic competitive system we're
seeing a rise of the Lone Wolf phenomena
in where individuals feeling alienated
and Powerless resort to extreme actions
sometimes often times with tragic
outcomes in a society that both isolates
people and prizes individual success
Above All Else it's no surprise that
some individuals lash out in violent
ways feeling as though they have no way
to assert their existence or validate
their pain it's this individualism it's
the disconnection from society combined
with the lack of adequate mental health
support and unrestricted access to
firearms that has led to a full-blown
Mental Health crisis adding the fact
that we have inadequate Health Care
Systems that leave many people without
the resources they need to address their
mental health struggles and you have a
recipe for disaster and while yes
capitalism drives Innovation it also
Fosters an environment where profits are
prioritized over people's well-beings
when it comes at the expense of empathy
Community and Mental Health we have to
ask ourselves is economic growth worth
it if it undermines the very things that
make life worth living in marginalized
communities capitalism's failures are
even more apparent systemic neglect this
can be seen in the underfunding of
schools lack of Health Care access and
targeted policing lead to a sense of
hopelessness that can manifest in
violence when the system fails to
provide meaningful work or opportunities
for Upward Mobility young people
internalize the belief that their lives
hold little value the resulting cycles
of violence seem like random acts they
are actually symptomatic of a system
that has long abandon these communities
lack of meaning and purpose in a
capitalist World whether it's the lone
shooter or the WAN in the Hood the root
cause of their nihilism is the same a
lack of purpose in a world that values
them only for their economic output the
Lone Wolf shooter becomes disillusioned
with a society that rewards wealth and
success but offers no Pathways for those
who don't fit into this mold or they
haven't received the promise they felt
that they were entitled to because of
the unrealized LIE of the American dream
they feel invisible and their alienation
pushes them toward violence as a means
of making themselves seen similarly but
also differently marginalized youth feel
that capitalism has nothing to offer
them generations of systemic racism and
economic exploitation have left black
and brown communities disenfranchised
and hopeless in a world that equates
worth with economic success but denies
people the tools to achieve it violence
becomes a coping mechanism for the void
left by the unattainable American dream
there's a Creator I really like Deontay
Kyle he has a fantastic interview where
he's just outside talking and some kids
walk past the filming walk past the set
he randomly invites some of this youth
to come over and talk to him and it's a
beautiful exchange because these kids
are initially keeping up like their hard
exterior at first that is until Deontay
begins talking to them like they're
humans and their entire demeanor changes
they've been invited into the fold
they're being spoken to not spoken at
and if you listen closely you look with
intention you can see how badly these
kids are craving hearing and being heard
it's the same system that fails them
just as it fails the lone wolves leaving
them with a sense that their lives have
little value outside of economic success
which is often just outside of reach
James Baldwin famously said the most
dangerous creation of any society is the
man who has nothing to lose this
observation captures the essence of
capitalistic nihilism whether it's the
mass shooter or the young person turning
to gangs the the common denominator is a
profound sense of having Nothing Left to
Lose a byproduct of a system that strips
away their Humanity the role of media
and Technology modern media and
Technology play a significant role in
both perpetuating and exacerbating these
feelings of nihilism this is cultural do
not get confused about this in the age
of social media we're constantly exposed
to a curated version of other people's
lives making us feel as though our own
existence is insignificant we encourage
comparison reinforcing unattainable or
for the most Parts very shallow
standards of success and happiness very
surface level on top of that a lot of us
have just become desensitized mainlining
violence straight from our feeds in ways
that we haven't before and I say this to
you as as a product of like the
rotten.com era things are wild now you
would think that things would be better
but the internet is actually like a much
scarier place but all of this
contributes feeling of alienation and
fosters the belief that our lives are
somehow less meaningful than what we see
online take for example the phenomena of
Doom scrolling and as a result something
that another creator has fantastically
called the mainstream ification of
loserdom people are spending hours
consuming negative news social media
content which only reinforces the
feelings of Despair and hopelessness
instead of using technology to connect
us these platforms often leave us
feeling more isolated and more
disconnected from each other and as a as
a result of this in the US We crave
third spaces but we actually have no
clue how to talk to each other social
media gives the illusion of connection
without the substance further deepening
the sense of isolation that fuels modern
nihilism even more unlikely examples of
capitalistic nihilism capitalistic
nihilism doesn't just affect those on
the margins it's present at all levels
of society even those who seem to have
quote unquote made it one really strong
example of this is Anthony Bourdain for
the uninitiated Anthony Bourdain was a
celebrated chef and TV personality and
by all intent and purposes Anthony was
living everyone's dream he would travel
all over the world he would eat
delicious food he would have interesting
conversations with interesting people
this is the life that people yearn for
and even still it wasn't enough despite
his Global Fame despite his success
Bourdain struggled with deep personal
demons and in 2018 he took his own life
and his suicide shocked the entire world
it should have highlighted the internal
emptiness that even the most successful
figures can experience under this system
Bain's life exemplifies how the pursuit
of success and wealth and fame can fail
to provide true fulfillment and in
instead lead to feelings of existential
despair all this to say that while the
Lone Wolf Mass shooter and the wyin in
the hood may seem to be Polar Opposites
they are actually both products of the
same culture they're products of the
same system one that devalues human life
and fosters nihilism and alienation
these things don't exist in a vacuum
capitalistic nihilism is the thread that
ties them together as both groups
experience the same elements their
actions are not random but they are the
symptoms of a deeper systemic issue
which truly at the heart of it is a
systematic failure to address root
causes of alienation meaningless and
hopelessness these individuals are often
left behind by a society that values
productivity greed and success over
human connection and their actions
however horrific are a manifestation of
that neglect and so I'm going to clarify
something here please don't
misunderstand me this is not an excuse
or justification for violent Behavior
but again none of this exists or happens
in a vacuum and when people find
themselves scratching their head
wondering how something so tragic like
gang violence or mass shootings could be
happening in America focusing on the IND
individualist aspects of it why would
someone do this though doing so helps us
Place tragedy in a nice neat little
simple package that we can rationalize
and we can push it to the to the side
and the very moment we swipe away from
the news article about it it also
creates blind spots for wider pattern
recognition and of course capitalistic
nihilism isn't confined to the lower
classes or extreme cases of violence
recognizing patterns allows you to see
that it seeps into every corner of
society affecting even the the highly
successful the wealthy and the famous if
you care to look you can see it in
corporate employees burned out by
endless work Cycles you can see it in
celebrities whose Fame cannot Shield
them from despair it's everywhere it's a
system that affects us all even when we
don't think that it does the
problem isn't that you aren't achieving
enough it's that the goal posts keep
shifting and even when you do make it
you realize that the promise fulfillment
often isn't there they have been
encourage to chase but rarely to find
and as more people wake up to this
realization they're beginning to see
that the problem isn't with the
individuals it's with the system itself
now more than ever more of us are
starting to question the price that
we're paying for that okay all right
that was a lot right after all of that
you're probably thinking well the most
natural next line of thinking to
conclude should be probably is deja what
is the point well that is why we are
here friend in the face of the systemic
illusionment I offer you an alternative
philosophical framework as a possible
antidote to the chaos tragic optimism
the tragic Optimist perspective finding
meaning in pain joy and impermanence
life is suffering hear me out hear me
out hear me out hear me out life is
suffering but life isn't only suffering
in the chaos of life where suffering is
inevitable and the world often feels
indifferent to our struggles tragic
optimism offers a power powerful way to
face the darkness without losing hope
this philosophy rooted in the works of
thinkers like Victor Frankle teaches us
that meaning can be found in even the
most difficult circumstances yet to
fully grasp tragic optimism we must also
look back to James Baldwin who
understood the deep relationship between
pain and transformation Baldwin believed
that our suffering far from being
something to avoid was something to be
used something that could be used to
illuminate truths to fuel growth and to
ultimately find Liberation it was
Baldwin who told us you are compelled
you are coralled you are bullwhipped
into dealing with whatever it is that
hurt you and what is crucial here is
that if it hurt you that's not what's
important what's important what caroused
you what bull whips you what drives you
torments you is that you must find some
way of using this to connect you with
everyone else alive this is all you have
to do it with so with that being said
let us explore the pillars of tragic
optimism while also getting clear on the
difference between necessary and
unnecessary suffering we'll also touch
on the importance of embracing
impermanence embracing pain as a teacher
tragic optimism tragic optimism is a
philosophy unlike toxic positivity okay
it doesn't ask us to push away our pain
or ignore it instead it encourages us to
acknowledge suffering as an integral
part of life while still holding space
for Hope and growth this idea was
popularized by Victor Frankle who after
surviving the horror of a Nazi
concentration camp argued that even in
the darkest of times we have the power
to find meaning in our suffering he
believed that while we cannot control
our circumstances we can control our
response to them James Baldwin wrote
extensively about how pain can be a
source of understanding and personal
power in his essay the fire next time he
says you think your pain and your
heartbreak are unprecedented in the
history of the world but then you read
this shows us that pain is not something
to be avoided or ignored by embraced and
understood it's what connects us to
Being Human and he believed that through
acknowledging the pain not running and
using our pain we can transcend it he
continued on you must understand that
your pain is Trivial except in so far as
you can use it to connect with other
people's pain and in so far as you can
do that with your pain you can be
released from it and then hopefully it
works the other way around too in so far
as I can tell you what it is to suffer
perhaps I can help you suffer less it's
probably really easy to tell by now but
Frankle and Baldwin have long been two
of my favorite proponents of the tragic
optimism perspective and I've kind of
weaved that throughout my own life
because they highlight a critical
component of tragic optimism and it's
that suffering is inevitable but it can
be meaningful if we choose to engage
with it constructively and probably what
I want most people to take away from
this video is that nihilism and cynicism
in the face of suffering or tragedy is
like the downhill flow of water it's the
easiest most natural the next in line
thing to do and no one would blame you
if that's what you chose to do when it
comes to navigating your very short time
here on this rock no one would blame you
but I think the most important aspect to
understand is the reality that it is a
choice nonetheless you still choose that
and should you find yourself making that
choice my very next question would be
how is is that working out for you
balancing realism and hope and the
difference between necessary and
unnecessary suffering so one of the key
pillars of tragic optimism is knowing
the difference between necessary and
unnecessary suffering I've talked about
this at length in another video so if
you want to check that out please do but
basically necessary suffering is
suffering that is going to be required
for growth and unnecessary suffering is
something that is self-inflicted in
Baldwin's work he often speaks to the
necessity of facing uncomfortable truths
particularly about race identity power
status Health as a means to personal and
societal transformation there are things
in our lives that are inescapable
meaning as a human being on this planet
you will deal with them no one gets out
of this there is no cheat code or
anything like that you will go through
it so these are things like grieving the
loss of a loved one taking care of an
aging parent the emotional pain of
ending a relationship personal failure
sickness death the these are components
of necessary suffering he argued that
the only way to heal from the wounds was
to confront them head-on no matter how
painful the process might be this is
necessary suffering the kind of
suffering that leads to growth and
Liberation however on the other hand
unnecessary suffering occurs when we
resist reality or we refuse to accept
life's inherent uncertainties missing
out on a fun time to study for your bar
exam is necessary suffering giving
yourself an anxiety attack leading up to
the bar exam because you chose not to
study for set exam would be unnecessary
suffering cheat code to figure is this
necessary or unnecessary suffering is if
you're suffering and you were to stop
doing something like going back to an
abusive ex or you know eating after
11:00 p.m. and the suffering that you're
experiencing eventually stops you're
probably inviting unnecessary suffering
into your life tragic optimism teaches
us that while suffering is inevitable
not all suffering is productive and the
only way to navigate Life Is Knowing the
difference so that when you are
inevitably confronted with necessary
suffering you can face it forthrightly
instead of being distracted or having
additional stress piled on by
unnecessary suffering too I went to a
10-day silent Retreat and you'd be
surprised at what you can hear in the
silence but something that I learned
that has shifted my perspective a lot is
how we as human tend to exist in two
states craving or aversion we're either
craving an outcome or craving something
we don't have or we're avoiding
something we're avoiding doing something
which places us too far outside of
oursel by craving something we're
probably living in the past craving a
time that we cannot have or craving
something in the future or we're
avoiding existing in the present
something that we need to address or do
and keeping us in in when we're bouncing
between these two states we are in our
own personal hell for example the pain
of trying to maintain an illusion
whether it's the illusion of control the
illusion of something lasting forever or
the illusion of a life free from any
hardship whatsoever it just leads to
more suffering and Baldwin understood
this deeply noting that much of the pain
in the world comes from denying the
truths that are too painful to face
otherwise of course you can
despair walk down the street of any City
any afternoon
and look around
you what you got to remember is what
you're looking at is also
you everyone you're looking at is also
you you could be that
person you could be that monster you
could be that
cop and you to decide in yourself not to
be running from reality doesn't Shield
us from suffering it just prolongs it in
contrast
facing suffering directly allows us to
discern what is within our control and
what isn't what suffering is necessary
for growth and what suffering we can let
go of that while we cannot Escape
hardship we can escape the suffering
that comes from our refusal to accept
reality the path of tragic optimism asks
us to engage with necessary suffering to
allow it to shape and refine us and to
let go of unnecessary pain that we're
that we create by clinging to illusions
of permanence or control or delusions of
grandeur or how we feel things should be
impermanence and the importance of not
running another key aspect of tragic
optimism is the understanding of
impermanence the idea that nothing lasts
forever for Baldwin and Frankle alike
the knowledge of life's impermanence was
not something to fear but something to
embrace it's through this lens that we
can better navigate both suffering and
happiness knowing that neither of them
will last forever running from this
reality Keeps Us trapped in that space
of craving and aversion facing it allows
us to grow and move forward this
understanding of impermanence frees us
from the fear of loss by allowing us to
experience life fully without clinging
to any moment suffering like Joy is
impermanent nothing lasts forever and
let's cover a couple ways that will make
it so we don't have to cling strategies
for tragic optimism personal coping
mechanisms life often presents us with
overwhelming challenges which should
push us to question what matters and
whether it's worth trying at all tragic
optimism offers a different way to
engage with these struggles providing us
with personal strategies to navigate the
chaos one of the most effective personal
strategies for cultivating this and it's
going to sound super cliche but hear me
out is mindfulness mindfulness is the
practice of staying present and
embracing the moment as it is not as we
wanted it to be but as it is accepting
that that reality as it is and by
focusing on what's Happening Here and
Now in the here and now we can avoid
getting lost in the future's
uncertainties or the regrets of the past
craving aversion craving aversion in
2022 I took a solo trip to Europe and my
luggage was stolen partially through my
trip and it should have ended in
disaster but it didn't I chose to make
it as much of an adventure as I could
and I turned the trip around but by the
last day I had had a mission and my
mission was I was going to roller skate
to one of my favorite songs in um the
song is called Bond park by John craigy
um I was going to roller skate to that
in vondal park in Amsterdam that was the
mission I was like this has to happen
and I ended up going to vondle park and
it was raining that day and I stumbled
onto this random stage to skate on even
even though it was raining the sun came
out and I remember in that moment being
so keenly aware so keenly aware
that this Joy wouldn't last forever I
remember trying to hold so tightly to
every detail I could I remember looking
around and being like I'm I'm skating
I'm moving my body the sun has just come
out I feel the sun on my skin and this
little Dutch mom comes up to me and she
asks me a question and I can't hear her
and I take my headphone off and she says
can my son dance with you and I was like
of course and she puts her little child
up on the stage with me and I'm skating
and this little baby is twirling around
and this song this beautiful song is in
my ears and I remember thinking like I
was at the top of the world I felt at
the top of the world and I remember
thinking this won't last forever and
being present and in it at that time
made it so that I focused in on every
detail that I could the feeling of the
sun on my skin the smell of the air the
laughter of this child and just the
beauty from the absolute chaos of that
trip that I was experiencing in that
moment I knew in that moment that this
experience that I was experiencing was
going to be something I would look back
fondly on that would warm me in in the
darkness because darkness is inevitable
and to have that Consciousness or that
awareness in the moment made it so that
I gave that moment everything that it
deserved I was there I was fully fully
fully in it I didn't want to look back
at that memory and be like I wish I had
you know no I was fully free in in that
moment I'm very grateful to have had
that awareness and to have given that
moment what it deserved because the
darkness
came and I'm grateful that I gave that
moment everything that it needed so that
I could pull from that moment as proof
that life was an all misery business I
needed that I needed to put that into
the bank
of how beautiful life could be to get me
through that Darkness because when it
came it leveled me less than 6 months
later a car crashed into the new house
that I had just bought to help my
brother rehabilitate from his addiction
but 3 weeks after that I got the call
that he would never get to see the house
because he had died and then three weeks
after that I was laid off from my job so
I went from the top of the world to
being in the absolute gutter in less
than six months and I cannot stress how
grateful I was to have been mindful in
that moment on that stage to be so aware
of the joy that I was experiencing and
its impermanence and giving it the
respect that it deserved because I knew
that it would not last forever that same
mindfulness that warmed my soul in the
Amsterdam Sun helped me be fully present
in my grief of my brother and it helped
me to not run or try to escape the pain
when so many tra things were happening
at once because I knew that also like
that joy that pain wouldn't last forever
all this is say mindfulness is just the
beginning resilience is another key in
the tragic Optimist tool kit resilience
means facing the harsh realities of Life
accepting that suffering is a part of
The Human Experience you cannot have joy
you cannot have roller skating in the
sunshine in Amsterdam without the pain
of saying goodbye to your brother for
the last time you you don't get to cheat
you don't get to avoid it and learning
from these realities you can do that
instead of being crushed by them in Rick
and Morty Rick Sanchez exemplifies
someone who lacks resilience despite his
intelligence Rick's awareness that
nothing matters leaves him in a state of
deep depression and self-loathing when
you know nothing matters the universe is
yours and I've never met a universe that
was into it he stops trying because he
believes it's all pointless but compare
this to Jerry Smith his son-in-law who
consistently tries to be a better father
and a better husband despite constantly
being belittled by others Jerry's
efforts though often ridiculed bring him
contentment he represents a kind of
tragic optimism he knows that he's not
perfect but he tries to find meaning in
small ways acceptance is another
essential strategy embracing life's
impermanence not as a form of giving up
but as a way to find meaning in the
temporary Rick's despair stems from his
inability to move past the
meaninglessness he sees in life Jerry
however Embraces his ordinary life and
finds joy in the small victories like
ridding his driveway of weed this
contrast shows the power of acceptance
Jerry's contentment comes from engaging
with the present while Rick's refusal to
accept life's impermanence leaves him
isolated and Paralyzed by nihilism
community and solidarity while
individual or personal coping mechanisms
are important community and solidarity
provide a crucial foundation for tragic
optimism humans are social creatures and
when we connect with others especially
in the face of hardship we realize that
we are not alone the beauty of tragic
optimism is that it doesn't require us
to go through life struggles in
isolation rather it encourages us to
seek out Collective Strength we saw this
widespread during the pandemic neighbors
helping neighbors Mutual Aid Network so
it is something that is possible in the
movie everything everywhere all at once
Evelyn Wang's Journey Only gains meaning
when she reconnects with her family
despite the infinite versions of herself
she encounters it's her relationships
that anchor her and give her life
purpose her bond with her daughter Joy
becomes a source of strength and healing
demonstrating that even in the vastness
of existence it's the people we love who
give our lives meaning here's a slight
caveat please don't misunderstand me I
know that a lot of us do not have
Healthy Families I am not saying go and
reconcile with your family that's not
what I'm saying at all but what I am
saying is that you can create your own
family and that the family that you
choose still counts as meaningful
relationships and interactions it's
still a conscious choice so please don't
take what I'm saying as a means of like
hey you need to go reconcile with your
toxic family that doesn't respect your
boundaries or are just like abusive to
you that's not what I'm saying in case
it needs to be said okay Back at It
ultimately community and solidarity are
important because they ground Us in the
present they ground Us in the here they
ground Us in the now where our actions
and relationships hold significance rck
Sanchez's nihilism isolates him from
meaningful connections leading him to
destructive Behavior he isolates himself
from others believing that his
intelligence translates Loosely to his
superiority and his understanding of all
of the universes makes relationships
pointless he lives by the idea that
nothing matter so why bother trying it
sounds sexy but this attitude leaves him
empty and depressed and unable to find
Joy or meaning in anything Jerry though
mocked for his Simplicity thrives on his
connections with his family in the
context of tragic optimism community and
solidarity remind us that life's
challenges are less overwhelming when we
Face them together love has never been a
popular movement and no one's ever
wanted really to be
free the world is held together really
it is held together by the love and the
passion of very few
people yes it's less rugged
individualist but even when everything
feels meaningless the support we find in
others can help us persevere and can
create purpose it's these connections
that sustain us in the face of adversity
not our rugged individualism
philosophical and psychological
foundations tragic optimism Finds Its
philosophical roots in existentialism
which is a school of thought that
grapples with life's inherent absurdity
while still seeking meaning within it
thinkers like Albert cus and Jean Paul
such argued that life is inherently
meaningless but that doesn't mean that
we should give up instead it's up to us
to create meaning through our actions
and through our relationships in cis's
the myth of Copus you guys know who
Copus is he's the protagonist who's
condemned to push a boulder up a hill
for all of eternity but cus imagines
Copus happy he imagines him finding joy
and purpose in the struggle itself this
parallels alongside Evelyn's experience
in everything everywhere all once her
journey through multiple realities
represents the existential idea that
life is inherently chaotic and without a
predetermined meaning and in the end
Evelyn chooses to embrace the chaos
finding meaning in her relationships and
the small precious moments that make
life worth living the act of trying of
engaging with life even when it feels
pointless is in and of itself a form of
rebellion against nihilism it's one of
the most revolutionary things you can do
life may be absurd but that doesn't mean
we stop trying Psych olical resilience
psychological resilience is another
factor of tragic optimism in this
context resilience is about
understanding that suffering is
inevitable but we have the ability to
transform it into growth when you're
experiencing something asking yourself
instead of why is this happening to me
try what am I supposed to be learning
from this that pushes you into
post-traumatic growth which is the idea
that individuals can experience positive
changes after difficult times back to
everything everywhere all at once
Evelyn's brain begins to crack as she is
shown different versions of herself in
other universes and she starts to
succumb to the chaos her ability to
finally cope with the multiverses chaos
comes from her willingness to not sit in
craving or aversion but to embrace the
absurdity instead of Yearning For What
she sees as the more successful versions
of herself or the version of herself
that was never married she stops
resisting and she leans into the love
that she has for her family her husband
Wayman is the unsuspecting hero of the
story as he's already mastered What it
Took Evelyn the whole entire movie going
through Helen Back to find out his
resilience is not about avoiding pain
but about confronting and accepting it
and finding meaning within both the
suffering and the mundane Rick lacks
resilience he's undoubtedly the smartest
man in the universe but his nihilistic
beliefs leave him emotionally detached
and unable to cope with life's hardships
in a healthy way instead he turns into
alcohol destructive Behavior putting his
family in danger isolating himself even
further his inability to connect with
others and his refusal to find meaning
in anything leads him to a place of deep
Despair and unhappiness meanwhile Jerry
despite being mocked for his Simplicity
demonstrates quiet resilience his
willingness to try to find joy in the
little things allows him to live a more
fulfilled life than Rick despite Rick's
intellectual superiority both Jerry and
Wayman experience a sense of contentment
that comes not from avoiding suffering
but accepting it and finding meaning in
those small moments
to infinity and beyond at its heart
tragic optimism is a philosophy that
teaches us to embrace life's inherent
contradictions the suffering alongside
the joy the chaos alongside the meaning
we can see the importance of finding
purpose in the small moments in the
relationship in the struggles in the
process as we continue to navigate a
world filled with uncertainty with
political instability with climate
change with existential dread tragic
optimism may be a more essential mindset
for Modern Life when Dan Harmon the
co-creator Rick and Morty was asked if
he agreed with Rick on the idea that
nothing matters means anything he said
no I do not because the knowledge that
nothing matters while accurate gets you
nowhere the planet is dying the sun is
exploding the universe is cooling
nothing's going to matter the further
back you pull away the more that truth
will endure but when you zoom in on
Earth when you zoom in to a family when
you zoom in a human brain and a
childhood and an experience you see all
these things that matter we're at a time
and place where nihilism Hedonism apathy
often feel like the easy most likely
answers and tragic optimism is a
philosophy that teaches us that trying
still matters that you're allowed to
accept the bad while also still
believing the good that every moment
that we share with others is an
opportunity and that rather than
hungrily searching for Grand sweeping
gestures maybe just maybe meaning is
found in the small moments in the love
that we give and receive in our
relationships in our communities what if
you treated everyone as if it was the
last time that you were going to see
them and it was found there what if it's
found in the person who waits to hold
the door open for you what if it's found
in replaying the song that makes you
think wow this sounds like heaven at
least one more time before you get out
of the car what if it's the biblical
experience that is everyone singing at
the top of their lungs in unison at a
concert
what if it's in the belly laugh of
someone you feel good around what if
it's roller skating in the sunshine what
if it's in the hug that you let linger
for a few more seconds before saying
goodbye what if it's
there
should yeah well what are you going to
do life's a  and then you die right
sometimes
sometimes life's a  and then you
keep
living
yeah it's a nice night
huh
yeah this is nice what if the most
radical revolutionary thing we can do is
be present Give Love and allow ourselves
to receive love while being aware of the
impermanence of both suffering and joy
and consciously choose to try we're
going to continue to face the
complexities of the future but I think
that this mindset may offer us the
resilience and hope that we need to move
forward forthrightly into it I have
found that it's not necessarily about
avoiding suffering or only seeking Joy
it's about being so keenly aware of
their existence that you make the
conscious choice to use them and to
create a life worth living for the very
short amount of time we are here anyway
it's like 8 minutes in the grand scheme
of things I don't think people clock it
enough tiny specs of time
here all we get are a
few specs of time where any of this
actually makes any
sense then I will
cherish these few specs of
tone so if this video resonated with you
in any way then maybe tragic optimism
has something to offer to you too maybe
you've already figured out that it's not
about having all the answers or denying
the harsh realities of life it's about
staying present in the moment right here
right now embracing both the highs and
the lows and finding meaning and hope in
the small everyday things in the grocery
store trip maybe it's about that can I
show you something Mor no offense but a
drawing of me you made when you were
eight isn't going to make me feel like
less of an accident that out there
that's my
grave wait what on one of our adventures
Rick and I basically destroyed the whole
world so we bailed on that reality and
we came to this one because in this one
the world wasn't destroyed and in this
one we were dead so we came here and we
buried ourselves and we took their place
and every morning summer I eat breakfast
20 yards away from my own rotting corpse
so you're not my brother I'm better than
your brother I'm a version of your
brother you can trust when he says don't
run nobody exists on purpose nobody
belongs anywhere everybody's going to
die die come watch TV subscribe for more
discussions like this and share your
thoughts in the comments how do you
navigate meaning in a world that often
feels so empty what small moments keep
you grounded and if you're feeling up
for it just take a deep breath maybe
start that project or go for that walk
or start the process of letting go of
what you can't control and remind
yourself that sometimes sometimes just
trying is enough maybe look around hang
for a while read some comments see how
Maybe
just maybe you're not as alone as you
think I will see yall in the next one
