hello welcome to the UN reted podcast
where we talk about artificial
intelligence digital transformation and
people today our podcast is brought to
you by our book AI in a weekend and
Executives guide and with that let me
lead into uh the intro by John of our
guests thank
you all right thanks Martin so today we
are joined with a special guest uh
Dimitri alperovich uh so Dimitri is a
leading expert in geopolitics and
National Security uh the co-founder and
executive chairman of the Silverado
policy accelerator and then prior to
founding Silverado he also co-founded
and served as the chief technology
officer of crowd strike probably most
importantly what we're going to be
talking a little bit more about today he
is the author of world on the brink how
America can beat China in the race for
the 21st century thank you very much
Dimitri for joining us today on the
podcast and as I typically do I only
gave the cliff notes uh on your
background as Martin stated so uh I like
to turn it over to you and uh tell us a
little bit about yourself uh how you got
to where you are today and uh anything
else important that I might have left
out in that little blurb there and then
great thank you so much for having me
well you got the cliff notes right I
spent my career early parts of my career
in the cyber security industry
co-founded crowd strike now uh one of
the largest cyber security uh companies
in the world but actually throughout my
career have been focused on National
Security
geopolitics uh focused on China
specifically for the last 14 years very
intently ever since uh I uh released a
report on operation Aurora which was the
hack of Google and many other companies
from Chinese nation state actors all the
way back in 2010 uh and uh really
unveiled that what was happening against
this country is economic Warfare that
China was stealing everything that's not
bolted down and and uh really
perpetrating the greatest transferal
wealth in history as as I called it at
the time and now this book really is is
a combination of all those efforts and
and and focus particularly in the last
four years uh since I launched Silverado
uh to really articulate the threat that
we're facing Vis China I believe we're
in a new Cold War and one that has a
good chance of becoming Hot War
unfortunately in the next 48 years
because I do believe that China and
particular Shin ping is intent on taking
Taiwan or trying to take Taiwan
somewhere in the 2028 through 2032
period which can bring us to the brink
of a of a potentially nuclear conflict
wow um there's a lot to to uh unravel
and unpack here Dimitri um and our
audience is typically um in you know
excited about areas that we uh we focus
on and I want to stay in the softer side
a little bit but we'll we'll we'll we'll
touch into this uh or what what do you
think China has as far as an approach uh
to Innovation versus the us today and do
you feel that we have a chance uh in the
market with artificial intelligence and
other emerging Technologies versus China
well I think we absolutely have a chance
uh so China's approach is is pretty
straightforward um its approach is is to
emphasize resilience and Independence in
all strategic sectors this is what made
in China 2025 plan that was unveiled
back in 2015 by shijin P is all about is
to basically reduce Reliance on Western
companies and not only reduce Reliance
but also dominate those sectors like
semiconductors and airspace and
artificial intellig Ence and the like uh
fortunately for us and unfortunately for
them they've not made a huge amount of
progress in those uh key areas they made
some but not as much as they would like
and uh it's clear that 2025 will be
failure and will probably become you
know 2030 uh at some point but in in in
large part it's been a failure because
of our efforts to curtail them
particularly in their Ambitions to
produce Advanced semiconductors and to
import uh advanced gpus that are
necessary for training I models but the
strategies basically H uh from their
perspective is to essentially provide
enormous subsidies government subsidies
to their uh champions of industry in
fact picking the winners in their
sectors and then overly investing in
them uh in order to allow them to dump
their products on our Shores and uh
really globally at reduced prices Drive
competition out of business that is to
steal massive amounts of intellectual
property to power their Innovation
engine you know uh back in 2011 I I
found myself in the Situation Room of
the White House talking to National
Security officials about yet another
Chinese Espionage uh report that I just
put out uh outlining how much they were
stealing and really getting animated in
that I thought that what was being done
against us as I mentioned is economic
Warfare that something had to be done
about that and the response was oh
Demitri we'll just out innovate them as
long as they're stealing they can't
innovate and I thought that was a an
incredibly condescending remark one that
dramatically underestimated the
adversary because of course you can
steal and innovate of course uh stealing
allows you to to take paths that you
know will work um and abandon those that
have much less of a chance to work based
on research of others and then invest in
your own Innovation and that's what
you're see now where China is dominant
in areas like electric vehicles and
batteries and Telecommunications
equipment which is objectively better
than competitors um a lot of it was
initially powered by theft but then
they've improved upon it as one you as
you would expect so that is the
challenge that you're facing
now 100% support where you came from
from that I I had early career years in
uh semiconductor equipment and uh I know
quite well about intellectual property
theft um witnessed uh noticed rewards
for engineers of that country for
stealing basically intellectual property
that we owned and and high-fived
themselves kind of not a fair uh playing
playing field when you consider um you
know we have patents and copyrights and
trademarks here and and none of that
means anything in in the world of uh
theft no that that's absolutely right
they have no compulsion to steal that
the only thing from from their
perspective that matters is winning
which you know I can certainly
appreciate and uh I don't actually fault
them for doing this right um they're
pursuing their National security
objectives as one would expect I fault
us for letting them do it and get away
with it valid point valid point um
coming into artificial intelligence
which is um very significant to John
John's life and my life here um in
enablement I I'm quite aware of the
advancements on on their side the large
volume of patents filed uh from CH you
know Chinese Engineers over here what
advice would you give to our political
leaders today uh to to move forward and
and make sure we still have a a
relevance Point here well this is where
you have some bright spots in in in this
competition because a few years ago we
finally woke up particularly in the area
of artificial intelligence that this is
not an area you can let China win um not
just because of the economic
implications of dominance in the sector
but but also because of of its direct
impact on Military Technologies and as a
result
the Biden Administration started um a
series of export controls uh first on
equipment uh that's needed to produce
Advanced strips which is manufactured
for all intents and purposes in in
basically three countries the United
States Netherlands and Japan and uh um
and and and the United States has an
incredible weapon in that's Arsenal
called the foreign direct product rule
which is wielded by the Commerce
Department that basically says that if
there is any product out there in the
world that is manufactured with basic
around 20% of us IP or us content or us
component parts then we have a right to
regulate its export anywhere else in the
world right so you can literally produce
a widget on Mars but if it has 20% of
content it can't go anywhere where we
don't want it to go and that's
essentially what we've done is use this
foreign product direct rule to restrict
export of semiconductors to to Russia
because every chip in the world is
actually made either with the US
technology um or us equipment and as a
result we basically insed a blanket ban
on import of of um of export of chips
into Russia now there are evasions
there's black markets that are taking
place but in terms of large companies
trying to sell into Russia they're all
banned so we threatened to use that uh
rule with our allies um on China and as
a result we've gotten a lot of these
allies actually all of these allies to
come on board and restrict Advanced
Equipment from going into China which is
dramatically curtailing their ability to
produce Advanced ships those effectively
below 18 nanometers and then on top of
that we said and by the way we will not
let you uh import Advanced gpus from
companies like Nvidia and AMD that you
need to train your own AI models and
that has dramatically curtailed their
advancements in this sector they're
behind and they're falling further and
further behind because of course the one
necessary component of training uh
Foundation uh Frontier AI models is
chips right and and access to chips
access to compute in huge quantities and
yes they're still able to buy some some
gpus on the black market and import a
few tens of thousands of them every year
uh but that's just not sufficient
particularly for country as large as
China to be able to catch up to the
likes of open Ai and anthropic and
Google and meta and so forth and uh
that's what you're see now is uh that we
are establishing a leadership position
in that space by basically kneecapping
China interesting um kind of building on
that then obviously taking the the the
political route that uh we're kind of
connecting between the relationship
between China the US um you know even
Russia obviously has a a play in there
somewhere but thinking obviously as we
are coming up upon a very critical um
general election in the US
and admittedly I'm not
completely uh knowledgeable about either
candidate's stance on how to proliferate
AI development within the us or
safeguards or um exactly what their
stance is what do you think are the
implications for this economic War
specifically in the terms of AI
development between the US and China uh
from either perspective of if uh Comm
Harris gets elected president or if
Donald Trump gets elected president what
do you see the AI landscape between our
two countries or how that evolves or how
do you see that evolving depending on
who gets elected I think it'll actually
be very similar in fact the one
continuity between the Trump
Administration and the Biden
Administration has been the China policy
right uh the Biden Administration kept
uh virtually all the tariffs um that um
actually all the tariffs that uh Trump
instituted on China in place uh
increased uh some of them had done more
on export controls I think the Trump
Administration uh should come into
office again uh will basically be a
continuation of that and and further
ratcheting it up those measures I think
KL Harris who has spoken quite um uh
starkly about the need to win this race
Vis of China in fact uh you know
basically quoting the title of my book
uh is is is going to do largely the same
thing there might be differences in in
some technical details and how you
approach allies whether you threaten
them or whether you try to bring them on
board voluntarily uh but I think by and
large they will try to pursue the same
objectives the interesting piece here is
actually not what we're going to do Vis
China because um I I don't think there's
going to be any relaxations on controls
on equipment or chips going into China
but what happens with other countries
because one of the ways in which China
is now trying to evade those um really
uh significant controls is by leveraging
compute capacity elsewhere around the
world right so if for example um we
allow UAE to build massive Data Centers
of Nvidia chips uh in in their country
and then Chinese companies are able to
access that compute and train their own
models that's basically back door around
the export controls right now the bid
Administration has worked hard to try to
get the UAE to pull them away from China
where they have very close relationships
as they do with us
uh and to try try to um do more around
vetting of customers of cloud computer
environments and so forth and uh it'll
be interesting to see if the Trump
Administration pursues similar measures
uh with allies as they would be Visa
directly with China interesting um kind
of a followup on that uh thinking more
of the global landscape then for AI so
one of the things that has happened
fairly recently this year maybe within
the past four or five months is several
large tech companies from the US uh and
I and also China have basically kind of
swarmed into southeast Asia with a lot
of them pledging millions or billions of
dollars in investment in data centers I
think uh Google uh Apple uh Amazon Intel
um a lot of these big tech companies
from the US and some from China have all
kind of moved into the uh southeast Asia
region with lots of money and lots of
investment which is been obviously a
boon for uh those countries uh but I'm
interested in your take on how you think
that that impacts the relationship
between the US and China and AI because
it almost in my opinion that it's as if
China and the US still want to uh or
still feel the need to work together or
or
uh work economically together but they
can't actually do it because of all the
sanctions between each of our countries
so they kind of act as this proxy uh the
proxy region in Southeast Asia where
they can all still kind of work together
but separately if that makes any sense
um what are your take on kind of that
development in in that part of the world
yeah I I don't think this is about
working together I think this is about
trying to lock in potential friends and
partners before the other side does
right so this is a really competition
for winning that that region and and
trying to get it closer to our side
versus their side um again this is
exactly the same thing that happened in
the Cold War where you had a huge
non-aligned block that everyone was
vying for and trying to pull closer um
to either the Soviet Union side or the
the US side uh it's playing out yet
again particularly in the technology
space you know in AI there's an
interesting ju deposition of National
Security priorities and one hand this
technology that I think everyone agrees
will be incredibly economically
empowering and will drive productivity
growth and and and so much innovation in
the coming decades uh can be a huge chip
for us to use in our foreign policy
right to enable other countries to uh
develop economically to to uh create
Advanced capabilities um there's also a
win-win uh situation um that um is seen
where energy costs in the United States
of course are quite significant so if
you can go to other countries where uh
the the price of energy is low and you
can build large data centers um then um
you can train um these models and and
run inference on them at a much lower
cost so so they benefit and we benefit
as well uh but then there there's the
other uh side of this coin which is that
if you believe that AI will be as
transformative as uh many many smart
people focused on this believe not just
economically but in terms of integration
of those capabilities and and
particularly autonomy into military
systems and you know I don't want to
overstate the case but but some have
likened it to the development of nuclear
weapons not necessarily from a
destructive of of the planet perspective
but but in terms of really changing
everything once this technology is
developed and and uh changing the entire
nature of international relations as as
occurred after the development of the
atomic bomb that why wouldn't you want
and and the fact that all of this
technology is basically in the United
States and is fully controlled by the
United States right all the top five
companies that are producing Frontier
models are American companies um all the
chips that that you use for training and
inference are being designed um by
American companies they've been produced
by tsmc uh but but nevertheless um an
ally and uh uh you know so much so much
of The Cutting Edge research is
happening largely in the United States
uh and and a few other Ali countries so
if you have such dominance in this field
you know there's an natural question of
well do you want to try to control it as
much as possible uh and and particularly
because it requires so much investment
in terms of capital investment that it's
hard for most other countries to compete
except those that have the the money to
invest billions of dollars and training
this so um you have this natural tension
that that that is being fought about in
the National Security apparatus of do
you use it as a way to pull others
closer to us or is it so fundamentally
revolutionary particularly in the
military sphere that you want to try to
control it as much as possible now you
won't be able to do it forever but even
if you get a decade or two out of it
that can be very significant Demitri
that's U very insightful and when we
consider like some of the softer sides
of influence um it it's apparent that
China you know even within your book you
I think there's I mentioned there's a
softer side potentially where China
might be going after the media and and
other areas of influence and you know we
have our own challenges here in the US
and we have you know polarization
between the media is one way or the
other way and people you know call
things fake news how do you perceive the
presence of China in media coming
forward well um obviously we've had this
debate over last year around Tik Tok and
I I actually think that the framing of
that debate was very misguided because
fundamentally it is not about privacy
and your data going to China because the
reality is your data is already going
everywhere else even with American
companies they're they're happy to sell
it uh to to anyone who is willing to pay
a buck for it but the the fundamental
problem is that Tik Tok is a media
company now it is user generated content
but nevertheless there's an algorithm
and human moderators which people tend
to forget about that dictate what you
can see and by the way what you can see
right um things disappear off Tik Tock
all the time and no one knows why uh in
terms of uh things that may not be
politically um approve uh approved by
the Chinese Communist party so for me
the Tik to debate was about
influence um and Tik tock
self-admittedly uh is used by half of
the American population 150 million
people and allowing a foreign control
company to have that level of influence
in this country when you're in a cold
war with that country seems kind of
ridiculous right imagine if Pravda the
main newspaper of the of of of the
Soviet Union had the circulation of the
New York Times in the United States
during the first Cold War would never
allow that to happen right and in fact
we have rules on on foreign media
ownership in this country that have
existed for many many decades uh one
most prominent example of this is when
rert Murdoch as an Australian citizen at
the time was trying to buy the Fox
network not not Fox News but the actual
Network in the 1980s he was prevented
from doing so until he became an
American citizen because even though he
was a citizen of an Allied country we
weren't going to let him do it so so uh
you know you apply the same standard to
Tik Tok and you sort of say well wait a
second this is a company that's owned by
Chinese Company by dance uh there's CCP
influence and control by law of uh the
technology sector in China they
self-admittedly say that they have
enormous influence over the United
States which they've demonstrated by the
way when they had this campaign which
horribly backfired uh when Congress was
considering the tiktock devasure ACT to
have people call their congressmen which
they did in in enormous numbers to try
to protest this why would you let a
foreign company had that much influence
over this uh this this country very good
Dimitri I know we're going to wrap up
here but if I had to give our audience
one or two key takeaways besides going
out and purchasing your book World on
the brink um help us out with some key
takeaways for our
audience well the key takeaway is we are
in a Cold War uh we didn't have time to
dig into why but you know I line that
this cold war has existed for a long
time we've just not paid attention to it
we've now woken up and the key to
winning this cold war is a making sure
it doesn't uh get into Hot War over
Taiwan but but also winning the
technology competition in this race of
the 21st century I believe the four
critical technologies that will Define
the winners of the century are Ai and
art and autonomy biotech and synthetic
biology space technology and green
energy and the two components without
which you can't build any of those
Technologies are semiconductors and
critical minerals whoever wins race and
dominates in all those SE sectors the
four Technologies and the two components
will win this the 21st century thank you
very much Dimitri on uh behalf of the UN
reted crew we enjoyed having you on um I
know John and I could talk with you for
hours but our our time frame is up and I
just want to say thank you for being on
un reted thanks so much for having me
thanks all
