hi friends I'm Ash I'm a social
scientist and sometimes I make videos
about sociological topics and sometimes
I make Vlogs today we are talking about
the consequences of AI artificial
intelligence in everyday life from a
sociological lens so let's get into the
video and yes I am wearing the same
outfit from either the past video or the
next video because I am trying to batch
content a bit better especially because
we're going to New Zealand for a couple
of weeks in November and I just want to
get a bit more into the groove of making
content and try and do better and with
that being said I am also trying to get
to 1,000 subscribers before the end of
the year that is one of my 2024 goals so
if you enjoy my content I would love it
if you subscribe to the channel anyway
as always I've written a blog post about
this and I'm just all about repurposing
content right now so uh I'll link the
blog post down below so you can read
that as well if you like I'm not like
perfect always looking at the camera I
am practicing and getting better and
getting more confident so thank you to
those who are supporting me on this
journey but yeah uh let's talk about the
consequences of AI in everyday life but
first what is AI so according to
Wikipedia AI in its broadest sense is
intelligent exhibited by machines
particularly computer systems it is is a
field of research and computer science
that develops and studies methods and
software that enable machines to
perceive their environment and uses
learning and intelligence to take
actions that maximize their chances of
achieving defined goals and if there's
an updated definition in Wikipedia I'll
put it on the screen here for you but
let's break it down for us like
simple-minded folk because AI obviously
isn't my area of expertise but uh one of
the things that I want to do in life or
before I turn 30 which is very soon um
is learn a lot more about AI I'm just
kind of curious so IBM describes AI as
technology that enables computers and
machines to simulate human intelligence
and problem solving capability so to me
that means AI is a type of computer
software that is kind of replicating
what we do as humans so we don't have to
think as much um and I keep seeing lot
of memes about people wanting AI to do
their mundane task like the dishes and
washing and whatnot uh so they can write
and make art but what AI is doing is
doing their writing and making art not
very good art um it's a bit of like
plagiarism basically so some examples of
AI that we have in everyday life and
we've had for a while are chat bots so
chat G GPT um digital assistant so Siri
Okay Google I don't want to go too much
into detail about what these are because
obviously most of us that's common
knowledge navigation so Google Maps
Apple MC Apple Mac Apple Maps um use AI
to direct it or direct where we're going
never really thought about maps's AI
until now which is interesting and
according to
mdpi uh navigation is a science and
technology of accurately determining the
position and velocity of an Airborne
land or marine vehicle relative to a
known reference wherein the planning and
execution of the Maneuvers necessary to
move between desired locations are
analyzed smart artical robotics that's a
example of AI like making
robots some examples of that uh before I
talk about the examples is that I think
Robotics and AI are very two different
dis
disciplines um that's not to say they
don't overlap but um robotics is a
branch of Engineering in computer
science where people build machines like
little robots who can operate without
human intervention or will not too much
and the reason these robots are built is
so that they can carry out the tasks
that humans would get fatigued by and
obviously I've already defined AI so I
won't bore you with that AI in robotics
is currently a minority but there are
some examples so uh the household
product Amazon's astrobot I'll put in
like pictures or links uh so you know
what I'm talking about so robots and
Manufacturing and there's even robots in
healthcare uh one robot is known as or
not one robot but there's robots known
as Waldo surgeons and they help with
surgery and the name is actually
inspired from a Sci-Fi short story
called Waldo from Robert a heinan who
was is a very uh famous uh sci-fi writer
or author um I don't know if he is still
alive so let's have a look no he's he's
definitely not alive anymore born in
1907 and died in 1988 but yeah very very
very good Sci-Fi writer if you like
sci-fi I recommend checking him out
anyway Healthcare uh facial recognition
autonomous vehicles like a self-driving
car and even search engines so those are
the examples of like AI in everyday life
now that we have a bit more context to
what AI is let's take a bit of a deeper
dive into the consequences or
implications or whatever you want to
call it of AI in everyday life from a
sociological lens and I feel like I have
to apologize because sometimes I talk
with my hands and sometimes I don't and
yeah I think my personality is just a
little bit all over the place a little
bit rustic and a little bit awkward and
a little bit
anxious okay the
first consequence or implication I don't
know what to say implication maybe
implication is better so labor markets
and employment and I feel like this has
both pros and cons about it so AI could
increase labor productivity by
automating mundane and routine tasks
which frees up time for work workers to
develop other skills and this could in
turn increase the value of the workers
but it could also decrease employment
opportunities so that's like the pro and
the con there and what kind of jobs will
AI create so according to the world
economic Forum some jobs that could be
created by AI are AI trainers so people
who develop AI explainers people who
help explain what AI is to the general
public and sustainers people who use Ai
and make sure to continue using it in
the best ways possible and a little side
note here this article also talks about
creative destruction and that makes my
sociological brain very happy um because
they are exactly right AI is literally
creative um destruction and we could
have a whole discussion on that so what
about the jobs that a AI might destroy
or replace so according to maranne 2024
roles that require repetitive tasks like
data entry legal admin and mathematical
careers may be replaced with AI or
enhanced depending on how you look at it
and Healthcare may be impacted as well
as we already saw with Waldo
surgeons and and with such Innovation it
means that new skill skill requirements
will need to be met so are we going to
lose more or learn more I don't have a
specific subsection for AI in healthcare
but I do want to say a few things here
if you don't mind so according to shahan
2021 there are many applications of AI
in healthcare such as AI for drug
Discovery meaning that AI has helped
phac pharmaceutical companies Fast Track
their drug Discovery process so fisa I
don't know how is that how you say it
fisa is using machine learning to help
discover Immunology treatments get
vaccinated everyone uh AI is being used
in clinical trials to help automate and
speed up the process and AI is being
used for patient care to analyze
people's quality of life so I feel like
it's doing some good things in
healthcare moving on to social
relationships and
interactions and I am getting distracted
because I feel like I haven't set the
camera up where I usually do or the
lighting's just a bit off cuz it's
darker usually I film early in the day
but it's like because we had
the garden Has Come Today all there has
been is like noises of mowing lawns and
I just haven't been able to like film
while that's going on because it's
frustrating me and like it's just
annoying right and I feel like the mic
would pick up on a little bit anyway
social relationships and
interactions so I personally feel like
AI is going to influence our social
relationships and interactions so for
example we already see the use of
filters in social media apps such as uh
Snapchat and Instagram I am sure there
are others but I can't think of them
right now and I use filters sometimes
not usually to enhance my face but
sometimes I like to play with the silly
ones on Snapchat but a lot of filters
are about changing the way we look often
to enhance our beauty or shape our face
to fit with what's trending at the time
so there's a whole debate there but I do
want to say as I said before there are a
range of like really silly or stupid
filters that like make us look ugly or
not our best selves and I think that's
important to point out because it's not
no one ever talks about that they only
ever talk about the beauty enhancing
side of things and I feel like there are
always multiple sides to things I
personally think that people do actually
just talk about negative things when it
comes to social media like like where
are the people talking about the
positive things about social media
because there are both talking about
social media a lot of platforms have
integrated AI into their own algorithms
even my blog um hosting site uses AI
inside it to help make the users have a
better experience um social media
platforms use AI to enable personalized
content recommendations real time
content analysis and automated content
generation and with this comes
enhancement for the user experience on
social media it could also lead lead it
could also lead to the spread of
misinformation filter Bubbles and Echo
Chambers and this was written a while
ago but since then the AI on like
Instagram and Facebook is really
annoying like like I'm just trying to
search for someone so I can message them
and then it's like telling me this whole
story about horses or whatever uh yeah
it's and I find it funny how now
Facebook has AI that is just
like summarizing a com um a comment
section of a post anyway AI is also seen
in things like customer relations where
companies will use AI similar to the way
they would use a customer service agent
and by doing this it saves their money
but also helps with time and location
barriers is so it doesn't matter what
time a person is calling or um chatting
with the company the AIA agent can help
them because they don't have a legal
right to go home at a certain time it
also means that companies can
unfortunately be located in cheaper
areas uh which might lead to more
exploitation if they do employ AI agents
and consider people it mean it might
mean that such companies could generate
higher Revenue yay capitalism that
sarcasm um and turnovers each year uh
whether or not the user experience is as
good as talking to a human is a
different story personally I don't like
talking on the phone at all but I've
also struggled with chat Bots too
because sometimes they just have no idea
what you're talking about so I feel like
I'm on the fence but that might just be
because I'm a bit of an introvert and if
you're like me you probably watched a
lot of sci-fi or read a lot of sci-fi
content and I love it but it does scare
me to some degree especially when it
does come to things like robots and I've
talked about this in previous videos
Westworld such a good show uh but it did
scare me a lot and I really feel like we
got ripped off with not another season
because I just wanted more of that but
apparently it had like it just cost too
much money to make and they weren't
making any money but yeah it was really
good anyway we I'm going off topic a lot
a little bit um but the reason I brought
up sci-fi is because it makes me think
of AI and companionship can AI really
replace human companionship personally I
don't think so I don't think there's a
very extra special feeling when you
create a connection with an AI like when
you create a connection with a human
it's very like special whether it's a
friendship a relationship or like lover
or whatever those connections are very
like special to me and this could just
be my opinion but I don't think I could
have that with a robot but yeah that
reminds me there is the movie Her which
is very interesting very long too and in
saying this it's not to say that some
people won't be able to have that
connection or like some people won't be
affected because there definitely will
be people affected by AI companionship
tools I wrote here that I personally
think some people may become addicted to
them which is terrifying to think think
about so if we replace human interaction
with AI we are likely to get less
equality and less
satisfaction it's not just the same it's
not no it's just not the same quantifi
2024 suggest that and this is a quote
that human to human communication is
vital to humanity social life and it
should be nurtured and enhanced in any
way possible and that data and
artificial intelligent provide Prov a
powerful opportunity enhance personal
human-to-human interaction and have more
winning conversation and they also go on
to say that the human fear of AI is
based on the concept that a AI will make
humans obsolete which definitely won't
be the case like that won't happen but I
do understand where the fear comes from
well this is going to be a long video
long to edit but moving on now to
surveillance surveillance and privacy is
AI the new eyes of surveillance well one
would assume so considering the way it
can collect interpret and analyze data
and do so at rapid speeds with this
comes concerns of safety privacy and
data collection remember Cambridge
analytica thanks Zuckerberg according to
F 2024 in a Forbes article it's widely
understood that AI tools allow people to
create content texts images videos and
much more can be quickly created with AI
but these tools can also be used to
track and profile individuals AI allows
for more detailed profiling and tracking
of individuals activities movements and
behaviors than was ever possible before
AI based surveillance technology can for
instance be used for marketing purposes
and targeted advertising and to me this
quote is very very scary as the use of
AI in such a way can lead to invasion of
privacy and it may make people feel very
uncomfortable and uneasy just think
about how many cameras you walk past on
a daily basis or how many things are
actually tracking at every move are our
phones listening to us I wouldn't go to
say as far as our phones have a bugs
have a bug in it but the way algorithms
and things like that work is on
prediction uh they know what we want
before we know we want it if that makes
sense but what is our data being used
for facial recognition technology is
widely used in public spaces like train
stations and airports probably a lot of
other spaces too and I remember watching
a gruin episode which is a uh Australian
panel show hosted by comedian Will
Anderson and um there's a couple of
advertising experts I can't remember
their names and then they get new ones
every week and they analyze Australian
ads and say whether they think it's
going to work and basically they do a
sociological and analysis of the ads and
it's really good and one episode it's
quite old now but said that there were
uh shopping centers in Australia that
were uh tracking your like movement and
obviously there's cameras and shopping
centers for safety but apparently they
were trying
to work out what your mood was so that
they could like put
ads in like areas close to you and so
you'd go shop at that place yeah that
kind of freaked me out like why do they
need to know your mood anyway and facial
recognition technology being used in
such spaces leads to a lot of ethical
concerns about the constant monitoring
of people are we in a real life
1984 is the show Person of Interest
going to become a reality you tell me
okay the next implication uh we're going
to talk about or factor sociological
factor is ethics ethics is an
interesting topic
I don't really know how people can
decide what's ethical or not like you
have a gut feeling but there are so many
experiments from the past especially if
you've done psychology or looked into
that uh where just things are so
unethical and you're just like how did
that happen how did they allow that to
happen and I know there are ethics
committees and they decide what you can
do and what you can't do but I feel like
it's just so interesting how far we've
come like what the if was the CIA doing
with MK Ultra like how did they get away
with that that was like literal
brainwashing so they took a substance it
must have been LSD and um drugged people
without their knowledge and then they
wanted to see if they could like control
them it's that's another Topic in
itself is AI ready to make UNS super
unsupervised decisions like moral decis
decision making so simply put no have
you seen some of the images that it
generates like people have like seven
fingers however it can help with
decision making in general we want AI to
enhance Our Lives not to take over and
make humans obsolete according to
mendrick and T I don't know if I'm
pronouncing that right 2022 AI makes the
right decisions for the most part what a
might struggle with is specific moral
decision making they go on to discuss
the trolley problem when someone has to
make a decision to sacrifice one person
to save a larger number of people will
AI be able to make a split second
decision will it make the right one
what's even scarier is the idea that if
AI can answer the TR trolley problem
it's able to think independently would
AI make the same ethical and moral
decisions that us people would is there
AI era like there is human era so the
trolley problem is kind of like uh how
do I explain it so it's a thought
experiment in ethics and psychology uh
involving ethical dilemmas of whether to
sacrifice one person or save uh millions
of people so you would be like if this
person uh passes away then all these
people are saved if this person is saved
millions of people are going going to
pass away so logically most people would
go with one person passing away rather
than Millions anyway back to what I was
talking about would AI be able to have
empathy for others or even sympathy I
know these are just more questions than
answers but I feel like right now we
still don't really know where AI stands
like it's kind of like still
developing and there's also the issue of
bias and fearness that comes up for
example the idea of AI as a recruitment
tool
let's look at this example from Amazon
where they used AI where they used an AI
based tool to essentially out recruit
other big tech companies you might be
shocked to learn what actually happened
the recruitment tool did not like women
and yes as a feminist and a woman myself
this is a big big problem the data that
this AO tool used was tainted because it
was only really looking at men it was
designed to vet applications by
observing patterns and resumés submitted
to the company over a 10year period and
most of these came from men a reflection
of male dominance across the tech
industry uh and you can unpack that a
bit because a lot of the time women
won't apply for jobs because they don't
think they're qualified for enough and
there have been studies done on like men
applying for jobs that they're
definitely not qualified for and they
get them so yeah women should just be
applying for more jobs is the takeaway
from that so this AI tool taught itself
that men were preferable to hire as
Amazon were unable to make the problem G
gender neutral the AI tool development
was scrapped and I feel like if AI was
able to teach itself this we have to
talk about H demonic masculinity so this
is the practice which reinforces male
dominance in society so how do we get
away from that if AI is just going to
have gender biases why is it that men
are still in charge aren't countries
with a woman as their leader better off
as a hole well that's just my opinion
it'll be very interesting to see what
happens in the November election in
America I'm very interested and lastly
what about accountability if AI does the
wrong thing who takes accountability for
that will AI be able to apologize or
Rectify a mistake we just don't know
next we're going to talk about economic
inequality so I feel like something that
always has to be discussed in sociology
is economics if you've ever taken a
first year sociology course you'll know
all about the social political cultural
and economic factors all of those uh
they all work together and can play an
important role in impacting something
and often each factor is correlated to
each other so what about Ai and economic
inquality inequality well we all know
that we live in this crazy capitalist
world where the rich get richer and the
poor get poorer thank you Carl Marx but
there's this qu question that's always
stuck with me from my University days
and one of my supervisors always used to
say it but who has access and in
hindsight this is a really important
question who has access to the
technology of AI well firstly we need an
internet connection because not everyone
has that we need to know how to use a
computer and we need to be chicksy
enough to be able to use a tool like
chat
GPT and those with access might lose out
and with that all that being said I also
think AI will allow those who may have
not had access before to education
finally get access to education we also
might see the rise of personalized
learning so learning tailored to the way
we want to learn or how we might learn
best there is the idea that with the
rise of AI
income inequality will worsen I don't
have a better way of paraphrasing this
but this is from Bell and coric 20123
and as a quote we argue that this poses
a grave threat to democracy that is
separate from more Trad traditional AI
risks to Democrat to democracy such as
deep fakes and
misinformation High inequality corrodes
Democratic institutions through
increased Eli influence corruption popul
ISM and greater public discontent at the
same time weaken democracy loses power
to reign in inequality through
Progressive policies this may create a
vicious feedback loop of eroding
democracy and Rising inequality which
may accelerate rapidly following an
economic shock like large scale
displacement of workers by AI the result
could be a new society-wide equilibrium
with starkly increased income
disparities and a weakened voice for
ordinary citizens
that was a mouthful um and if this does
come into play wealth distribution will
be impacted and we will see a rise in
economic
inequality and to minimize the
likelihood of this policy should be put
in place such is not allowing AI to
automate or work Empower workers reform
um tax policies and make sure there are
no excessive power gains from the
implementation of AI okay we are at the
last factor and this is social norms and
this is my favorite one I think so
social norms are the shared standard of
behaviors that are acceptable in certain
places which can often be different in
different scenarios so for example
there's a social Norm of not talking to
other people in a lift or elevator uh
and if someone breaks a social Norm it
can get quite uncomfortable so someone
might face the wrong way in an elevator
or lift and it could be seen as a social
Norm um another social Norm in uh New
Zealand compared to Melbourne is when
you're on the escalator steer things uh
in a shopping center in um New Zealand
no one walks up them everyone's pretty
lazy and just stands on them and you
don't really need to get out of the way
but in Melbourne because people are like
always busy busy trying to get to other
places you need to stand on the left so
that if anyone needs to get up really
fast they can yeah I just thought that
was interesting anyway
what about social norms in AI I
personally think that AI is going to
fundamentally fundamentally change our
social norms especially in the Western
World so Baron Chelly 2024 says an
outlook on how AI could influence the
formation of future social norms
emphasizes the importance for open
societies to Anchor their formal
deliberation process in an open
inclusive and transparent public
discourse so in my own interpretation of
this
quote new social norms are likely to
emerge from the use of AI but we don't
yet know what they are going to be it
also just makes me things think of
things like uncanny valy I don't know
why are we going to lose agency with the
rise of AI how much of the world is
actually going to take over do we really
need to be scared and what's going to
happen to our work life balance are the
days of the 9 to5 over or are we still
going to be overworked and underpaid
what happens to agency does AI have
agency social norms in AI uh and our
society is becoming increasingly
digitalized things like social cues that
would have with a personto person
interaction will not be seen in the same
way when interacting with an AI check
bot they may not be able to pick up on
subtle hints or cues like humans would
they go on to say that we may even see a
decline in authenticity so this is all
and Def who I am referencing here um so
we might see a decline in authenticity
online when we see avatars which I think
is already happening with like Ai
influencers and I don't understand why
they have so many followers if a person
is acting as an avatar or something like
that on the metaverse does there mean
there are different social norms and
expectations for that Avatar what
happens if that Avatar commits a crime
is it treated the same way as a crime in
real life
what happens to trolls will we still be
able to block them so many
thought-provoking questions and I feel
like I have more questions about social
norms and answers to do with AI and I
apologize for that but that brings me to
the end so to summarize we have
discussed the consequences or
implications of AI on everyday life from
a sociological lens we have explored
examples of AI the effects of AI on
labor markets and employment AI Ai and
social relationships Ai Ai and surveill
surveillance Society Ai and ethics Ai
and economic inequality and Ai and
social norms we can see that AI is
another form of creative destruction but
with the rise of AI comes way more
questions than answers so stay
tuned anyway thank you so much for
watching as I said at the start of this
video I trying to get to 1,000
subscribers before the end of this year
so if you could go ahead and give this
video a big thumbs up if you enjoyed it
and subscribe to my channel if you have
not already I believe there's about 70%
of people who are watching my videos but
aren't subscribed um and I will link all
the sources and my blog post down below
so you can go and read those as well
I'll see you next one bye
