uh I mean my mind is a storm I don't
think most people would want to be me
they may think they would want to be me
but they don't they don't know is your
storm a Happy
Storm
no I've grown tired of hearing the name
Elon Musk and not really understanding
what's going on who is this guy where is
he from how has he built a huge business
Empire to become one of the richest
people in the world and what can we
learn about his purchase of Twitter so
I've been going on a deep dive finding
everything I can about this guy his
upbringing businesses he started talking
to people who have worked with him who
have worked for him many of these people
want to remain anonymous for reasons you
will soon understand I've talked to
people who love him people who hate him
people who used to love him and now hate
him if I were an employee at Twitter
right now I'd probably just do your job
don't let him know your name so after a
few months of reporting on this I feel
like I finally have a handle on who this
guy is I understand how he built his
Empire how he treats the people around
him and the real reason I believe he
bought Twitter Elon Musk put in an offer
unsolicited bid to buy the social media
platform 44
billion so let me show you the rise and
Rule of Elon Musk you're a super
villain that's what a super villain does
yeah he's addicted to drama who's
addicted to risk and when everything
seem to be going smoothly he almost has
a comp pulsion toore things
up Elon Musk was born in the summer of
1971 in South Africa from a young age he
was bullied pretty relentlessly by kids
at school for being scrawny and nerdy I
was you know bullied quite a lot I
punched the face many times musk would
later say that he's on the autism
spectrum though he was never diagnosed
it really bad for young Elon like one
time when he got beaten up at school
once and so bloodied he had to go to the
hospital the scars were actually worse
when he came home and his father made
him stand in front of him and berated
him for more than an hour calling him
stupid saying it was his fault stories
like this make me sick to my stomach and
you realize that the trauma and scars
from this kind of abuse both physical
and emotional they don't go away easily
speaking of his dad there's a lot of
rumors that Elon came from a rich dad
who owned Emerald mines in South Africa
and that he was set up to be successful
because of family wealth this isn't
factually accurate elon's dad did import
emeralds but there wasn't a lot of money
in this family he never owned a a a
emerald mine this is total if
you want more detail on that you can go
check out our sources where we put the
fact check for every one of the
assertion in this video anyway what Elon
did have at a young age was a skill for
computers and
programming I told myself how to program
computers mostly cuz I wanted to program
games at the age of 12 he invented a
video game mom do you remember when I
was 12 and I created my own video game
that he sold to a magazine for $500 it
was his first business move in
Tech his first interest in space around
12 or 13 I had compan EX itial crisis
trying to figure out the meaning of life
from an early age musk found meaning in
the idea of the potential of humanity
what humans can do as a collective how
we as a species have somehow been able
to work together to explore the meaning
of the universe my motivation was that
if we can expand the scope and scale of
Consciousness maybe we can find out the
meaning of life I mean you hear this and
it kind of sounds overly Grand kind of
delusional overly idealistic
but honestly this is what motivates Musk
from a very young age and he doesn't
bend on what he wants and what he's
willing to do to achieve
it so he leaves South Africa when he's
18 and moves to Canada and eventually
ends up in Pennsylvania where he goes to
college and gets a degree in economics
and physics at the age of 24 he moves
out to California to pursue a PhD at
Stanford but he never starts the program
instead he starts his first business
okay so I'm not going to go into the
details of every one of elon's companies
because there are a lot if you want to
Deep dive read this very thick book this
was a foundational part of our reporting
and it details the play-by-play on all
of these companies for now let me give
you a quick summary of the businesses
this guy built to become one of the
richest men on the planet his first
company was called zip 2 he started it
in 1995 with his brother who seems to
have an affinity for cowboy
hats his company provided maps and
business directories for online
newspapers I know those words sound very
strange to us now but like back in 1995
it was a huge deal it almost was like
the precursor to what Google Maps is
today and it was very successful we
helped bring online several hundred uh
newspapers that previously were only in
it was acquired a few years later for
$37 million 22 million of those dollars
going right into elon's pocket suddenly
Elon is Rich receiving cash is cash I
mean those are just a large number of
Van Franklin he uses the money to start
another company called x.com no no no
not that x.com the first x.com which you
now know today as PayPal so this is an
ATM what we're going to do is transform
the traditional banking industry it was
basically an online bank and it was
revolutionary at the time so much so
that in 2002 eBay bought it for 1 .5
billion Elon got $180 million of those
dollars and now he's officially Super
Rich there is jlan the fastest car in
the world so what to do with all of this
money the answer for Elon Musk was to
try out the craziest ideas he could
think of well I had like about 180
million from PayPal I thought you know
I'll allocate half of that to SpaceX and
Tesla and Solar City that should be fine
I'll have 90 million lik just Lots I
thought our probability of success was
less than 10% it would be foolish to
think anything else other than
that ever since he was a kid making
video games about space Elon has been
motivated by this idea of humans
expanding outside of Earth humans
becoming a multiplet species we would
like to help make life multiplanetary
the extension of life to multiple
planets in the early 2000s Tesla already
existed they were making electric cars
but they were kind of high-end Niche
sports cars Elon was really interested
in this so he came in as an investor and
eventually became the CEO with the
vision of turning electric cars
mainstream and ushering a whole new era
of Transportation but these ideas were
more expensive than he anticipated
things cost more and took longer than
than I thought so I had a choice of
either put the rest of the money in or
the companies are going to die his
Rockets kept blowing up his electric
cars were devilishly complicated to
manufacture but Elon developed this
addiction to risk and intensity that
kept him pushing forward despite these
challenges Tesla reinvented how cars
were made thanks to Innovative
Technology and Manufacturing really
clever engineering and a waterfall of
government subsidies he was able to
Skyrocket Tesla into one of the most
valuable companies in the world
overtaking every other car company by a
long shot in just a few years and this
company was weird it wasn't obeying all
the rules like there was almost no
official marketing campaign and Elon
decided to make all of his technology
open source the patents were not
copyrighted anyone could see them and
use them with the hope that the market
for electric vehicles would take off and
that the world would more quickly move
away from the use of fossil fuels which
would ultimately benefit Tesla so if
somebody comes and makes a better
electric car that than than Tesla and
it's it's so much better than ours that
we can't sell our cars and and we go
bankrupt I still think that's a good
thing for the world these were bold
crazy moves but they were totally
working meanwhile elon's space company
was about to go out of
business for SpaceX first three launches
failed just barely able to scrape
together enough parts and and money to
do the the fourth launch and then after
6 years and 6 months of stress and
intensity elon's dreams of going to
space started to come true
I'm going to explain a little bit more
about how he did all of this but the big
deal about SpaceX is that they created a
reusable rocket every other rocket is
disposable you can only use it once and
it's very expensive but Elon proved that
you could use a rocket and safely land
it back down onto the surface of Earth
and then use it again soon SpaceX would
be carrying NASA astronauts and supplies
to the International Space Station
launching military satellites into space
for the Pentagon launching dozens of
satellites up into space for commercial
use and even launching the first ever
private space flight for tourism space
travel was officially reinvented I think
we're at the DOR of a new era and it's a
reason for people to be excited and
inspired to be human okay but what's
crazy is that during all of this Elon is
also launching a bunch of other
companies like the boring company which
is trying to revolutionize traffic and
transportation by building smarter
tunnels oh my God it just hit me that
it's boring like boring into the side of
a mountain oh my God that that just hit
me right
now this company also turned into like a
blank canvas for Elon Musk to play out
all of his childish silly ideas like
selling a flamethrower or this perfume
that smells like singed human hair and
yes musk uses his businesses as kind of
a way to troll Humanity while also
trying to save Humanity it's this
behavior that a lot of people find
refreshing and ends up getting a lot of
attention and becoming a marketing tool
for all of his companies he starts
building neuralink which is designing a
way for humans to control computers with
their brains which is already having
some initial successes and now that
elon's company can easily go to space he
starts sending up these small satellites
6,000 of them that are orbiting the
Earth and he starts providing internet
to remote places arguably changing the
course of the war in Ukraine by
providing Ukrainian Soldiers with
internet during the initial Invasion
From Russia though that's gotten more
complicated in recent months as Russian
soldiers have started to use starlink
and it's a whole other Rabbit Hole okay
but we're not done yet with elon's
companies he also co-founded open AI way
back in 2015 who went on to make chat
GPT he later left the company over
disagreements and then has recently
started his own AI company called you
guessed it X AI yes the guy loves the
letter X it's literally the name of
several of his companies and one of his
children each one of these Ventures
points back to elon's Childish idealism
this Grand Vision of testing the limits
of what humans can do by pushing our
understanding of physics and working
together to do crazy amazing things but
then after building all of these
companies that are focused on pushing
the physical limits of human potential
Elon in recent years has set his sights
on reshaping another industry
tonight the richest man in the world is
hunting for more put in an offer of
almost $44 billion to buy Twitter all of
Twitter is this all a troll or is this
very
real Elon Musk has been portrayed as
both a reckless unethical billionaire as
well as a Visionary who is changing the
world for the better and what you think
about him probably comes from what you
read about him and what you read about
him was probably served to you by an
algorithm this is how our media
landscape works these days and it's
getting us deeper and deeper into
trouble which is a major theme in this
video but it's also in line with the
sponsor of today's video which is ground
news ground news is a platform that I've
been using to navigate this problem to
find a balanced view where I can see
both sides of a new story ground news
Aggregates tens of thousands of news
articles from around the world into one
place and then allows you to critically
examine how that news is being covered
here's a recent story that on the left
you can see from the Los Angeles Times
that Engineers Su Elon Musk and SpaceX
saying that the company mirrored his
juvenile crude xposts while on the right
you've got the New York Post saying that
Elon Musk was sued by fired Engineers
alleging Elon Musk allowed pervasive
sexist culture these headlines have
subtle bias in them like the left
leaning headlines suggests that musk's
personal Behavior was directly
responsible while the right leaning
headline emphasizes that they were fired
employees and that there was an alleged
sexist culture softening any kind of
blame towards musk and his company this
is really subtle stuff that's hard to
pay attention to if you're just
scrolling your algorithm ground news
emphasizes and highlights these biases
and allows you to be more critical as a
news consumer not only do they show this
biased distribution but they also have a
tool that rates how factual an article
is and my favorite they have this blind
spot detector that pays attention to the
articles that you tend to read and
presents you with stuff that might be
outside of your comfort zone but that
you probably need to see to be a
balanced news consumer this is a really
cool tool I'm very glad they exist I'm
really glad they're sponsoring today's
video if you want to try this out for
yourself go to ground news.com Johny
Harris where you'll get 40% off the
Vantage plan which is unlimited access
to all of these features I use ground
news I think it's really important in
today's media landscape I'm grateful
that they sponsored today's video with
that let's dive back into the story of
Elon
Musk tonight the richest man in the
world is hunting for
more okay so we're getting into this why
did Elon buy Twitter what can we learn
from it before we do that I want to tell
you a little bit about what I learned
about Elon Musk as a leader after
talking to people who have worked with
him people who have worked under him
there's a few key lessons that I've
taken taken away from all of these
conversations we've had with these
people and doing research on him I will
not be quoting them directly because
most of them ask to remain
anonymous the first thing I heard over
and over again is how obsessed Elon Musk
is with the details of what his
companies are building I think people
think like I'm a business guy or
something like that engineering that's
like 80% more of my time One Source I
talked to who worked closely with musk
estimates that he spends 90% of his time
in technical details with a whiteboard
out looking at code with engineers and
programmers solving very specific
details in meetings that sometimes go
into the middle of the night and this
gets to our second takeway which is that
Elon questions everything and I mean
everything you can see this really
clearly when he was building SpaceX it
was tough going there in the beginning U
because I'd never built anything
physical I mean I'd built like little
model rockets as a kid and that kind of
thing but I'd never had a company that
built anything physical elon's original
idea for SpaceX was to buy Russian
rockets that had been decommissioned and
to rebuild them more efficiently I can
tell you it was very weird going to the
Russian rocket forces and saying I'd
like to buy two of your biggest Rockets
they thought I was crazy but but I did
have money he went to Russia and quickly
discovered that the price that
governments pay for Rockets is
astronomical it felt absurd on the
flight home Elon makes this list of
every component he can think of needed
to build a rocket and then he put in the
estimated price for just the mat
materials and the components what he
found is that the prices that they were
quoting him for these rocket parts were
highly inflated he interrogated every
single cost associated with rockets and
started to make plans on how his team
could find a much cheaper way to build
them he did this over and over and over
until soon his team was manufacturing
70% of all of the rocket components for
SpaceX and saving millions of
dollars I heard story after Story like
this Elon showing up talking to some
low-level engineer working on some very
specific problem and interrogating it
until he found the most efficient answer
oh and this wasn't about him being
collaborative or inclusive of his
employees this is about him stress
testing every single assumption pushing
every single thing to the limit so that
he can find the most efficient way to
build something this also makes working
for Elon incredibly stressful he'll show
up he'll question everything and then
he'll tell people that a 6-month
timeline needs to be condensed down into
90 days everyone's jaw drops they say
it's impossible and he says it has to be
possible and then everyone makes it
happen which gets me to number four the
people around him musk's ruthless
idealism and vision for the future has
attracted a lot of really talented
people who bring these dreams to life
these people have rallied around his
mission to reinvent Transportation or
take humans to Mars they're the ones who
make it happen with unprecedented speed
and efficiency these four things are
really his superpowers they are the
ingredients that have allowed him to
reinvent entire Industries but this
isn't the full picture everyone I talk
to includes the fact that Elon can be a
total and is a lot of the time
hate me like me or indifferent do you
want the best car or do you not want the
best car he is abrupt he is blunt and he
puts basically no effort into making you
like him no I am not the evil I just a
misunderstood one irony I kept hearing
is that musk cares so much about
Humanity but he doesn't really care
about humans okay so I'm the father of
an 11-year-old who is autistic and I
myself identify as being on some part of
the spectrum and so listening to hours
of musk I see moments that to most
people might look like him being
mean-hearted and arrogant and extreme
and even cruel but to me feel more like
him being unaware or perhaps unwilling
to play by the rules of social norms
okay but and because my son is probably
watching this I need to make one thing
crystal clear that there is a line here
musk's Behavior especially recently can
quickly cross into malicious
temperamental mean-hearted and harmful
behavior that goes well beyond anything
that can be justified or explained by
neurodivergence into something that
looks a lot more like aggressive
bullying coercion unethical business
practices there's almost a Deon mode of
Eli mus where it turns really dark and
that can be very problematic especially
when it came to acquiring Twitter my
point is that there's some empathy that
is warranted here it can be a blurry
line but musk very clearly crosses that
line something we'll talk about more in
a little bit but for now let's get back
to our list these five things that are
the big takeaways on how musk operates
and how he's built his Empire and let's
look at where got him by the early
2020s his four big companies had grown
rapidly to become worth billions Tesla
reaching a trillion doll valuation one
of the most valuable companies on Earth
revolutionizing the car industry and by
January 2021 these successes had
skyrocketed musk to become the world's
richest man according to Forbes
billionaire
tracker but don't be fooled for musk
this actually isn't an ideal situation
musk's biographer Walter Isaacson wrote
this amazing book book that details all
of this private communication that
really gives us an inside look into the
psychology of musk during this time and
he documents this conversation between
Siobhan zillis the director of
operations at one of his companies and
the mother of a set of elon's twins and
Elon in a text that read you don't have
to be in a state of War all the time or
is that where you find greater Comfort
when you're in periods of war and he
replies that it's a part of his default
setting zillis then tells Isaac
that it was like he was winning the
simulation and now he felt at a loss at
what to do extended periods of calm were
unnerving for him the guy is addicted to
conflict and crisis and tension and
drama and being the world's richest man
with all these successes was
uncomfortable he needed a new storm to
throw himself into and so he chose the
storm of all
storms at the end of 2022 he buys
Twitter for $44 billion in his offer
letter he tells us why he's doing it he
believes that Twitter has the potential
to be the platform for free speech
around the globe and that free speech is
a societal imperative for a functioning
democracy and right away musk applies
his Playbook to the company sending out
a midnight email telling the thousands
of employees that there's going to be a
new Twitter culture that is quote
extremely hardcore long hours high
intensity and tells anyone who wants to
stay to fill out this form or be fired
thousands of Twitter employees are being
laid off locked out of their work email
accounts Twitter has fired half of its 7
and a half thousand staff we called it
the Twitter Hunger
Games I thought a lot about how to talk
about musk's fora into Twitter because
it is in the news right now it is
shaping the way that we receive and talk
about information and there's a lot of
hot takes out there what I decided to do
here is to try to give the most Earnest
understanding as to musk's motives why
did he do this what does he want from it
and what is he doing to reshape Twitter
around this
Vision what was it ultimately that led
you to make the decision to do it uh
somewhat melodramatic
but I was worried about that that it was
having a corrosive effect on
civilization so first and foremost free
speech is like the thing he says over
and over spech Free Speech Free Speech
free speech is the only way that humans
are going to thrive and because musk's
main mission is the advancement of human
civilization he must buy Twitter and
make it the Free Speech platform the
platform where we have perhaps the most
important conversations in the world he
says this over and over like in this
tweet where he says this is a battle for
the future of civilization if free
speech is lost even in America tyranny
is all that lies ahead so that's number
one on what he says his motives are I
think part of it is that it's where it's
where it was located which is uh you
know downtown San Francisco the next
pillar of musk's reasoning has to do
with the city of San Francisco is there
a place that's more far left than San
Francisco
brookley Twitter's headquarters is
located right here in downtown San
Francisco and for musk that's a big
problem it was an accidental far-left
information weapon that was then
harnessed by the farle who could not
themselves create the weapon but
happened to be collocated where the
technologist were okay so let me get
this straight musk believes that Twitter
being in the heart of a liberal City
means that the engineers and leaders
deciding what gets elevated and
suppressed on Twitter are infected with
the politics of the liberal City and so
they're more likely to elevate their
ideology a megaphone an information
weapon that's his argument I have a
couple issues with the argument and its
logical underpinning but again this is
about what Elon mus says and as his
motivations for buying Twitter and
number three the government is censoring
Twitter and Twitter is letting them
Twitter was simply um an arm of the
government you know it's a state
publication is the way to think of old
Twitter it's a state publication all
right this is our list we're going to
get to each of these and like try to
understand them all but like is anyone
else wondering what happened here it
feels like the story went from quirky
Visionary engineer uses his brilliant
unorthodox socially immature tactics and
obsessions to accomplish unprecedented
engineering Feats to said quirky
engineer suddenly dedicates His
Brilliant mind away from physics and
towards social media Because he believes
that there's a deep state conspiracy
between San Francisco technologists
infected with liberal bias and they're
censoring government overlords and he is
going to fix
it what happened I actually never got to
the bottom of that and um I I don't
think anyone has that's actually been a
central question that was never answered
for me during this reporting we do know
this pivot happened sometime in 2020 why
did musk shift to obsessing over this
the answer to that probably lies
somewhere in Elon musk's brain and it is
not ethical or useful for me to try to
opine on his mental health or what is
going on in his brain so let's stick to
the facts here is The Logical framework
that Elon Musk used to buy Twitter this
is what he wants to do with it is fix
this let's see what happens next
so after firing most of the employees
and changing the name to his favorite
letter he gets to work on free speech he
lets big accounts that were previously
banned back onto the platform including
former president Donald Trump comedian
Kathy Griffin lawmaker marjerie Taylor
green Jordan Peterson within a few
months he posts this tweet around the
Super Bowl and he notices that this
tweet gets less engagement than the
Tweet by President Joe Biden Elon does
not like this he calls an urgent meeting
and tasks 80 Engineers to quickly
rebuild a version of the algorithm that
will allow his tweets to be artificially
boosted by a factor of a thousand I was
kind of skeptical on how Sensational it
was reported but through my
conversations confirmed that this
actually went down like the old Twitter
was not built to artificially boost One
account and Elon the Free Speech guy was
like I need you to boost my account
because it's not getting as much
attention as the president and the ad0
engineers did so a few months after
buying the company Elon now has super
algorithmic power and he uses it to
start to amplify certain people so I
know what you're thinking Johnny you
just disagree with these people and so
you think that it's bad that Elon let
them on but really free speech is about
letting everyone talk yes absolutely
that is true and yet Elon uses an
artificially Amplified voice to prop up
a very specific type of voice on Twitter
to amplify
ideas extreme ideas harmful ideas not
just to liberals in San Francisco but
ideas that we as Humanity recognize are
bad ideas and now someone with a massive
megaphone has control on how big those
ideas can get even Bill Maher the Elon
Fanboy there's a very few people who
actually make change happen you are one
of those people even he could not
understand why Elon was doing this I
understand why you wanted to like have a
platform where you have Free Speech but
like why then embrace the worst people
on it and then Elon isn't totally
consistent about this like in the case
of Alex Jones who spreads horrendous
conspiracies and misinformation to a lot
of people when asked why Elon didn't let
him go back onto Twitter he said no
saying that he had no mercy for anyone
who would use the death of children for
gain politics or fame he did eventually
reinstate Alex Jones after running a
poll but you start to see that he'll
reinstate anyone unless he personally
takes issue with their views or what
they said what's puzzling to me is that
this isn't free speech absolutism it's
not say anything you want musk's new
Twitter then starts Banning and
suppressing substack link substack the
place where independent journalists
write musk made the change where you
can't comment or like on anything that
has a substack article and you can't
embed Tweets in your substack article
that doesn't feel like Free Speech To Me
musk that decides that the word
cisgender is a slur on Twitter and
threatens to ban people who use it too
much is that free speech he then starts
Banning journalists who criticize him
though he did reinstate a few of them
after a vote and then starts suing media
Watchdog organizations like the center
for countering digital hate trying to
silence them for criticizing the new
Twitter musk of course lost with the
verdict coming out saying that this
lawsuit was basically about trying to
Sil criticism and deter others from
criticizing his company he's someone who
is willing to use his enormous wealth
and power to silence people like this is
such clear anti-free speech behavior
when Twitter users organized a protest
against making users pay for a blue
check mark he banned that account and
this is what's so mind-bending like I
swear he's trolling us here he says that
he's obsessed with Free Speech but then
immediately after taking it over Twitter
he demonstrates an extreme hypocrisy for
that very point and I secretly think
he's doing that so that we are talking
about it right now I don't think it was
ever about free speech I also think that
when he posts political propaganda ads
like this conspiracy video that says
that Democrats are letting immigrants in
to turn America into single party Rule
and has almost 100 million views I think
he's doing that not because he agrees
with this factless piece of propaganda
but because he loves to rile people up
though maybe he does agree with it I
don't know either way he has built a
platform that gives him the biggest
megaphone and suppresses people that
criticize him that is not free speech
okay but let's move on CU Free Speech
was just one of his three major motives
what about this argument that Twitter is
infected with liberal ideology because
it is based in San Francisco luckily we
have
data this was a great study very
thorough algor rmic amplification of
Politics on Twitter it's a study from
before Elon took over they conducted a
long-running massive scale randomized
experiment where they looked at a huge
number of tweets from seven countries
and they found that in six out of the
seven countries including the United
States that quote the mainstream
political right enjoys a higher
algorithmic amplification than the
mainstream political left they saw this
over and over oh and also a really
interesting side note here is that they
found that Twitter actually doesn't
amplify farle or far right political
groups more than moderate ones which is
a myth that I believed until I read this
study but the whole point is that old
Twitter did not have a liberal bias if
anything it had a conservative bias this
study is very robust proof of that
despite elon's theory that Twitter being
in San Francisco infected it with a
liberal bias go to the sources and read
the study for yourself if you want to
poke into it if there's anything wrong
with it that I'm missing please tell me
but it seems like pretty damn solid
proof to me okay but what about the last
critique and this is a big one musk
believed that Twitter was being censored
by governments and Twitter was letting
them do this and guess what that is
actually true upon taking over Twitter
musk cracked into all of the internal
Communications and found a bunch of
emails that showed how Twitter had
banned and suppressed information that
it deemed harmful and dangerous but that
they did so sometimes with a political
bias you can see things like Biden's
team asking Twitter to review these
tweets that they didn't like yes
governments around the world can ask
Twitter to take things down in their
country that they think are breaking the
law or that are harmful to National
Security and this happened on both sides
the Trump White House asked Twitter to
take things down as well but this
reporting did reveal what looked like a
lot of left-leaning bias in censoring
certain highly sensitive content that
would be damaging to the left the the
the big example of this was this New
York Post article about Hunter Biden's
laptop Twitter severely censored this
not even letting people DM the link to
each other and making up a thin
justification for it later now content
moderation deciding what is harmful and
what should be censored and what
shouldn't is a really difficult task but
for a lot of people including myself
this crossed a line this was not okay
though I have to say that Hunter Biden
New York Post article was the most sort
of egregious one a lot of the other
stuff in the Twitter files was not
nearly as black and white much more
nuanced much more complicated the point
is there should be transparency here and
I agree with musk on that okay but this
is once again where we find some strange
Paradox that doesn't make any sense
which is that since musk took over
government censorship on Twitter has
gone up Twitter suspended multiple
journalists from prominent Outlets
including the Washington Post the New
York Times and CNN tonight a number of
high-profile journalists have been
silenced here are the number of takedown
requests that governments around the
world made to Twitter in the 6 months
before musk took over and these are the
ones that Twitter complied with Twitter
would fully comply with the government's
censorship request about half of the
time the other half the time they'd say
no in the 6 months after musk the number
of requests went up probably because
musk got rid of a lot of the automatic
moderation but look musk's Twitter now
says yes to government censorship over
80% of the time time way more than the
old Twitter wait what and look the kind
of stuff that musk is allowing to be
censored on the platform is really
sensitive stuff for free speech like
take turkey for example there was a
Turkish election last year the president
of Turkey himself a massive user of
State censorship pressured Twitter to
block the accounts of a few people he
didn't like a Kurdish businessman an
investigative journalists both of them
vocal critics of the president like this
is like clear black and white political
censorship in an election year like make
the guy who is criticizing me go away
and guess what musk's Twitter did it
they said yes they banned the accounts
and then said we didn't have a choice
they were going to shut down all of
Twitter so we had to do it and then they
patted themselves on the back about how
they were still trying to fight it and
they're doing so much for battling
government censorship and transparency
on the platform but guess what they did
have a choice this same kind of thing
happened before musk ever came in and
Twitter fought back in a previous
Turkish election the Government tried to
do the same thing censor posts about
corruption within the Turkish government
they asked Twitter to take these down
and Twitter said no they fired back that
political speech is among the most
important speech especially when it
concerns matters of possible corruption
so turkey shut down Twitter it was down
for a couple of weeks while they battled
it out in court and the Turkish
government lost indeed they lost lost
because they were trying to censor
political speech and Twitter fought back
there's even more recent examples like
Wikipedia or wkipedia as Elon calls it
refusing to comply with the Turkish
government censorship requests getting
completely shut down for almost 3 years
only to have it be overturned in Turkish
courts a major win for free speech in
Turkey which is something that's in
short supply lately so like Wikipedia
Twitter can do this they can say no to
the Turkish government if they're
actually Crusaders for free speech and
if they're actually against government
censorship they would have said no in
20123 musk's Twitter did this in India
too when the Indian government asked
Twitter to censor a bunch of journalists
including an entire BBC Bureau and a
documentary that was critical of the
government and the president and Twitter
complied Elon where is your conviction
for free speech where is your hate for
government censorship in moments like
this where it really really matters but
for Elon Musk he's got a lot of other
things he needs to think about he needs
to think about the market for Teslas who
might be buying his satellites or
Rockets he needs to be thinking about
where Tesla factories might be set up
the market for his electric cars this is
a conflict of interests that gets in the
way of his idealistic vision for free
speech and his hate for government
censorship Twitter used to have a page
where they would publish in detail why
they would take down any content they
took down at the request of the
government and there's this research lab
at Harvard that would aggregate all of
this for the public when our story
producer Alex went to go look for these
government requests from turkey and
India she found that they no longer were
there this page had gone quiet so she
reached out to the Harvard lab and got
this response Twitter stopped sharing
this data starting in April 2023 no more
transparency on government censorship it
looks like it's down to the whims of one
super rich dude that is not free speech
that is the antithesis of what this guy
said he was going to build so no I don't
think Elon Musk is earnest about these
three things that he said were his
motive for buying Twitter in fact after
looking into all of this I'm having a
hard time figuring out what Elon is
earnest about at all other than his
belief that humans have the potential to
do amazing things I do believe that in
of this that is the one thing that has
stayed consistent but how he's pursuing
that goal and that Vision in recent
years is baffling confusing and in my
mind quite harmful to our society
Twitter seems much more like a platform
where he can bully the people he doesn't
like he can feed his addiction to crisis
and controversy while also showing a
childish hypocrisy in his principles and
values but unlike his other Ventures
which you can tell when they're
successful because they're physics the
rocket either goes up into space or it
doesn't the car drives or it doesn't
this new Venture doesn't have a physical
feedback loop that tells him if it's
doing good or working instead he's
playing with the delicate precarious
nature of information in the internet
age something that is already in crisis
and now is being chipped away at by one
rich dude who gets off on crisis and
what blows my mind most is that in the
process of all of this musk is
undermining his own dream his own Vision
this is a sentiment I heard from the
employees and colleagues of Elon Musk
they felt betrayed like this man pushed
them to think differently to do things
that seemed impossible all in the name
of this Grand Vision of what Humanity
could be what we could do as a
civilization and yet in recent years he
seems to be sabot aging that very Vision
alienating the people and customers that
he needs to bring this Vision to life in
my mind Elon has exchanged that vision
for controversy and division that forces
all of us to talk about it here we are
talking about it talking about him I
think a part of him loves that or needs
that and yet after all of this Defenders
of Elon will continue to argue that only
someone like this could be the one to
change the world to anyone I've offended
I just want to say I reinvented electric
cars and I'm sending people to Mars in a
rocketship did you think I was also
going to be a chill normal
dude and yeah I get that the people who
change the world aren't normal and
Orthodox they're not nice but I don't
accept this way of thinking about musk
today maybe a couple years ago but in
recent years musk has shown it's his
addiction to crisis and attention that
is having a corrosive effect on our
Society validating and glorifying ways
of acting that rewards the worst parts
of us and instead of saving
civilization driving us further apart
hey everyone thanks for watching this
deep dive on Elon Musk um I want to tell
you about our new channel called search
party it is a deep dive into geopolitics
and sports it is started by Sam Ellis my
old Vox colleague who now has a
wonderful channel that we collaborate on
and it is awesome go check it out thank
you everyone over at The Newsroom which
is our patreon people who support our
Deep dive reporting every month really
appreciate your support um patreon.com
Johny Harris if you want to go check out
the perks there we also still have a few
hundred copies of this poster that I
designed a few months ago maybe last
year and it is still around few hundred
copies left if you want to go uh buy
them if they still exist at this point I
they could be sold out it is a poster of
all the map projections and it is called
all maps are wrong and I'm very proud of
it you can have it on your wall like I
have it on mine all our sources are in
the description if you want to go poke
into them and um thank you all for being
here I'll see you in the next one
bye-bye
