to be rich in America is to be loved
full stop it's a violent rapacious place
if you don't have money it's a loving
generous place if you do have money once
you hit your number there's no reason to
be a hoarder because this is what makes
you happy spend it I spend so much
 money and it's amazing and then
you know what I do I give it away and so
what I would say to anyone else who has
a lot of money why do you need to be a
billionaire it's not going to get you
anything here's what you do you do
amazing things with friends and family
you take care of your parents you fly
your friends to ask them to hang out
with you and then anything above that
you give it away and there's so many
amazing causes and people and overpay
the people who work with you throw money
around like you're a  gangster in
the 50s diagnosed with ass cancer just
live it up and you know what you're
going to love life don't do it because
you're noble don't do it because you're
praying to some God or whatever it is I
can tell you firsthand it feels amazing
thanks for joining it's really good to
see you always was good to see you um
and congratulations on on the Ted Talk
the new book lots of busy things
happening thanks so um when you got
invited to do the Ted Talk did they ask
you to do a particular subject or did
they did you just did you say to them
this is what I want to talk about no I I
had lunch with Chris Anderson who I've
known for 20 30 years in London and he
said we're thinking about having you
attest as if I'd you know been crowned
he didn't he didn't commit to giving me
a speaking site he said we're thinking
about it and I said well first off
thanks that's that's exciting and he
said what what's your vision uh for a
talk he said if you were to do a talk
what would it be he didn't even offer me
the slly yet and I said I think that the
thing that people aren't talking enough
about is I believe that almost every
economic policy is nothing but a thinly
veiled transfer of wealth M from the
entrance to the incumbents and more
Loosely from young to old and he said
okay so how would you brand it I'm like
well thinking about this I think there's
a war on the young he said that's the
talk and we want to have you and I
wasn't sold myself cuz Vancouver from
London is a real Hall and I I'm trying
to be more someone said I love the
saying be generous with everything
except your time I'm pretty cheap with
my time now and anyway so I did it and
then I thought this is something I feel
passionate about so I I rallied the team
and I get a lot of nice feedback around
wow that's so much data it's you know
greatness is in the agency of others I
probably spent eight hours on that talk
but I bet there was 800 hours that went
into it and so of my team immediately
started pulling together data and you
know it's 110 slides it was um chilling
I would say is a good word um how Stark
your conclusions were your your your
insights were um and I think it really
does point to sort of a Brokenness of
capitalism where and you know better
than I do about this stuff but my
understanding is that the original
concept of the stock market mhm was that
the average working person could share
in the wealth of a Nation yeah um and
what's happened in the past 30 40 years
is that the middle class is leaving the
stock market and it's become the
playground literally of the top 1% or
maybe slightly bigger um at least at
least it's that small percentage that
are benefiting most at the expense and
then we see and you know I rail against
this kind of stuff you know where uh
where compan announced Mass layoffs
because they missed their projections
they're profitable just not as
profitable as they promised the street
and so you get to lose your job and this
all benefits the stock market you know
when companies announce layoffs the
price of their Equity goes up announce
R&amp;D your Equity goes down yeah to call
it the war in the young um I think
speaks to
this very large and growing populist
movement that we're seeing both the
United States and around the world yeah
so I one of my intellectual Role Models
is Peter D or The Economist he said that
the purpose of an economy is to create a
middle class and I think the greatest
innovation in history is not the iPhone
or the semiconductor or the printing
press I think it's the middle class this
idea that the largest segment of your
population gets to register the
prosperity of an economy and they fight
your Wars they pay the majority of your
taxes they're responsible for the
majority of the framework for real
future Innovations and they create sort
of a neoliberal society that decides you
know we'd like to share some of our
privilege and start affording rights to
other people I think that's the greatest
innovation in history but it's not with
the incumbents and sometimes the right
the far right will tell you is that it's
a natural occurring organism it's not
capitalism that's unfettered results in
a small group of very talented people
who aggregate um incredible capital and
then have access to cheaper capital and
can kind of run away with the game show
and then they weaponize government I
mean this is what Central America is a
group of talented people figure out a
way to license Unilever or a BNB Brands
they get more Capital they support the
next president they get regulatory
capture and they end up with so much so
much of the economy that the bottom 99%
says the easiest way for us to double
our wealth is to kill these people and
start over again and then another group
of people emerges is the 1% if
capitalism doesn't have a pay it forward
reinvestment in the middle class it does
collapse on itself it's also a bit of a
Zeitgeist thing and that is I've been
watching a lot of the D-Day I'm obsessed
with World War III the D-Day memorials
and I was I was wondering myself like if
I were called I like to think if I were
called I would have gone but I also
believe that if I'm merely honest with
myself if my sons were called I think I
would use my influence and wealth to get
them out of it and I think Americans
have over the last 50 years slowly but
surely and I don't know what I don't
know what are the inter like Dynamics
but I think we've become inherently a
little bit more focused on me and we see
so many people this is kind of your
bwick when you have a candidate for
president who's just so nakedly
self-serving and people find that
admirable when you have Tech
billionaires that seem pretty focused on
getting from 1 billion to 100 billion
even if it involves depressing teenage
girls and they win and and we love them
then it creates this incentive system in
the US where people decide it really is
about me it's no longer about
reinvesting in the in the middle class
and as a result you have the incumbents
25 wealthiest people in America pay an
average tax rate of
8% and we have a series of elected
officials who are in a system where they
need to get money to be reelected the
people with money are the incumbents and
what do you know old people keep voting
in older people who keep voting
themselves more money and now we're at
40% of all government spending is on
people over the age of 65 it's about to
go over 50% meaning we're not going to
be able to make the forward leaning
investments in technology and education
that quite frankly pay off and bring
more people in the middle class and then
the older people who tend to be the
executives they're the ones in charge
just by virtue of time and age um then
they complain about the lack of loyalty
from The Young employees failing to
recognize that they're the ones that set
the rules they demand loyalty they
demand you kiss the ring but they offer
nothing in return and then they're
surprised at this Young Generation that
is doubling down on the the rules that
the older generation set which is me
before we you know I I think you're 100%
right which is especially in United
States over indexed on rugged
individualism you know the malro man
works too well and we heroized CEOs CEOs
became Heroes rather than the teams and
I think when we talk about you know
would you go to war or would you allow
your kids to go to war the times that we
live in are the context and you're
saying I would you know I would use my
wealth and influence to get them out of
it but if it was
1941 I'm not so sure that would be true
you know at least in the United States
you know there were more suicides from
Young men who didn't get called than
ones who did that's interesting which is
which is an astonishing thing and if you
think about the collective desire to to
help right so people who could went to
war in some way shape or form they put
on a uniform to support in some way
shape or form those who didn't fight
bought war bonds to support the effort
and those who couldn't afford war bonds
planted planted planted War Gardens yeah
they they just did something even if it
was symbolic to demonstrate that we are
one I think one of the so the capitalism
collapsing on itself is a bit of a
far-left
narrative let me give some not nod to
the far right I think that the fact that
Americans haven't been attacked on our
homeland other than 9/11 we're energy
independent we're food independent um
friendly Canada to the north harmless
Mexico to the South I don't think a lot
of people in America realize there's a
large swath of people globally who the
moment they feel like they can take with
Force our Netflix and our Espress away
from us we'll do it in a second and that
I don't think they really understand or
nod to the amount of sacrifice that was
made by previous generations to and also
very brave young men and women who are
in the uniform right now and some of our
people who work in government and our
security apparatus I don't think
Americans have the same level of
fidelity or
appreciation for just how hard it is how
much energy how much money it takes how
much sacrifice it takes to get to the
levels of freedom and prosperity that
America enjoys I feel like America has
become entitled my generation on down
because every time we've been asked to
sacrifice while we've been alive it's
been for a failed War Iraq was stupid
going into southeast Asia supporting the
French colonization or recolonization
after World War II ended up being a
disaster so I think people just take for
granted that oh we're special all of
this Prosperity doesn't require
sacrifice it requires a ruthless
Devotion to Uber C capitalism and doing
what you can to get to a certain point
now to your point around the CEOs
believing the young people are entitled
yeah it's just such  yeah when
you look at the level of compensation of
CEOs relative to young people it's gone
from 30 to
300 oh wait let me get this David
zasloff you cut the stock in half you're
firing people like crazy but you walk
away with a quarter of a billion dollars
and oh you're going to make sure that
you give enough money to Senators like
Kristen Cinema you give her $2 million
and she makes sure as the Swing Vote
that the tax credit for carried interest
for private Equity Funds maintain a12
billion tax cut the most disappointing
thing about our government right now
it's not that they're  they've
been  for a long time it's that
what incredibly cheap  they are
and the greatest return on investment in
our economy is for an organization a
special interest group a lobbying group
for the rich or for corporations to go
spread a little bit of money around and
find out oh that we need to protect the
the shoe market in case there a war and
we need boots or we need this tax cut
for people in the real estate industry
and it does feel a little bit like it's
collapsing on itself that if we don't as
Citizens and elect people who are a
little bit more long-term thinking and
recognize there's just no  reason
why people who make their money selling
stocks should have a lower tax rate than
people uh sweeping up the floor at the
New York Stock Exchange when did Capital
become the capital that Capital makes
become more noble than the capital that
sweat makes shouldn't it be flipped even
Ronald Reagan said this is  and
he had one tax rate so effectively every
big tax thing that goes through every
big
expenditure to name it is really about a
transfer of wealth $30 billion child tax
credit who does that benefit not only
the children but young mothers right
that gets stripped out of the
infrastructure Bill we can't do it it's
too expensive $30 billion we need to be
responsible but the $140 billion cost of
living adjustment in Social Security
each year another 140 billion flies
right through no discussion of means
testing you and I should never have
social security no way let's call it
senior security it's not Social Security
it's and it's called a tax it's not a
pension fund all this  well I
pay it into it it's a tax it's meant to
be redistributed to people who need it
cap capital gains tax deduction mortgage
tax deduction who owns homes people our
age who rents the younger people here it
is everything we do is how do we butress
the wealth of incumbents and old people
yeah and make it more expensive for
young people their housing's gone up 4X
right education's gone up 2x on
inflation adjusted basis their income's
gone down so they make less money
everything they need to get ahead or
start saving or form a family's gotten
more expensive and yet they look left
and right and up and they see people
making tons of money and 210 times a day
on their phone people are vomiting their
wealth a lot of times faux wealth yeah
and what do you know they feel shitty
what a
shocker so how do we fix it short short
of short of Revolution short of short of
Revolution because I mean you and I you
know better than most that the way
revolutions happen Y is when the Delta
between the halves and the have notss
gets too wide 100% short of Revolution
right and some may
argue it's already begun yeah how how do
we how do we fix it look the good news
the good news about income inequality is
when it gets to a certain level it
always self-corrects the bad news as the
means of self-correction are usually War
famine or revolution yeah I would argue
that a lot of the social uh up Uprising
in the US is more what I'll call a
series of mini revolutions I don't think
what's going on on campuses in the
United States is about the Middle East I
think it's about America I it's it's
anti-establishment this level of income
inequality and dissatisfaction is
incendiary poured on every small fire it
turns a dumpster fire into a nuclear
mushroom cloud there's just rage
everywhere now what do we do I think the
good news is we don't even need to come
up with Creative Solutions we just need
to go back to the future we need a much
more progressive tax rate and I'm not
talking about the super owners if you
make a lot of money on current income
and you live in a blue State you're
probably paying 50 52% the super earners
are actually paying too much but once
you make the jump to light speed and you
say Get Lucky like me and you sell a
company for nine figures and you can
take all of that money and put into
income earning assets that appreciate
and value you become a super owner and
your tax rate plummets and I'm very
transparent about my wealth I think that
this gestal or this Vibe you're not
supposed to talk about money is nothing
but a thinly veiled attempt to keep poor
people poor because rich people talk
about money all the time the guy who
runs the company and it's almost always
the guy knows what everybody makes so
asymmetry of information benefits the
incumbent so what what we have is a
series of policies that again don't make
any sense for young people so more
progressive tax structure on the super
owners eliminate capital gain seduction
everybody pays One Rate have an
alternative minimum tax ta for
corporations and very wealthy people
right now corporations are paying the
lowest tax rate they've paid since 1939
it used to be 2 and a half% of GDP now
it's 1% there are five companies Nike
FedEx a bunch of them that paid Amazon
that paid no taxes there's the tax code
has gone from 400 pages to 4,000 right
and all of it is a bunch of loopholes
meant to give money back to Big
organizations Apple's the most
profitable company in history they
incorporate in Ireland such that they
can increase their taxes or increase
their pre tax tax revenue in a low tax
domain and decrease their revenue in a
high tax domain that is nothing but
sheer tax avoidance we need Alternative
Minimum Tax on the super wealth in
corporations and you could actually
lower taxes across the super earners and
youth so redo our tax policy to be more
quote unquote just Equitable restore a
progressive tax rate two more
opportunities for young people
specifically broader Freshman Class
college is still the be best onramp into
the middle or upper income classes
Harvard has grown its endowment 40-fold
4,000% but it's increased its freshman
class size 4% it lets in about the same
number of people that a good Starbucks
does if you aren't growing your freshman
class size faster than population growth
you should lose your taxfree status
because you're now a hedge fund offering
classes you're not public servants and
in addition uh instead of bailing out
one-third of kids who got to go to
college with student loan bailouts on
the backs of the two-thirds that didn't
we should take some of that money and
give it to our great public universities
in exchange for three things one they
increase their freshman class size 6%
with adapt use of Technology they could
easily do there's no one there at night
there's no one there during the Summers
I work at one of these places we could
easily expand our freshman class size
too reduce costs 2% a year we could do
that with scale and more students and
Technology a third of my faculty and
they're some of the best in the world
should be put on an ice flow they're not
only not adding any value because
they're not any adding any value they
get angry and disruptive and get in the
way of of progress that is not nothing
but student debt layered on young people
ethics leadership sustainability it's
all  and self-aggrandisement
from a group of people who decided
they're no longer centers of excellence
they're social Engineers I mean just
think about how  arrogant that is
We're Not Elected by anyone but we've
decided we should train a new generation
of Youth around what they should care
about and what social policy should be
here's an idea give them the skills they
can go make a bunch of money and take
care of their families and then pay
taxes to a group of people who are
elected who then decide our social
priorities and then finally 20% of all
degrees should be vocational
certifications non-traditional four
years degree two-year in specialty
nursing one year in construction of
nuclear power plants 18-month vocational
program and the installation of energy
efficient HVAC there are a ton of Main
Street economy jobs that pay six figures
plus that we're not training kids for
here in the UK 11% of LinkedIn profile
say Apprentice It's 3% in the US more
freshman seats lower cost for college
and we need a federal a federal law that
say if you get in the way of housing
permits you're liable if you found that
these this obstruction wasn't ethical uh
we need a million and a half more
housing permits per year because this is
what has happening once you and I own a
home we start showing up to the local
review board and we get very concerned
about traffic and we find ways to make
sure that no housing permits are ever
issued such that people who work with
you can't afford a goddamn home preo
2019 homes were 290,000 they're 420,000
a day and with the acceleration in
interest rates because we keep spending
money on their godamn credit card
mortgages have gone from $1,100 to 2,300
it used to be 2/3 of Americans could
afford a home now it's 1/3 so they can't
afford a home they're getting tax like
 crazy and everyone above them is
making a  ton of money I'm in the
club with champagne and cocaine and the
closest the next generation gets to the
club is they can throw me their credit
card so I can run it up that is
literally what is happening we're going
to have cheap debt long enough we're
going to be able to pay our debt while
I'm still alive but who's really going
to get fu is the kids who are going to
have to pay it back where I keep parting
on their debt okay so that was a lot no
it's um the thing that I find um nobody
can listen to this podcast at any faster
than actual speed or
slower I speak fast it's just too fast
it's there was the wrong morning to do
math do remember do you remember
airplanes like oh I picked the wrong
week to quit drinking that's right to
quit GL to quit glue yeah to quit
sniffing glue um okay so let's let's
back up a second here sure I subscribe
yeah hookline Sinker right I'm in yeah
but who will voluntarily make those
changes you just made the case that the
that the Habs the status quo defend the
status quo because they benefit from the
status quo obviously and so there's no
incentive at all in business or in
politics to change the tax code and make
the changes that you're talking about
there's no incent
in a university system University
presidents aren't hired to make great
universities they're hired to raise
money and so there's no incentive
whatsoever to make the changes that are
common sense and will work that you're
advocating yep so short of
Revolution how do we make those changes
well I I don't think it's that bad so
I'll use myself as an example because
what you're talking about people aren't
going to disarm unilaterally I've been
very open I started my last speech on
saying I've been open about my finances
my average tax rate the last 10 years
has been
17% because some of the brightest people
I work with help me minimize my tax rate
probably the brightest woman in my
universe is a woman who works at a big
law firm and every year she looks at my
taxes and she figures out all kinds of
legal ways for me to reduce my tax rate
and I have the ability to do that now
that I'm a super owner I've gone from
Super owner to Super owner what we need
is a group of people and we've done this
in the past that say we're going to
elect people no one's going to disarm
unilaterally you're going to try and pay
the minimum amount of tax all right
that's your job it's like being a prison
of War your job is to Escape right so
I'm not suggesting anyone's going to say
well I'm just going to write a bigger
check to the government this year that's
not going to happen but what we have
done and a lot of people still do is I
will vote for people you I'll vote for
senators clob Bashar and Senators
Bennett and I'll try and get Biden
reelected because I think that those
people do think somewhat long term and
will try will try to impose some of the
things we're talking about I hold on let
me interrupt here sure okay you don't
buy it no okay go on um so when you have
wealth yep you get to say things like
I'll vote for the guy that will make the
long-term decisions yep when you are on
the receiving end of everything you've
talked about yep long-term ain't a thing
mhm solving the problem finding a job
reducing my tax rate managing inflation
MH affording milk mhm getting my kid in
into school yep the um not having to
have two jobs to make a single job wage
y
um immediate relief is the thing I vote
for and the promises that some
politicians can make about the the
immediate relief that they will offer is
unbelievably appealing whether it's true
or not and you said it yourself that's
the voting population the wealthy try to
they use their money to get what they
want but the voting population the
majority gets to actually vote right but
I do think so first off to your point
the the culprits are the elected
officials but the culpable are voters if
young people want a greater transfer
want to restore opportunity to young
people they need to start voting instead
of 40% of them voting like seniors they
need to be 60% yeah in addition I think
there's an interesting idea that you
should be able to vote for your kids we
spend less money per capita on children
than any developed nation and I think
one quick fix for that would be to give
people who are the guardians of kids uh
more votes so you're a single mom with
three kids you get four votes I realize
that's unlikely to happen but that would
immediately overnight reshift our
priorities so I do think there are
things absolutely we can do and I do
think people do vote for people who they
believe are I look I hate to use the war
term but it's leadership it's someone
saying no one should have to go bankrupt
after they find out their wife has lung
cancer so Obamacare expensive we all pay
2% or 2.8% a year in taxes that we'd
rather not pay if you're healthy but
Americans are saying look if if a leader
comes along and convinces me this is a
reinvestment in the middle class and a
reinvestment in America I will vote for
that person if they can articulate with
passion and Leadership I think that that
opportunity is still there you're
touching right on something that um that
that's the thing that I'm sort of
lamenting these days and and it is the
leadership it is that leadership compan
which is it seems that there's been a
total loss of idealism I I agree and you
go back to Ronald Reagan or or John F
Kennedy so I don't care what your
politics are they literally use the
terms peace on Earth world peace in
their inaugurations as a driving
motivation which is an incredibly
appealing thing to bring people together
and be willing to Bear any burden and
pay any price for the greater good and
talking about world peace now literally
in this artificial context sounds
completely cheesy to say the world I'm
doing it for world peace and I don't see
it in politics I don't even see it in
business the the the total loss of
idealism and I think idealism is the
thing because idealism exists on a level
above everything we're talking about yep
it is the thing that we can actually see
the forest for the trees and say well I
am willing to give up some because I
believe in that and some could be money
it could be an effort it could be some
sort of sacrifice and so I wonder if
this is solvable with good leadership
now I'm also not so fool hearty to think
oh well you just make leaders M you know
uh I actually think that
um the single worst thing that happened
to the United States was the uh the
bankruptcy of the Soviet Union MH
because it's very
easy the problem with vision and
idealism is it's ethereal you know it's
literally in someone's imagination they
give an rousing speech and like o that
sounds amazing um um and the great thing
about a common enemy is they're tangible
and we can see it that's right and it's
easy to know what we stand for when I
can literally see what I'm against
what's the thing that is preventing me
from getting this thing and it's and I
think there's this there's a very
important Nuance here which is the enemy
isn't the thing having an enemy is easy
and we we've seen it throughout every
dictatorship they find an enemy and they
that that's how they come to power what
they're missing is the idealism the
enemy isn't the enemy so much it is is
the thing getting in the way of us
getting to the thing that we want Y
which is really important that there's
something on the other side of that of
that and I blame every president by the
way this is not a republican Democrat
thing the decline of idealism from every
president who has served since the since
the fall of the Soviet Union has slowly
chipped away at American idealism and
that is
gone that's a lot there so like I and by
the way we know we know the numbers
which is we know that belief and Trust
in politicians is an all-time low we
know that belief and Trust in there's no
social leaders either where the Martin
Luther King Jr like they're they're not
there right the ones that are bringing
people together rather than breaking us
apart they're not there but trust in
corporate corporations weirdly yeah is
quite high right now and so I'm just
going to go where the market takes me
and if that's where the trust is then
I'm looking to the corporate leaders to
start to demonstrate the restoration of
idealism and if they can start to make
the changes that you and I are
advocating at a national level which by
the way is not going to happen like that
doesn't MH but if if they can start
making it at a at a corporate level
small mid midsize companies small
companies even large companies start
making the kinds of social changes that
you and I are talking about there it'll
filter out and eventually roll over to
politics the part where you lost me is
that we keep hoping that the better
angels of CEOs are going to show up and
then if we paint iPods red that
corporations and capitalism will save us
and I find that this entire notion of of
corporate social responsibility is just
such unfettered  I but wa wait I
don't think of that's not what I'm
talking about but let me let me give me
some running here okay and that is we
keep hoping that we're that Cheryl
Samberg actually does care about our
children and that Sam Alman and his hush
tones and concerns about AI cares about
anything but making money corporations
are so great in making money and we need
that so we can generate tax revenue and
create Economic Security for people
they're so good at making money they
shouldn't be trusted to do anything else
what we should do is have a group of
people who sit on top of that tax
revenue that hopefully grows with the
full body contact violence of capitalism
which is a wonderful thing that tax them
at a fair rate and then redeploy that
Capital based on a series of policies
that we all buy into I think that people
generally do
believe that we have a problem when one
in five households in the most
prosperous Society in nation with
children are food insecure that they
would like to see those problems solved
and if someone comes in with an idea and
leaders ership and says okay this is how
we do it equitably this is the sacrifice
it's going to require are we going to
cut spending or increase taxes the
answer is yes I do think there's
opportunity right now for someone to
come in and say it's time to start
paying it forward it's time to return to
our American rots we have sacrificed all
the way through we've been harvesting
these
sacrifices uh it's time to step into the
void and pay it a little bit forward I
do think there's an opportunity here I'm
more optimistic americ if you think
about it are an incredibly generous
people and what's happened is that I
think because of uh no term limits
because of the Aging of our po of our
elected elected representatives Nancy
Pelosi which she had a first child Fidel
had just um declared martial law in Cuba
only a third of houses had color
television so does she really understand
the challenges facing a single mother I
think we need much much younger
electorate but I think that I think
Americans as a whole are are ready to
sacrifice as long as they feel they're
part of a collective sacrifice and there
really hasn't been a voice to kind of
bring people together and say unions
you're going to hate me old people
you're going to hate me corporations
Jesus Christ you're going to hate me
young people all right I see the problem
here I'm going to look something I've
struggled with my whole life is the
difference between being right and being
effective and as I talk about these
things and try and fo in and catalyze
social change I'm trying to be more
effective so for example I'm trying to
um appeal to people's sense of reward
and masculinity for example and this is
virtue signaling but I I actually think
virtue sing is fine uh I give away a lot
of money and I don't do it because I'm a
good person I don't think I think I do
it because I'm philanthropic it makes me
feel really masculine I brag about it it
makes me feel strong I believe it's
bringing together my skills and my
strengths to protect and provide for
others and it makes me feel like a
 baller so I'm like why above a
certain level and Daniel con one of my
intellectual Role Models has this thing
he proved that the difference between
the difference between making $30,000
and $80,000 a year or 30 and 50 is huge
the difference between making one and
three million a year no incremental
happiness you're no happier so wouldn't
that argue for a really progressive tax
structure once above say one or call it
even 10 million you're going to get any
happier between 10 and 20 million a year
you're not I have sence that shows it
but if you can take that money and then
make a bunch of households much happier
taking from 30 to 5050 let's elect
people who are going to have the
backbone to say nor to corporations and
special interest group and impose a
truly progressive tax structure and I
think that argument that argument will
resonate with a lot of Voters I do think
that D and democracy can still work here
and I think that we are looking for a
voice and I think they're out there to
say look it is time to nod our head to
all the people who' have made a ton of
sacrifice such that we could reap the
fruit we're reaping I think it's time I
think America's ready for
it all
right you and I are giving each other a
lot of dense sandwiches to
unpack so the capitalism that you're
defending yep or at least pointing to
yep that Sam ultman who comes in with
these idealistic Notions and all of a
sudden they disappear when money gets
involved yeah um is a relatively modern
conception of capitalism it's it's it's
Milton Freedman capitalism right
um popularized by  like Jack
Welch right um but it's not Adam Smith
capitalism it's not the capitalism that
made America great yeah it's not true
capitalism it's not true capitalism and
so we've conflated right the bastardized
version of capitalism we have now with
the capitalism that has has that's right
contributed to the world for over 200
years and my fear is that we're going to
throw the baby out with the bathwater
because because we've so conflated them
and I think there should be a return to
a kind of capitalism where there is Mo
I'll use the term moral obligation
that's right that we have moral
obligation so so just out of curiosity I
did this just the other day just out of
curiosity I was curious why rich people
gave to taxes in like the Victorian era
right so 19th century because the
carnegies The Rockefellers and and and
and the British wealthy they gave 
tons to charity and they built
universities and hospitals and all the
all these wonderful institutions that
exist today and I was curious if they
did it for tax incentive and neither
Britain nor in the US was there any tax
incentive a total of zero tax benefits
to give to charity and then I went and
read some of what they wrote and what
they said and they all Ed the same terms
they all use the same term which is
moral obligation that we have a moral
obligation to give back to the society
that gave to us even if you could make
the argument they were  and not
nice people they believed in this moral
obligation and that moral obligation
came from God in other words God was the
thing that was bigger than all of them
they were God-fearing uh or not um I'm
not looking for religion to solve the
problem here but it's idealism it's the
thing that's bigger than all of us the
fear of an existential of something
existential a comy of man a comy of man
yeah somehow restores moral obligation
and I don't think any CEO feels a moral
obligation mhm they talk about fiduciary
duty which by the way is lower than a
moral obligation MH they're talk about
their fiduciary responsibility
um and I think that's why business has
become so myopic to your point which is
the only thing they're good at is making
money but I would like them to have a
moral obligation and be good at making
money see I think you're talking your
own book because you this is how you
make your living is you go into
corporations and you teach them or you
try and convince them to be more moral
and I think that that is I think that is
a noble thing that we need more of I
don't think it's the right strategy go
on tell more because they're always
going to figure out ways why how they
get to their next  Gulf Stream
and they'll wave their hands I go to to
these meetings I'm in these boardrooms
and they all talk a big  game
about social responsibility and then
they will incrementally do whatever is
required whether it's put out media the
results in more teenage girls
self-cutting radicalizing young men such
that they can while they finally are in
that CEO seat that they work so hard to
get to bank enough money that they have
influence and have a much broader
selection set of much hotter mates than
they deserve those things are
irresistible that's what I want but
those things are irresistible in
different
times those those things are not a mod
conception those things have existed
literally ifting for more than if you're
waiting for the better angels of CEOs to
show up don't hold your breath what we
need is a group of people who convince
enough people to vote for them to say
okay but where are the candidates so I
like you and I are stuck in the same
place right which is but you think CEOs
are going to fix this no I I think the
CEOs at least at least there's an
opportunity in business that I think is
is uh is
more uh more like to happen in the short
term than the opportunity in politics we
need long-term Solutions let me give you
one very tactical idea if we could go
back in time would we put a pretty
immense tax on all carbon capture all
carbon emission and all oil pulled out
of the ground we knew that pulling
fossil fuels out of the ground and then
arbing it into a substance to create
economic value is going to have a lot of
externalities so if we'd said for every
barrel we pull out we're putting a $10
tax on it and we're going to start
investing in forward leaning Investments
around the government job training and
and Renewables this is we're at that
moment the new energy seven of the 10
most valuable firms in 1980 were energy
companies seven of the 10 most valuable
firms in 2024 are tech companies but
they're not they're energy firms they're
all becoming the same firm offering
something called compute instead of
powering our cars and our factories they
powering our phones and our llms
requ right now a query on chat gbt takes
10 times the energy of Google right now
is this an opportunity to put in place
legislation and have forward meaning and
Forward Thinking politicians who get
enough support and say okay we're going
to tax compute we're going to tax
compute because we know there are going
to be externalities that will require
money around misinformation around teen
depression paying off the deficit
everything you're saying is correct
right where are the people who have the
courage to implement those things you're
more cynical than me the government does
pass some positive things the chips act
the infrastructure act there are some
people thinking long-term
Bob Iger isn't going to save us Simon no
I don't think he is and Sam Alman but
I'm not looking to those guys to fix it
I'm looking for the Revolutionary CEOs
what Ben and Jerry's or REI okay who
who's doing
it yeah
exactly I think aoup your power Simon
you have so you are so articulate and so
forceful is to Rally a group of people
to find elected officials who are going
to make the hard decisions to hold
corporations and they super wealthy and
reinvest in America looking to Rally
CEOs right fair enough good okay for for
every reason you've articulated because
they they and by the way you're they I
have the same meetings with them they
spew the same they tell me what I want
to hear and then they go and make the
opposite decisions no no I'm fully aware
of of the of the idiocy right um and
when I when I can I'll call  but
that's part of what I think my job is is
to call  yep um I'm I'm rallying
the rest of us what you know the voting
population yep in business is is the
workforce yep and I believe that power
is not it's not a belief it's a fact
that power always exists with the people
the people always have the power agree
another another quick idea you didn't
like the or the compute idea I no no I
love that idea all right another one why
wouldn't we raise minimum wage to $25 an
hour well it'll put all these small
businesses out of business no it doesn't
the states that have raised minimum wage
for to to 122 or $15 an hour Washington
State in California their economies have
gr cuz the wonderful thing about poor
people is they spend all their 
money it creates a multiplier effect and
by the way if minimum wage had just kept
pace with uh inflation or productivity
would be 23 bucks an hour and by the way
McDonald's and Walmart their stock would
go down and that's okay corporate
profits are at an all-time high wages as
a percentage of GDP are at an all-time
low minimum wage $25 federally mandated
you and I agree here's where we actually
agree that the power is with the people
right you're saying it's the voter I'm
saying it's the employee and what I'm
hoping fa what I'm hoping is that just
like the voting population gets involved
and gets educated y um I'm hoping that
the employee population learns the
skills that they need to learn y about
idealism and Leadership and moral
obligation so that as they make their
own way through the ranks y that they
will become the leaders that they wish
they had I like that the manifestation
for that in the 20th century with is
unions who are corrupt and ineffective
there should be one Union all unions
have been totally ineffective 45 of the
47 Nations that have unions have lost
union membership union membership in the
United States has been cut in half there
should be one Union it should be in
Washington DC and it should be federally
mandated minimum wage of 25 bucks an
hour and get rid of all the corrupt
corruption and weirdness and
inefficiency everything we're talking
about usually if you go to a company
with a good leader yep the what the what
the federally mandated minimum wages is
irrelevant right because good leaders
will say my people can't live on that
wage I'm going to pay them fairly
okay right and those good leaders are
usually in information economy companies
that can afford to pay other people 25
bucks an hour unless all fast food
companies are forced to pay $25 an hour
the temptation to pay them $11 an hour
will be too great they won't yeah I I I
think that you and I have gone in a full
circle here um because all we have
advocated is Revolution no no no no but
but I don't think it has to be a violent
revolution but what we're advocating is
Revolution There's an opportunity and I
think they're out there for a younger
person to come in and say it is time to
pay it forward folks I'm going to
literally piss off every special
interest group but I need your vote it's
funny because we're kind of saying the
exact same thing which is we're looking
for people to say what the solutions are
and ask vote for me or support me
whether at work or in in in in office to
do the right thing um uh I agree with
you the problem is is once they get the
power and once they get the money the
same thing happens there's a like
Congressman that I've met with their
their first terms or when they're
running for the first time my God they
really are idealistic then once they get
there and they sniff the power and and
they recognize that their job is
fundraising MH the idealism falls falls
there's some good people I'm not
throwing Ro Senators Warner clar Bennett
by the way on both sides of the aisle on
both sides of the aisle there there's
fewer and fewer on the right to be blunt
uh fewer and fewer the the ratios aren't
the same James Carville said and I think
he's 100% right when he said it then and
I think it's 100% true now which is the
difference between Republicans and
Democrats is Republicans want to win and
Democrats want to be right well the
difference between right and effective
and also just to just to be give equal
opportunity the farle has become uh
incredibly naive and Incredibly
anti-American incredibly in my opinion
uh racist I think there's look the
biggest threat in the world is not a
pandemic it's not Putin it's not Hamas
it's extremism
yeah and if you look at the far left and
the far right they seem to have all come
together to agree on anti-Semitism I
mean it's just we have we have decided
to elect people who are extremists yeah
and because of Jerry mandering and hard
right and hard left um districts we send
people who are just  crazy on the
left and people who are  crazy on
the right and we're supposed to govern
that way yeah we have minority rule yeah
right 80% of our Senators are from 20%
of the population the vast majority of
Americans are in the middle the vast
majority of Americans think okay we need
corporations to be successful but they
should pay their fair share okay women
should have botly autonomy should a
woman be able to have a pregnancy in the
third term without threat to the life
probably not but that never happens
let's have an honest conversation do we
need three sets of bathrooms in every
corporation probably not but for God's
sake stop demonizing these people who
make up the total population of lacrosse
players and Wisconsin why the  are
we demon most people are somewhere in
the middle yes and those people have
absolutely no representation because
social media says the following okay you
need two things to survive as a species
you have to enjoy sex right we still
have that and you need to be able to get
enjoyment in a rush from collectively
pulling together and you referenced this
earlier to defeat a common enemy whether
it's either there's no more deer here we
need to move on or there's people over
the hill that want to kill us so we come
together to kill them you've got to get
a rush from that and in order to have
that rush you need to find an enemy
enemy yes and unfortunately because as
you said we're no longer in a cold war
well we need an enemy well I know let's
turn our neighbors into enemies 40%
fewer people are speaking to their
neighbors right now 52% of Democrats are
worried their kids going to marry a
republican we're not each other's
enemies we're  Americans we're
we're each other's allies for Christ's
sake but instead let's find algorithms
that pit us against each other let's
find politicians that are more
interested in making the other side
looks stupid for their YouTube moment
than actually coming together to
actually  govern enough already
let's find people in the middle and by
the way it I'm sure it happens to you it
happens to me you know what they all
agree on we should hate moderates this
is what I get from the political
Spectrum the far right calls me a
libtard and occasionally when I talk
about the importance of having a strong
military or the taxes are too high on
the super earners the far left feel like
oh my God we thought we could trust you
you have betrayed us there is absolutely
no room anymore for anyone in the middle
and unless people start speaking up and
going you know what it' be doesn't make
for good Tick Tock but it probably
represents how most people think and we
need to have a thoughtful opinion we
need fewer ideologues and more
pragmatists yes but there there there is
such a wide space right now for a new
generation of leadership to come in and
say okay I'm somewhere in the middle I'm
never going to personally attack anyone
on the other side that's not why I'm
here I'm here to get legislation done
there's some obvious things we need to
restore here income inequality is out of
control we need an exceptionally strong
defense we need to stop spending $7
trillion do a year and only taking in
five trillion we need to stop this
 transfer of wealth from the
entrance to the incumbents come on let's
grow up it's time the opportunity is
huge someone is going to step you and I
are founding a new political party
called the the common sensus you know
the normies the normies the common
sensus I am
hopeful
because and here's what gives me hope
you and I shouldn't have careers I
definitely shouldn't have a career
you know I talk about trust and optimism
 you have the you have the core
components of success you know what that
is what's that storytelling you know how
to tell stories I have but I talk about
my stories are about trust and
cooperation and there should be no
demand for my work you don't believe
that I do yeah I no no no if I had a if
I had said if any of my books were
written and anything that I said you're
living in Russia talking about
patriarchy or all if I had said if I had
written anything that I wrote or said
anything that I said in the 1980s
there would be no one but you would have
found something else no but the point is
this is what I believe and my beliefs
would have zero residents in the 1980s
okay I got that the times are right for
what we're talking about and there is
demand yeah for the stuff that you and I
are talking about there is demand for
people who are looking for to belong to
something and their the society isn't
providing you know the bowling leagues
and the and the religious institutions
aren't providing it that that people are
looking they they they they focused on
money they did as they were told and
focused on me and focus focused on on
money and focused on advancement and
they haven't found the happiness and joy
that they've been looking for and so
they're looking somewhere else and
they're looking in weird places and
weird spiritual things and what if I do
iasa every weekend you know it's like
it's like they you know it was said that
a glass of wine a day is good for you
that means the very American Way well of
a glass of wine is a day is good you
that a bottle of wine in a day must be
great for you it's a quick stat just I'm
prob there's a statistic showing that
far right families are better at
parenting than farle which upset me
because I'm farle because of what you're
talking about far- right families are
more likely to inject institutions into
the kids life religious institutions Boy
Scouts what you're saying is the
importance of Institutions the
importance of Institutions the points
the importance of collective of
collective and the importance of friends
you know this this is the thing that I'm
sort of working on and writing about now
which is you know there's an entire uh
industry to help us be better leaders
there's an entire industry to give us
advice how to be better
there's an entire industry how we can be
healthy how we can eat right how we can
manage our glucose how we can live
longer and how we can exercise and
there's absolutely nothing to teach us
how to be better friends Y and none of
those other things will be there in a
time of need like like your boss isn't
going to be there for you and by the way
learning to be a better boss doesn't
make you a better uh uh a parent
learning to be a better friend makes you
a better parent makes you a better boss
makes you better everything yeah the
thing that's lubricated friendship for
me is alcohol by the way one and S which
is why you and I aren't friends because
I I won drink with that hurt you said to
me the last time I saw you that you
couldn't be my friend because I won't go
out and get drunk with you now it means
we couldn't have sex I don't think I've
ever had sex with anyone I I didn't get
 up first uh we should probably
edit that out um by the way for all
young people listening my advice to you
is go out drink too much and make a
series of bad decisions that might pay
off um that's not my career experience
just so you know yeah yeah so but but
there was one in seven men I'm trying to
find a segue out of this one and seven
men don't have a single friend one in
four men can't name a best friend I
agree with you I I'd like to see
something called the Friendship project
I'm trying to be more promiscuous for
saying yes to stuff to to I'm at a point
where I'm looking to shed friends not
gain them but I'm trying to be better
about it and something I'm trying to
instill on my boys is I ask them to
speak to a stranger when they're out
because I'm worried that being on the
phone that they slowly but surely become
introverts that aren't investing in
other people are they good at playing
with each other like they playing
together
you know they're brothers
so do you have siblings mhm I have a
younger sister they're so you you hope
as parents that they're going to be best
friends and they're not you know the
younger one's obsessed with the older
one lashes out to get his attention the
older ones into other things and kind
how how what are their ages uh they're
13 and 16 yeah uh so our vision for what
we'd hope they would be I mean I hope I
hope it grows into a great friendship
but right now they're more competitors
than friends it's actually sort of
heartbreaking
but it's but it's an age that makes
sense yeah I get it I get it but we'd
still rather want they were looking out
for each other a little bit more but
anyways um by the way that was I think
that's my biggest regret is not having
more kids but I don't know how I got on
this anyways you were trying to segue
out of thing about to alcohol and having
it's like my parents asked them if I was
an accident they said no I was a
tragedy
um uh anyways where are we Simon bring
us back so I I it goes the irony is of
all of these Social Challenges that
we're facing yeah and the decline of the
Empire you know which is you know
declines of Empires are acts of suicide
always yeah you know the thing that
we're watching play out in front of us
um that perhaps just perhaps this very
very old-fashioned thing called I care
and love the people next to me mhm might
actually be the solution because I want
to do the right thing not for myself but
for the people I love and and you know
like I I spent time with Navy Seals yep
and and and other y very high performing
yep military uh special operators and
what they all have in common is that
they care for each other more than
others are capable of and that they
don't have this raw courage I think
that's the definition of Love they don't
have this raw courage it's that they
fear letting each other down more than
they fear dying yep and um it's all
about the guy next to you it's all about
the guy next to them and and I think
very few of us you know I remember the
first time A friend of mine in uniforms
uh called me
brother cuz you and I have colleagues
and co-workers they have brothers and
sisters and I remember the first time
somebody called me brother that meant
something and I also as a friend of mine
who's a he's a warrior there make no
mistake of it he's a warrior he's a he's
a war hero he's risked his life to save
others he's still in uniform and I
remember we had a long conversation one
evening just catching up as friends and
at the end of the conversation before he
got off the phone he said I love you not
love you not love you I love you yep and
men don't say that to each other for
sure no yeah and I remember what it felt
like I it it I'm feeling it now and I I
was it struck me so hard yeah that I
started experimenting saying that to the
people who I feel that way about yeah
and I have some friends who
are I would call them not warm good
people kind people not warm people y but
I love them and I remember I'm thinking
of two people in particular MH um and I
remember saying to them I love you when
I was leaving to say goodbye and I
remember how struck they were yeah and
then in very short time they started
saying it back and in very short time
they started hugging meh like they'd
never hugged me before and these are old
friendships yeah that's nice and when we
talk about World War II and and and the
willingness to the intense desire to
serve I think it's because we knew our
you said it before we knew our neighbors
we barbecued with our neighbors we cared
about our friends we went to church we
went to bowling league we went to PTA
meetings we took each other's kids to
school yep um and dare I say it this
very oldfashioned very very human Thing
Called Love Thy Neighbor love thy friend
might actually be the solution we're
looking for that all the other things
that you and I have spent way too long
talking about might actually be symptoms
rather than than than the causes
themselves so I I like that I think
that's part of it but you know how I say
I love you to people now I give them
money that's not love oh it's better the
kids who work for me don't want my love
they want money your friends I'm not
talking about your I'm not talking about
your employees I'm not talking about
your employees okay but that's how I
make the biggest impact okay I have a
group of friends we share affection with
each other I'm seeing like three
fraternity Brothers in Aspen in two
weeks I invite my friends to a bunch of
 I think they feel loved I know they
love me but that's generous but in terms
of moving Society forward here's how I
was the first 40 years of my life anyone
that walked into one of my companies had
two bubbles one bubble was how much
money they made one bubble was how much
value they were adding and if the left
bubble got bigger than the right I
warned them and if it didn't get fixed
fast I fired them I was a pure underated
capitalist and now you know what I do I
overpay people my job as someone who has
a lot of money is to stuff as much money
into the pockets of people who are
working with me who do a great job it's
almost like a self-imposed okay
wonderful I love that keep doing it
great love it okay but your friends that
you're generous with and you'll pay for
the trip and you'll pay for the hotel
talk about that like I'm talking about
like like here let's take two scenarios
right A friend of yours is moving house
yep and you you go you're you're such a
great friend I'm paying for the moving
van here's five grand right yeah you
wanted to go over an actual help a move
right and and and versus the friend no
 way okay so I'll
be getting drunk with someone or I'll be
at the hotel ducap by the way here's the
money no need to thank me I got it money
is the transfer of work and time it is
the best but it's a redeemable commodity
it's a redeemable commodity it's such an
awesome commodity in a
capital some people who work for you do
they want to  hug or do they want
a bonus give them a bonus you keep a
bonus  you keep conflating
employees and friends every time I'm
talking about friends you keep going
back to people who work for you work the
guy lecturing CEOs turn them into your
family isn't that what they called we're
a family okay treat them like family
give them money I'm talking about the
people you love in your life that you
will learn moral obligation and you keep
going back should so be drinking now you
keep talking about employees I think
this I think we need to lie you down on
a couch here and you need to tell me
about your childhood why you can't talk
about friends and loving friends and you
keep keep want to talking about
capitalism and pay not either or it's
yes it's yes I got that part down I got
they two different things and you can
only talk about one of them why but
they're not mutually exclusive what do
we need more of people telling each
other they love each other or stuffing
more money into their pockets so they
can so they can have their own house yes
we need both those things vacation we're
Simon vacation we need both those things
but you are only talking about one I'm
trying to get you to talk about the
other okay I agree with you I'm there
the love thing I have an idea the love
things are great I have an idea I I
don't think we suffer from an absence
well okay the coarseness of our
discourse is gotten too coarse I agree
with you take the temperature down the
greatest un the greatest unused
commodity in history is good
intentions men have a difficult time
expressing their emotions
it's great to say I respect you I think
you're an interesting guy I think you're
handsome given your age Simon it's it's
these are things you don't have to say I
love you we don't have that friendship
it's fine it's not it's not going to
happen it's I don't expect it would be
weird if you said I I respect you the
but I do think that for guys in my
position I think the way I can add the
most value is to really I'll give you an
example I hit my number 10 years ago I
don't understand I'm totally op
optimized for happiness right now I got
a third of my life left chronologically
but I'm going to live 43ds of it
spiritually and psychologically I'm just
going to have a  I'm going to
squeeze so much juice out of this
ellipsoid lemon called terara called
Earth and I figured out the way I can be
happiest is to get rich I got there
that's really important to me it's
wonderful in a capital society means I
get to live a better life I me I get to
be loved to be rich in America is to be
loved full stop it's a violent rapacious
place if you don't have money it's a
loving generous place place you do have
money once you hit your number and I
would like to start a movement here
there's no reason to be a hoarder cuz
this is what makes you happy spend it I
spend so much  money and it's
amazing and then you know what I do I
give it away I have not increased my net
worth in seven years I look at my number
once I got there 10 years ago the last
seven years I look at my number and if
my wealth has gone up X and I haven't
spent it all I give it away and you know
what it makes me feel strong like bull I
want to beat my  chest it feels
so good good and so what I would say to
anyone else who has a lot of money why
do you need to be a billionaire it's not
going to get you anything here's what
you do you go to the hotel duap with
your wife you do amazing things with
friends and family you take care of your
parents you fly your friends to ask them
to hang out with you and then anything
above that you give it away and there's
so many amazing causes and people and
overpay the people who work with you
throw money around like you're a 
gangster in the 50s diagnosed with ask
cancer just live it up and you know what
you're going to love life don't do it
because you're noble don't do it because
you're praying to some God or whatever
it is I can tell you firsthand it feels
amazing so I'm trying to appeal to
people's selfish instincts you want to
have an amazing life get rich Economic
Security is important especially for a
man and I know that sounds sexist but
assume you are going to take economic
responsibility for your household which
sometimes means getting out of the way
and letting your wife because she's
better at the money thing and then once
you get your number once you get your
number spend it or give it away I was so
trying to wrap this up and end this and
you had to go and open a 
Pandora's Box for me now I can't just
let that go okay
okay you're missing one vital element
from that rent okay at what cost at
right what cost and in other words
that's that that's what's been happening
for the past I don't get a second plane
cuz I'm giving my money away I'd like a
bigger plane Simon no meaning I the GOL
stream meaning people are are pushing so
hard to make their number yeah it the
cost is too steep it's at the cost of
each other it's at the cost of society
it's at the cost of our it's it's like
like like I'm going to lay off all these
people so that I can make my number I'm
going to stab you in the back so that I
can make my number it's it's your your
rant needs a little bit of a head that's
not true your because the rant that
you're giving is the new capitalist 1980
you're falling into a populous myth that
rich people call over other people to
get there the majority of rich people
are good people if you want to be really
wealthy it's a full person project you
have you're the one who said that
there's no the CEO uh that I'm living at
with roads colored glasses because the
CEO is ignoring me because of you know
they're doing a good job they're
supposed to they're suppos we should
have higher taxes on them but generally
speaking they're good people I know yes
generally speaking some of them are our
friends yeah yeah some of them I don't
like but some of them the majority of
successful people have one thing in
common and that is one they work out
that's the thing that's most common
physical fitness is really important you
need to walk into a room and be able to
either if  gets real either kill and
eat everybody or outrun them I believe
that and two they're generally put in a
room of opportunities even when they're
not there because they're High character
people so the cartoon of Monty Burns
lighting his cigars with $100 bills that
really isn't accurate but I at the same
time they need to pay more than taxes
they need to pay their fair share they
can't be incentivized to lay off people
and invest money artifici intellig it's
tax policy it's incentives at the risk
of this becoming yet another one of your
podcasts that that you know Scott's
announcing another podcast that he's
doing it's now with me there you go how
many do you how many podc podcast do you
have now four to resist is feudal I'm
like AOL in the 90s you stick your hand
in a in a cereal box and you pull out a
disc at the dog I'm everywhere I'm
literally it's like I every time I turn
on any kind of social media it's like
resist isal Galloway G has another yet
another podcast that he's doing it's
like what how do you just spend eight
hours a day like one podcast or the
other here's the unknown secret I work I
work 30 hours a week Max greatness is in
the agency of others I have 14 people
that I pay really well and I think
overpay they would argue and they do an
amazing job you have the same thing I've
met your team you have really good
people people think it's us in our
kitchen with a camcorder or sketching
out  no and they don't realize no
the key to success is like I said
greatness in the agency of other is
finding and retaining really good people
and and it's easier when you pay them
really well and the lesson I learned a
long long long time ago when I had that
that thought completely backwards when I
started my business thinking that I had
to be the one that had all the answers
was learning to ask for help and
accepting what it was offered I that's
right yeah I still struggle with that
but yeah I agree on that
note are me agreeing with you Simon
synic We agree on more than you think by
the way I made fun of I made fun of
Simon in my TED Talk I said that Ted was
was a Brazilian Aela where Bill Gates
and Malcolm Gladwell had a night of wild
sex and gave birth to their bastard
lovech child Simon cynic and literally
the crowd went crazy for that that was
actually I think the it was a picture of
a baby with your face on I knew you
would love it I think it was the biggest
laugh you got it was it was oh wait and
the picture of Bezos with his new wife
that got a lot of that got a lot of
laughs that got a lot of
laughs Simon Scott I don't love you but
I like you I like you a lot I like you
Simon I like you a lot respect you a
great de likewise brother uh and uh I'm
glad you
exist if you enjoyed this podcast and
would like to hear more please subscribe
wherever you like to listen to podcasts
and if you'd like even more optimism
check out my website simon.com for
classes videos and more until then take
care of yourself take care of each other
