think of a stupidly big number a google
a googleplex 10 to the power of a
googleplex that number is so massive
that it has no meaning in the real world
but it's still nothing compared to
infinity try to imagine an infinitely
small number also called an
infinitesimal 0.0000
on and on you need to attach more zeros
than whatever massive number you just
thought of in order to get a true
infinitesimal to put the ridiculousness
of those numbers and infinity into
perspective the observable universe is
about 93 billion light years in diameter
if for whatever reason you wanted to
express that monstrosity in terms of the
smallest unit we have for distance plank
length you would get this number this is
the largest possible number you would
ever need to use to describe a length
and it still doesn't even come close to
a google and google doesn't even come
close to infinity as anyone living in a
finite world with a finite lifespan
knows infinity is a horrifying concept i
mean who as a child did not lie in bed
filled with a slowly mounting terror
while sinking into the idea of a
universe that goes on and on forever and
ever asks rudy rucker in infinity and
the mind we should have absolutely
nothing to do with this us trying to
play with infinity would be like an ant
trying to kill god it's just too
powerful of a concept to do anything
with we should just erase it from our
minds and live out our lives using
numbers that actually have meaning to us
hey hey wait what are you doing i'm
doing calculus is that an
infinity i see in there yep nothing too
mind-blowing actually why in the world
did we as a species ever agree to do
math with infinity oh come on it's not
that big of a deal what sick people
would ever voluntarily summon this demon
of an idea there has to be something
wrong with this how did calculus even
begin
if you've taken a calculus course before
you may have been taught in this order
this makes absolutely no sense right i
mean integrals are the opposite of
derivatives and to even define
derivatives you need limits right well
this ordering is closer to how the idea
is developed historically that being
said where on this map do you think the
first calculus concepts began
here maybe here
because it's here and where on this
timeline do you think calculus began
because it's around here the story
begins with the ancient greeks what were
they up to let's start with a tour of
old math this is math this is kind of
bath and this is math right well this
would look like nonsense since the hindu
arabic numerals and mathematicians
weren't used back then and none of this
exists yet but this is math in ancient
greek philosophy circles geometry is all
the rage with our math knowledge now we
can find areas of shapes like this and
this and
oh god never fear says a certain
archimedes if you cut up a circle into
pizza slices then rearrange those slices
like this it almost looks like a
parallelogram if you make those slices
smaller and smaller you'll eventually
get a perfect rectangle whose side
lengths are the radius of a circle and
half their circumference so since the
circle has the same area as this
rectangle the area of a circle is its
radius times half its circumference
that's ridiculous those tiny pizza
slices won't ever become a rectangle but
what if you make them infinitely small
you can't do that infinity doesn't exist
this was a convincing argument at the
time let's travel 150 years before
archimedes was born to see what the
ancient greeks thought about infinity in
order to go from point a to b i need to
get halfway there first then i need to
go halfway again and so on
wait i'll need an infinite amount of
halves to get to point b and i can't
take an infinite amount of steps
therefore i cannot walk to the other
side of my room
okay if you really don't believe that
the area of a circle is equal to the
area of this rectangle then let's assume
that this rectangle is smaller than the
circle because if the area of the
rectangle isn't equal to the area of the
circle then it has to be either less
than or greater than the circle so let's
start with the assumption that the area
of the rectangle is less than the area
of the circle now let's cut off the
curvy parts of the rearranged circle so
we get this parallelogram we know that
this parallelogram is smaller than the
circle because we literally just cut off
these pieces but is the parallelogram
bigger or smaller than the rectangle
well we define the rectangle to have a
height that is equal to the radius of
the circle meanwhile since we cut off
this extra part to make the
parallelogram the parallelogram's height
is less than the radius by a small
amount so the parallelogram is smaller
than the rectangle which we assumed is
smaller than the circle now let's cut
this circle into tinier pizza slices and
let's make a new parallelogram by
cutting off the curvy parts again hang
on this parallelogram is slightly taller
than the other ones since the curry part
we're cutting off also got smaller if we
keep cutting the circle into smaller
pizza slices then the curvy part that's
left over will keep getting smaller and
smaller there should be a point where
the curvy difference becomes less than
whatever difference there is between the
circle and the rectangle so eventually
the parallelogram should become bigger
than the rectangle while still being
smaller than the circle but wait how is
it even possible for the parallelogram
to become bigger than the rectangle the
rectangle's height is the radius of the
circle that's how we defined it but the
parallelogram's height will always be
the radius of the circle minus some
really really small number we have two
conflicting conclusions from following
two logical ways of thinking so maybe
that means the rectangle isn't smaller
than the circle after all what if the
rectangle is bigger than the circle this
time let's make a parallelogram by
extending the sides of the slices until
they become triangles the parallelogram
is bigger than the rectangle because the
height is a little bigger than the
radius the parallelogram is bigger than
the rectangle which is bigger than the
circle if we cut the circle into small
slices again and repeat the
parallelogram making process we start
getting smaller parallelograms the more
we cut the circle eventually the
parallelogram should be smaller than the
rectangle but that conflicts with the
fact that the rectangle's height is the
radius of the circle while the
parallelogram's height is always the
radius plus some small number so this
rectangle can't possibly be bigger than
the circle well if this special
rectangle is neither smaller than nor
bigger than the circle then it must be
equal to the circle and therefore the
area of the circle is its radius times
its circumference over two
alright fine i guess you win this time
if you got lost there it's okay i did
the first 20 times i looked at it as
well but the key parts that you should
appreciate about this argument are that
one it cuts something into tinier and
tinier pieces than adds them back up
again that's what integration is and two
even though it uses the idea of infinity
it never really uses infinity it's
almost like archimedes is very carefully
trying to tame a beast there is a really
nice lesson about math that you can take
away from this proof notice how
archimedes started with a hazy argument
about how you can make a rectangle out
of pizza slices of a circle and then
created a rigorous proof for it after
that the big part of math is about
finding what people call a moral
solution to a problem which is the
solution that should be right and then
coming up with a formal proof to justify
it archimedes wrote about this in a text
called the method and this method is
still recognized today hey here's even a
quote from one of grant sanderson's
podcast talking about this idea
the mathematical equivalent of you
playing with your ribbon for the
undergrad result where you first figure
out what's true and then when you need
to make it rigorous that's that's the
second step but just into like what do
you want to be true that should be
treated as a
a step worth highlighting and holding up
as just as valuable as the rigorous
follow
exactly exactly and you know who did
this archimedes
if you so i give an example
it's the 800s and you are a scholar in
the baghdad house of wisdom you're
sporting a cool beard and turban and you
just finished reading the works of
archimedes and other greek philosophers
what a wonderful time to contribute to
the development of algebra you think to
yourself algebra i thought this video
was about calculus you're right but the
development of algebra was crucial to
the development of calculus and it just
so happens to have happened in the
middle of our story so let's look at how
this algebra thing is going you know
these now they're starting to get
popular especially because muhammad
imnemusa al-kawarismi is using them in
his book al-jabret but these aren't
popular yet instead equations are
written as sentences and numbers are
thought of as geometric shapes a square
is a square a cube is a cube and
ah yeah they didn't really do these they
also didn't do these since you can't
have negative area or volume 800 years
later these ideas caught on to a new
group of mathematicians who not only
spread hindu arabic numerals but also
added their own notation francois viet
introduced the use of letters as symbols
for unknowns and constants and rene
descartes standardized the use of these
letters for variables and these four
constants hey math is now starting to
look a little bit more like math but the
best is soon to come after he said i
think therefore i am the guy that looked
like a cartoon villain had the idea to
combine geometry with algebra to make a
coordinate system this was revolutionary
look at what happens when you graph a
quadratic it's a parabola to understand
just how crazy this is the ancient
greeks have been cutting up cones to
study different shapes for centuries
archimedes even wrote the whole book
specifically about the parabola they had
been studying these shapes without a
standard way to easily manipulate them
but with descartes analytic geometry you
have the power to analyze any curve as a
family of equations another thing is up
until this point the idea that you could
compare two variables in this way was
ridiculous this number represents money
and this number represents cabbages
those are two very different numbers you
cannot put them together but descartes
did it and somehow it worked now we can
visually represent relationships between
variables and it's all thanks to
descartes and his method speaking of
relationships hey descartes look there's
this vermont guy who wants to talk to
you he says he developed analytic
geometry a decade before you did he says
he did what and so began a fierce
lifelong rivalry between two huge names
in math and physics armed with analytic
geometry this battle is where some of
the origins of the modern derivative lay
and where we can start talking about
calculus again now the idea of an
instantaneous rate of change goes back
to at least zeno who other than the
argument about not being able to get out
of his room also famously riddled that
an arrow moving through the air is
really an infinite collection of moments
where the arrow is unmoving in each some
practical uses of derivatives can be
found in the 500s where indian
mathematician aryabhatta discovered that
the rate of change of the sine function
is the same as the cosine function and
used this to approximate specific values
of sine but the derivative in the
graphical sense starts here descartes
discovered a way to find the tangential
slope by finding the radius of a circle
centered at where this line hits the
x-axis verma found the tangential slope
by doing something similar to solving
this as h gets smaller and smaller which
you may be a bit more familiar with but
more than just finding the derivative
verma also tackled some other problems
that influenced later calculus
development like using derivatives in
physics finding the maxima and minima of
curves and finding a general integral
power rule the cart and for moz work
will pave the way for others to make
discoveries that will forever change the
world
hey let's check in on the development of
integral calculus what have they been up
to while algebra was being developed in
the 800s some scholars in baghdad were
working on finding the volume of certain
shapes quick side note if you've ever
taken the calculus course before have
you ever wondered why in the world
people would ever need to find the
volume of solids that revolve around an
axis and why the ap test keep checking
that we know this formula
oh oh
i see in 1600's italy bonaventura
cavalieri performed integration with a
controversial method where he cut a 2d
shape into infinitesimally small slices
then rearranged them his student
evangelista toricelli later used his
invisibles to find the shape with an
infinite surface area and a finite
volume but notice that unlike archimedes
cavalieri and toricelli play directly
with infinity and mathematicians really
didn't like that now hold on to that
thought for later because calculus is
about to change fundamentally ideas
behind integral and differential
calculus have so far been developing
separately over thousands of years but
we're about to see the birth of a new
calculus and it starts with two stunning
men i'm talking about galileo and kepler
of course these guys actually came
before descartes and firma but i bring
them up now because i think their work
transitions better with newton and
leibniz than the others and the way that
they reflect the beginnings of
mathematicians discovering the
relationship between differentiation and
integration the key reason why these two
mark the beginning of this relationship
is because get this isolated behavior in
the real world a lot of the examples and
mathematicians i brought up so far have
been doing what feels a lot like pure
math or math for the sake of doing math
these two will do what feels a lot more
like applied math where they use math to
model physics galileo galilei isn't
called the father of modern science for
nothing when he asked the question he
made sure that he could answer it by
focusing on that one question only one
of the questions he asked at the time
was how objects fell and he went about
answering it by creating the most ideal
system for measuring the effect of
gravity on an object a ramp where he
could time how long it takes for a ball
to roll down to different lengths using
a water clock when the ball starts
moving he opens a valve and lets water
flow into this bucket when it reaches a
checkpoint or stops he closes the valve
and sees how much water has accumulated
i wonder if there's any pattern to how
this ball falls wait a minute in one
second the ball moves one unit then the
second second the ball moves three units
then in the third second the ball moves
five units that's odd gravity follows
some rule to do with odd numbers if you
know a bit of physics you might know
that this is because gravity on earth's
surface can be roughly modeled by a
parabola which follows this pattern one
unit traveled is one squared units one
unit plus three units is two squared
units one unit plus three plus five is
three squared units and so on you may
also start to notice how this is the
first hint toward discovering the
connection between the integral and the
derivative the total distance that the
ball travels which feels a lot like
integration because we're adding up the
distances it travels in each second can
be calculated by a pattern in the rate
at which the ball covers distance which
feels like a derivative not only that
even the way that galileo measures any
of this feels a lot like integration and
differentiation he first tracks how much
water accumulates in a bucket then
subtracts differences in how much water
there is to find the rate of change of
the ball while galileo was looking at
gravity on earth johannes kepler studied
gravity in the solar system he
discovered three laws after so much
trial and error but we're only
interested in the second one that the
planets orbit in a way that for two time
intervals the area of these pizza slices
are the same ah i wonder why that
happens ah what that's because velocity
is constant while acceleration is radial
if an object keeps moving at the same
speed it sweeps out the same area in the
same time interval if the angle at which
an object moves changes but the object
keeps moving at the same speed it'll
still sweep out the same area in the
same time interval who the hell are you
isaac newton born on christmas had a
father who died before he was born and a
mother who left him for a rich second
husband went to college poorer even
though his mother definitely could have
supported him and was understandably
antisocial would end up on this list be
simultaneously hated and loved by
billions of physics and math students
over the centuries and make everything
about modern life possible it's around
1666 and there's an epidemic in england
hey what did you do over quarantine i
learned to play the guitar i got good at
painting i started putting together the
ideas that would lead to my calculus in
my world changing book the principia
show off after doing some light reading
newton went on an intellectual rampage
in the midst of discovering laws of
gravity and inventing telescopes one day
he must have gotten pretty bored because
he started tackling some casual puzzles
i wonder if there's anything special
about a curve that has an equation that
can express its area oh huh the height
of the curve is the same as the rate at
which the curve's area increases i also
wonder if there's anything special about
the equation that gives the area of the
curve oh the area given between two
bounds is just the equation at the first
bound minus the equation at the second
bound now what did newton do with most
of his findings he kept them hidden but
they got leaked and one day he started
getting annoying fan mail from a certain
gutfried leibniz was a german lawyer who
worked as a secretary to a politician so
he traveled a lot on diplomatic missions
he got to meet a lot of people and one
person he happened to meet was christian
huygens who was the mathematician of the
time hey you seem like a cool guy wanna
learn advanced math from me so you can
publish the first articles on calculus
in 15 years and one day have a way
longer wikipedia page than your own boss
that sounds awesome thanks man hey you
should go talk to this newton guy i
heard he's really smart yo isaac i heard
about your contributions to math would
you be so kind as to show me some of
your work that would make my day no come
on man what if i show you this cool
infinite series i found that's amazing
you're a mathematical mastermind it's
incredible to see that someone else is
able to do something i already know how
to do in three different ways this son
of a magnet discovered the fundamental
theorem of calculus after newton but he
was the first to publish his calculus
and he packaged it all in neat
understandable notation that we still
use today there are a few key
differences between newton and leibniz's
calculus though for leibniz this the
part in his dydx notation represents a
differential or an infinite testament
you might be familiar with this
explanation of imagining the d as a tiny
tiny nudge in the direction of a
variable and d y d x as a ratio of tiny
nudges that's what it is newton also
played with infinitesimals but he
presented them in a different way he
used what he called flexions which treat
each variable as changing with time
rather than directly comparing how one
variable changes with another this is
kind of like treating every variable
like a parametric equation so basically
leibniz looked at infinite testimony
lodges in variables while newton looked
at infinitesimal nudges in time notice
still how both of them explicitly used
infinitesimals in their calculus this
was definitely frowned upon and they
both knew it newton trivialized his work
since it was only good for finding
solutions not proving them levnitz said
that philosophically speaking i know
more believe in infinitely small
quantities than in infinitely great ones
that is in infinitesimals rather than
infinite tuples i consider them both as
fictions of the mind for succinct ways
of speaking appropriate to the calculus
to newton and leibniz their early
calculus was just a thinking tool it
wasn't rigorous it was kind of hand wavy
the question of what to do with infinite
decimals and infinity won't be answered
until a bit later but before we get into
that leibniz did another thing to
calculus that newton could never ever
have done remember how he was a
secretary who went on diplomatic
missions that made him really good at
dealing with people and he used those
people skills to popularize calculus one
genius can only do so much but a lot of
geniuses working in the same field can
do a lot more and this was honestly one
of leibniz's biggest contributions to
the early study of calculus that he got
the ideas to the people who are ready to
work with them you might be able to
notice that a key theme in how i
presented the development of calculus is
that it involved many pairs both in
people and also in ideas with the pairs
of algebra and geometry integral and
differential calculus and math and
physics this fairness of calculus to me
is telling of how powerful relationships
between ideas and people can be even
when they might not seem to work well
together at first galileo conducted
experiments by creating an ideal
environment while kepler only had data
to try to use to discover his laws
descartes was pretty famous in his
lifetime verma was a lot more reserved
newton kept to himself leibniz was a
people person but despite the
differences they all contributed to the
development of pivotal ideas and
altogether they were able to make
calculus what it is not only does this
show how big ideas developed from the
contributions of many people rather than
from a single prodigy it also shows how
much more far-reaching things can become
when different ways of thinking find a
common ground and can have free reign to
influence each other
so far i've mostly been talking about
infinity as if it was a value but
there's also another type of infinity
that i'll quickly mention where you
treat it like a process that never ends
enter the second half of calculus 2.
remember zeno's paradox about movement
an infinite series is when you add up a
sequence of numbers in this case
one-half plus one-fourth plus one-eighth
and so on to get a finite value they are
too much to get into now and i know i'm
skipping a really big part of math but
for the purposes of this narrative of
calculus these are like tools that kind
of developed alongside the fundamental
theorem and helped newton leibniz and
the people after them make a lot of
discoveries notably leonard euler's use
of infinite series moved calculus away
from the language of geometry and more
toward the language of functions and he
even derived his famous number from them
this time period just after newton and
leibniz is also to blame for the
convergence test that you may have had
to memorize and all the funny names that
you may be familiar with attention
everybody there is not a single infinite
series whose sum has been rigorously
determined in other words the most
important parts of mathematics stand
without foundation yeah but what about
the xenoseries i'm pretty sure that it
converges to one yeah it converges to
one but what does that even mean to add
an infinite amount of terms in the 1800s
there was another revolution in calculus
and all of mathematics as a whole after
mathematicians decided to revisit the
foundations of math now is the time that
we finally get to talking about limits
i've been implicitly referencing them
throughout this video and mathematicians
since before newton and leibniz had been
kind of using them this whole time what
leibniz said about thinking of
infinitesimals as fictions of the mind
is kind of an example of what a limit
tries to do it's like a tool of thinking
that gets you to express infinite
numbers in a way that doesn't actually
summon infinite numbers a limit is
usually described as a value that some
function gets close to so if we scroll
to the right of this function forever it
approaches zero so how is this limit
idea better than just saying imagine
that infinitesimals are real like like
this did first off let's look at what a
function is a function is defined by
pairs of x and f of x let's say we have
a function and we think that the value
it approaches at a is l if you aren't
convinced that a pairs with l then i
dare you to give me any range around l
that you think only contains values that
don't pair with a i guarantee that no
matter what range you pick i can give
you a range around a that only has
values that pair with numbers inside
your range meaning that my a has to pair
with one number in your range you can
keep picking the smallest number you can
think of but i guarantee that any range
you come up with will always be matched
by a range around a that proves that
your number isn't small enough for my
value it's clear that since you can't
give me a range that excludes my a the
limit of f at a has to be l it doesn't
really matter if you understood that or
not the key to all of this is that now
when we do calculus we aren't all
agreeing to pretend like we're playing
with infinity writing l-i-m means that
we agree that if we wanted to we could
keep on going forever and ever picking
smaller and smaller or bigger and bigger
numbers that slowly push the function
closer to the limit we now have a
language where the only thing you have
to know logically to prove anything is
if one number is bigger or smaller than
another number it's very similar in
spirit to the initial problem i gave at
the beginning of the video where
archimedes proved the area of a circle
and it's beautiful the attitude of the
epsilon delta proof perfectly
complements the attitude of the
mathematician who asks how can i know
this for certain by answering if you're
really up for it i guarantee that you
can ask that question over and over
again until you are satisfied the
epsilon delta limit is almost like an
atom for calculus and in that way it
captures the whole idea of calculus in
itself by defining calculus with the
language of limits we get the tame
infinity archimedes would be proud
but of course there's more to the story
than that there's still the question of
infinity itself the limit was able to
redefine calculus without explicitly
using infinity but it didn't get rid of
the idea of infinity there are still
debates today about infinity's place in
math in the real world ranging from
views that argue that calculus can work
fine with infinitesimals to views that
infinity doesn't exist at all and that
our current foundation for math set
theory is flawed because it directly
plays with infinity but that is an
incredible surprisingly heated debate to
save for another time
i have long embraced the belief that
every course should be built around a
story a quest to answer certain burning
questions in writing this book i sought
to unearth the questions that drove the
historical development of calculus says
dr david persue about his book calculus
reordered which is one of the books i
used to research for this video for me
the question that took me down this
quest had to do with infinity is
infinity really this simple of an idea
that we could just say the derivative is
like finding an infinitely small ratio
between two changing variables it's easy
to get desensitized to the idea of
infinity when first learning calculus
each time a new subject is introduced
there's almost like a mental countdown
to when the teacher says something like
now imagine that we take this process on
to infinity what happened to that whole
other side of infinity that leads to
paradoxes and is a massive headache to
think about and come to think of it why
do we even have these limits again i was
surprised and felt almost validated when
i learned that the use of infinity in
math was a problem even to the
mathematicians who developed ideas that
led to calculus and after the initial
shock from hearing that integration came
before differentiation everything
started to make more sense infinity only
became this simple after we developed
the limited trap it but the idea of
cutting something into infinitely many
pieces was a thing before that and for
most of the history of calculus
mathematicians struggled with trying to
limit infinity to just that one
interpretation the whole story of
calculus is a story of how
mathematicians over millennia develop
different ways of jousting with infinity
to get simple results leading up to the
twist that integration and
differentiation are connected and coming
to a resolution with the development of
formal limits and the following shift
from calculus to analysis as dr brasau
says the progression we now use for
teaching is appropriate for the student
who wants to verify that calculus is
logically sound however that describes
very few students in first year calculus
by emphasizing the historical
progression of calculus students have a
context for understanding how these big
ideas developed now this begs the
question what if we always teach
introductory calculus like this i've
talked with with many many engineers
and no engineer that i have ever met
says that in their job they actually
need to find derivatives or evaluate
integrals i taught at penn state for
many years and uh interviewed students
and most of them when i asked them what
what you want to get from this course
they said i wanted to understand
calculus they've been told that this is
important mathematics that this
laid the groundwork for for much of our
modern era they want to know why it's
important to try to understand what's
important about it a lot of students
they're pressed for time at college or
university and so and again there have
been some great studies on this that
show that
that once students get to a point where
they're having difficulty
maintaining this this mastery of the
ideas behind calculus they fall back on
mastering the technique so that they can
pass the next test and unfortunately
that's what happens to most students uh
during their calculus course and i think
part of the problem there is that uh
that so much of the way that we teach
the calculus
facilitates this we we have a great many
ideas but we don't really spend the time
to allow students to to
to absorb these ideas we spend a lot of
our time just just explaining well
here's how you apply this particular
technique and i interviewed penn state
students this was toward the end of the
semester and i asked them to describe
what goes on in a typical class
at this point one of the most common
responses i got well at the beginning of
the class
the professor tries to explain what's
going on in the mathematics he's going
to present
and i know i can ignore that and then he
starts doing examples and that's when i
know i have to start paying attention
so what i think the history is very
important because it can help illuminate
uh the ideas that are behind
the the concepts of calculus and and it
motivates the subject i find students
are much more interested in the calculus
if they know where the ideas are coming
from and also know
how people had to struggle to come to
these ideas i know that you mentioned
that infinitesimals and these tiny
pieces um yeah that's something that
philosophers wrestled with for hundreds
of years i think the history of calculus
is a great way of informing instructors
you know here's a place where the field
as a whole stumbled and had difficulty
for a long time
expect your students to stumble and have
difficulty for a long time
calculus is notorious for being a
difficult subject riddled with hazy
ideas and limitless rules to hastily
memorize but it doesn't have to be this
way some mathematical pedagogists have
considered mixing calculus with its
history to contextualize the concepts
and leave a lasting impression on the
main ideas of calculus there have been
efforts to reform the way calculus is
taught for decades notably there was a
reform movement in the early 1990s but
support for it dwindled in the years
following i bring this up because i want
to emphasize that the current way that
calculus is taught may give many people
a flawed impression on what calculus and
math in general is i know that
personally i walked out of calculus only
having a vague idea of how this
supposedly revolutionary math i just
learned was important i hope that if you
were like me this video was able to go
beyond what you might learn in the
classroom and show the humanity of math
and i hope now you have a different
perspective on what calculus is thanks
for watching
you
