hey everyone welcome to another episode
today we're checking out rampton Ros R's
newest development here in Brentwood
two-story contemporary estate amazing
backyard rooftop deck water features
fireplaces we got a lot to see today so
let's begin
know
all right everyone let's start our Tour
on the exterior we have this walkway
that takes us to the front door I love
the entry of this property two Mass
water features then we have these palm
trees right in the center and on my
right hand side we have a spacious
driveway that leads you to the three-car
garage and the driveway extends on the
other side and gives you access all the
way to the backyard too now follow me
this way I really like how we have these
steps going across the feature pool to
the entry and look look at the scale
here covered roof Natural Stone finish
on the exterior Kenna lever roof line a
lot to take in and follow me this way we
have this massive pivot door opening up
to the gr room now this is my favorite
space in this house I love how open it
is you have Fleetwood motorized sliding
glass doors pocketing into the wall
opening up to the backyard you have your
seating area here kitchen behind me and
look above us massive skylight
complemented with moss walls bringing so
much natural light to the heart of the
room and you have your seating area here
very impressive space yeah this is a
massive space you look very small on
camera it is that big I mean you have
beautiful Oak hardwood floors beautiful
coffee table built-ins on this side TVs
nicely recessed in you have an ethanol
fireplace that's double-sided and even
your built-ins are double-sided and of
course you have the wood tones wood
slats wood treatment on the ceiling to
warm up the space and I just love that
you can look out to your backyard
imagine sitting down here enjoying this
space this is fantastic and again this
living Moss wall is so impressive it
brings so much life and color to this
room perfect room for entertainment we
can have so many people here flowing to
your backyard this is really nice now we
have the kitchen on this side but before
I talk about the kitchen let's talk
about the specs of this property so we
have six bedrooms nine bathrooms
approximately 14,000 ft of interior
space built on a 1.3 acre lot on the
market for
$9,888 th000 and I want to give big
thanks to the developer and the designer
rampton rosra for making this tour
possible and as always we will have more
information about this listing in the
description of this video now let's
continue our tour with this amazing
kitchen I love this island design and
how it has two distinct sections you
have the main is here and then built-in
dining area on this side four chairs
penel lights above obviously the main
island houses some Cabinetry dishwasher
and the main sink and on the other side
you can see rest of the base cabinets
beautiful stone that's book match we see
this in raay homes all the time these
built-in cooktops that are incorporated
into the counter top then you have your
pop filler here more cabinet tree and on
the other side you have your built-in
fridge freezer and more of the built-in
appliances now it gets better you go
this way and of course since this house
is built for entertainment you have a
really spacious Chef's Kitchen here a
lot of Cabinetry space and my favorite
detail within the Chef's Kitchen is the
walk-in fridge this is super nice I feel
like we started seeing more Walkin
fridges and they're so practical you can
reach each one of the levels and shelves
very easily you have the condenser above
and a great place to cool off too
another uh signature rain is R detail as
well well said well said he puts them in
every single one of his houses yeah now
let's check out the rest of the Chef's
Kitchen again you have ton of Cabinetry
gas cook top there's another sink here
dishwasher I believe is on this side
fridge freezer and two details here that
I want to talk about door at the end
opens up to the side driveway that way
your staff your Caterers can come
directly into the kitchen without having
to go through the house and in fact
there's also a really nice staff
Quarters here on this side with a full
bathroom now let's let's continue our
tour I want to take everybody back to
the entry again house is phenomenal this
is Ray's newest development that he just
completed and we toured a lot of his
homes we toured a property in Brentwood
uh that was on the market for $45
million we t a house that rebuilt in
Palisades and uh we T another one in
belir if you haven't watched those
videos make sure to check them out we've
known Ray for a minute yeah and uh not
only that but Ry has kind of developed a
little bit of a developer Celebrity
Status around Los Angeles I feel like uh
I'm always really impressed by not only
his homes but his ability to Market his
products I feel like uh there's really
no one else who can do it quite like him
you know well he's definitely out there
he's really well known in the community
uh he's been in a business for a minute
and on top of that he's a big basketball
fan uh he's friends with a lot of
celebrities so let's just say when he
builds a home people know about
it there are some elements that I know
is raino from the first photo I see do
you pay specific attention to make sure
that each of your products are different
but at the same time they still tie some
of the elements together so it's like
this cohesive look that you go for 100%
you know it's it's the brand and the
brand is at just same exact level with
different homes but you get little
different style on each the B Escape
you're looking at this droped gorgeous
Ocean View with the city and all that
just a little bit of a different vibe
mhm right metalore is just your own
Resort on it right but at the end of the
day it has the same feeling when you are
staying in this home it just kind of
makes you have a just forget about
everything else right you feel like
you're on vacation right it just kind of
calms you it's a family house it's a fun
house right it's a house you would like
to entertain in right in a house also
that you want to raise your family
in now let's continue our T mik key off
of the entry we have this really nice
fish tank we have have this hallway
leading us to the three-car garage epoxy
floors opens up to the driveway that I
mentioned earlier and coming back to the
entry really nice art piece we have the
staircase on the other side I love this
glass back wall that goes all the way up
to the second floor steel frame open
riser wood paneling on the walls and
this beautiful chandelier now let's
continue this way we have this door here
opening up to a very spacious powder
bathroom I really like the fabrication
here with the vanity circular mirror
ceiling mount like fixtures total toilet
which you like and then we have a Barby
picture here do you recognize anything
interesting with this picture um no I
know the Barbie maybe just came out uh
come this way look at the picture now oh
yeah that's uh that's very La for me for
some reason it's a fun touch I wanted to
show to you all right let's continue our
tour now at the end of this hallway we
have a door that opens up to the movie
theater on for the entry you have some
built-ins on the back there's a really
nice bar area with more shelves and then
you go straight into the movie theater
three tier seating comfortable couches
Starlight ceiling above wood slats on
the walls and I really like how the
built-ins on the left hand side are
different color that way there's a
really nice contrast between the dark
paneling and the Lightwood paneling you
go to the other side massive screen you
have your accessories coffee tables and
this is your movie theater this is
really nice I really like this movie
theater this one is massive from a scale
perspective it is a good siiz movie
theater but it feels more like a
screening room so it walks that fine
line really well it feels very cozy and
yeah this is your movie theater now next
door we have the wine Celler this space
is located right next to the great room
I really like how the walls are paneled
then we have these built-in shelves for
all of your bottles nice table in the
center light fixtures and obviously this
space is temperature control and on top
of that we have the entire thing glass
enclosed so it's a nice backdrop now
coming this way behind the fireplace we
have this Exquisite bar look at that
Island Stone fabrication penel lights
above it's like an art piece and on the
back They carried out the same Stone all
the way to the ceiling and then we have
these built-ins framing the bar with
glass fronts obviously Cabinetry holds
the ice maker fridge and there's a small
sing here and this is a really nice
space that complement your great room as
well as your formal dining room area
beautiful table that sits 10 look at the
chandelier that's above us wood class
ceilings wood paneled walls really nice
glass built-ins and we have more
built-in Cabinetry down below which
serves as your servage counter and on
top of that you have this entire glass
wo with an exterior door that opens up
to your backyard this backdrop is
fantastic this formal dining room is
great what a home this entire first
floor is pretty insane I feel like it's
just obviously with a lot of his houses
they're perfect entertainment homes
they're perfect for throwing parties
having friends over uh and just you know
enjoying the space with a bunch of
people exactly because we travel so much
and work so much A lot of times we don't
really have enough time to hang out with
our friends so every time we have a
really exciting shoot we just invite
them over
our friends arck and Sarah D stopped by
to give us the impressions of the home I
kind of thought that was like a TV
screen right here cuz it looks so crazy
it looks like a Jurassic Park so if
you're looking to live in Jurassic Park
in real life maybe this is your place
well just walking up the fact that it
had like recessed LEDs in the steps
walking up to the property I was like oh
this is going to be a good
one oh my gosh bro this like sets the
bar this is crazy that somebody bought
this house or built it at all let's take
a look at the primary bathroom this is
an entirely different bedroom basically
this house is incredible completely
overwhelming I'll take it you'll take it
yep done those are my final
thoughts you know I'm looking at it as
if myself and my family living in it and
every single angle of it is designed for
that and how would you live in it and
what functionalities and amenities would
be meaningful to you everything I you
see here I mean it's got something for
everybody for example let's just say you
and I right there's so many different
things in this house that is just kind
of we would go crazy for it right and
then let's just say for the wife for her
right the closet for example that
walk-in fridge and just the the the
linen closets and being able to go ahead
and have you know what she really uses
every single day and then the kids I
mean this the kids dream out here it's
nice that you can enjoy a property at
this level with this many amenities and
it's just a different
experience let's continue our tour we
have this long hallway art pieces
ceiling treatment and then we have this
glass door opening up to the gym rubber
floors paneled walls Venetian plaster
ceiling we have the TV and the mirror
wall in the center small size but a
practical sauna can you open that for me
I'm really I saw I really like this uh
will you just go in there for me please
this makes me want to get one yeah well
I was like this is like what a what a
cute and like attainable sauna right
here like very attainable yeah uh but
gets the job done you know sure and I
like that it's within your gym then you
have your mirror walls gym equipment in
the center obviously you can fill it up
with a lot more equipment as well around
the corner we have a full bathroom which
is also really nice and another detail I
like is the fact that you have an
exterior door that opens up to your
backyard so this bathroom here can serve
Service as your secondary pool bathroom
even though they have a pool bathroom
outside and yeah and you got this
beautiful backyard and first floor is
fantastic all right let's check out this
amazing backyard like we mentioned
earlier motorized sliding glass doors
open up to this cover section you have
your outdoor dining area here you can
see the first floor in the second floor
and right in the center of this backyard
we have this amazing pull look look at
this Frame here Baja shelves plaster
pool race hot tub water feature behind
that then you have your pool Cabana if
all that wasn't enough you have your
first outdoor seating area here second
one is actually sunken and they even
have a glass front that looks into the
pool that space is complemented with a
fire pit and this backdrop is absolutely
insane this is awesome I feel like I'm
in Bali right now in a wild jungle I
just happen to have all these incredible
amenities and this beautiful
contemporary home yeah with the sound of
the water feature the Landscaping all
the little palm trees everything and
then we have a really cool area at the
back of this property which we'll get to
in a minute absolutely and personally
the color here the energy water feature
Landscaping all of it coming together I
really dig this backyard now it guess
better we're going to go this way for a
second there's a nice covered seating
area here two couches TV's nicely reset
thin you have your built-ins fireplace
down below I also like how they use
stack stone Behind These open shelves
with LED lighting it just gives it a
nice texture when it gets really hot you
can sit down enjoy the outdoors here and
they even have curbs for you to bring
some more shade if needed or privacy
this is actually one of my favorite
spots in the backyard when we first got
here I flew the Drone and I sat back
there for about 45 minutes it was very
relaxing it's a pretty cool spot yeah
now we're in the center of the backyard
look at this pool glass front sunken
seating area pool looks very inviting
you have your lounging beds and now
let's go to the other side your raised
hot tub look at the water feature that's
behind that adding some Tranquility to
this backyard and before we check out
the P Cabana I want to mention we have a
full bathroom here for your backyard now
let's check out this amazing space bar
in the center you have your built-ins on
the back barbecue Pizza Oven fridges
down below ice maker sink massive screen
that is nicely Incorporated to the wall
this section is partially covered and
then you have additional outdoor seating
area here and this water feature and
this crazy home that's right behind me
this is pretty cool yeah it's a it's a
nice warm day in La I really want to
just dive into that pool right now it
looks really really uh inviting I
couldn't agree more there's actually one
more detail here I want to mention look
at these
vents it allows the air to come into the
space but it blocks the light that comes
in so it's just a nice way to create
some opening between the roof and on the
walls so that way you have nice airf
flow here as well we cool off the
space all right Michel let's continue
landscape here looks absolutely gorgeous
and then we have the steps here taking
us to another Landing Point look at the
way this space feels as we're walking to
the other side of the property every
single place every single corner you
look you have a plant or a tree and you
have these steps here taking you to a
putting green which is always a fun
touch yeah and it's another uh signature
of raina's Ry detail right there you
know he puts it in all of his homes now
welcome to the pickle ball court come on
does it get any better this is so cool
have you played pickle ball before we
keep talking about it uh would like to
yeah like I would like to get into it
it's basically ping pong on a bigger
scale or tennis on a smaller scale you
that's right
ready all right let's have a good game
doing these House tours can be very
exhausting round two so my crew and I
decide to have a quick game of pickle
ball Come On Son
motivation it's nice that you have a
pickle Bow Court within your property
come on and how private is this backyard
you don't have any
neighbors I got to walk around look at
the backdrop seriously yeah it's so cool
it's so different and then if that
wasn't enough you have this massive
Buddha statue which is also a water
feature to add more Tranquility to this
backyard super cool it's really relaxing
but this is the part I've been looking
forward to right here take a look at
this Michael Jordan branded basketball
court this is cool this is incredible
it seems like you live a very balance
entertaining and full life how do you
balance it all how do you make so much
time for your family family is
everything to me I me you know that the
these boys my little ones they're been
my best friends they come with you
wherever you go oh yeah yeah you know
they're my biggest fans I talk to them
about everything things like you would
not talk to you know what 11 14y old but
um we're very very close they motivate
me unfortunately I didn't get a too much
time to spend with my dad came from uh
During the Revolution 78 we had to go
ahead and get out and we got here to us
D to work two jobs so I didn't get a
chance to really see him at all and that
kind of stuck with me and I promis
myself it's going to be the total
opposite you know I'm with them all the
time and and I enjoy hanging out with
them a lot of times you know it's going
to dinner with your buddies or these
guys hey man guys let's go to dinner I
mean you said something really important
to me uh like literally few minutes ago
you were like they're like my best
friends
yeah so this is the fourth property of
raina's rties that we've toured correct
yall may remember the first tour we did
in Brentwood correct he had a big kind
of Lakers and Kobe themed basketball
court exactly kind of can of Levering
over a hillside really unique you know
really unique this feels like we're in a
jungle though on a basketball court it's
really nice it is super nice and we also
had the privilege to tour Michael
Jordan's home in Chicago what an
experience that was yeah that every
every now and then Inn and I kind of go
to these videos go to these shoots and
it feels like a new Benchmark or a new
or a new level you know I remember the
first time we did a big yacht we were
walking around it was like a $100
million do yacht and we were like okay
this is something very new Michael
Jordan shoot at the time was definitely
the Pinnacle for us and not only that we
got two-day access to the property and
just walking around the grounds and the
whole experience was quite amazing I got
to say yeah 100% And yeah you have your
basketball court here Mikey actually
let's turn around for a second look how
far the house is away from us this
backyard is insane super private it's
been a lot of
fun now we're going to continue our tour
with this bedroom on the second floor
KingSize bed hardwood floors built-in
Cabinetry this room actually is front-
facing comes with its own balcony too
and we have the full bathroom right here
with a walk-in shower and and a floating
Vanity now before we exit got to love
this built-in desk area as well mhm now
on the other side we have another
spacious bedroom that comes with a
queen-size bed of course you have your
full bathroom and this bedroom here
which is the second bedroom on this
floor is facing the side now going back
to the hallway we have the laundry room
here let's go have a quick look you have
your washer and dryer built-in Cabinetry
even the laundry room gets a corner with
window yeah something youall don't know
about these shoots I have to say
whenever we get to these houses we have
a lot of equipment we have a lot of gear
and we always have to find somewhere in
these houses to put it where it won't be
seen in the tour typically we would do a
laundry room or something like that we
spent a lot of time in laundry rooms we
brought our gear up here and we were
like this laundry room is too nice we
can't put our gear in here uh we have to
go in there and walk in on camera I
agree with that yeah for sure so really
nice spacious laundry room now let's go
back we have the third bedroom right
here this one is facing the backyard you
again have your queen-size bed balcony
that faces the backyard walk-in closet
full bathroom everything you need and
this is the third bedroom on this level
now we are on the bridge right now and
let's take a close look at this living
Moss wall design look at the Skylight
that's above us bringing so much natural
light which is the light needed to feed
these living Moss walls then you have
chandeliers above the drop here where
you can look down to your great room
this is fantastic and look at the design
palette here as well pretty
crazy let's talk about the Moss wall for
a second yeah I feel like each project
these walls are getting bigger and
Bolder what's about moss or living
malles in general that you personally
really like it's an art piece right it's
a live art piece well the property that
we Tor in Belair definitely has an
amazing Moss wall yeah it's a little bit
of different feeling different location
than out here again this is just little
more toned down Zen Green Zen exactly
and I feel like you use these Moss walls
as opportunity to bring color to your
properties 100% you know it gives it a
little pop especially with the Skylight
above for example I mean just look at
that natural light that is hitting it
right now the different colors that it
puts together and then doing Twilight
when that moon hits it it's just a
totally different
tone this is design here gives so much
life and color to this house I really
dig it y me too now let's continue our
tour we're at the staircase Landing now
primary bedroom is on our left hand side
this bedroom is absolutely insane over
3,000 ft and we're going to see that in
a second and the door here takes you up
to the rooftop deck we're going to tour
that last now let's check out this wing
and the first space we're going to cover
is the office before we fully commit to
this office there's something I have to
ask though tell us about the shoes so
they're a little bit different they are
a little bit different so my dear friend
Dominic also known as the shoe surgeon
designed and made these shoes they're
Air Force Ones but they're made out of
crocodile Lea you know my style I like
to go minimalist with what I wear I
don't wear too much color we get a close
so uh he was kind enough to design these
shoes for me we worked on it together
and it was a really fun
project as most of you know I have a
passion for AR artistic design and
quality craftsmanship so I want to give
you a quick behind the-scenes look at
the shoe surgeon incredible Design
Studio this is our customization
Workshop area we set it up where people
can come you can grab a shoe you can
customize it in addition to hosting
workshops for crafting handmade shoes
this studio also has a basketball court
a bar and an insane collection of rare
and custom
shoes Dominic explains to us what makes
these shoes so unique you know we use
very expensive materials we take apart
the Louis Vuitton bags that cost
$115,000 just for the bags this is a
clear leather this originally this
leather was designed for Rick Owens for
jackets it's clear leather see-through
leather and I put it over a shoe and
like made a design and then over time it
it gets hard and it cracks this is the
real British pound we got the $5 bill I
had a client that was wanted it more
expensive so we did sueded Croc and then
did a $100 bills for
Dominic offered me to make my very own
custommade sneakers and I could not say
no a few weeks later I came back and was
amazed at the result American alligator
white black we wanted to keep it clean
something that you can wear in a suit
something like this would go around
$155,000 this is
incredible all right and what do you
think I really like it Mike when I got
the opportunity to work with Dominic to
create a one-off shoe of course I said
yes but not only that now I see the end
product I see different materials used
on the shoe and I'm the only one that
has
it so yeah if you like custom shoes if
you're interested I'm going to leave
Dominic's links in the description make
sure to check it out uh he is the best
at what he does and it's just honestly
fascinating to watch him work yeah so
yeah we'll leave his links in the
description I've just gotten kind of
into shoes in the last like two years uh
but I know it's uh really popular online
his Instagram has all this designs it's
it's really cool absolutely now let's
come back to the office we have the desk
here wood paneled walls open shelving
fireplace to Cozy up to space nicely
decorated and furnished and I like that
it has a glass enclosed section up front
so you get more natural light here and
it's right off the landing of the second
floor now let's continue our tour last
bedroom on this level besides the
primary bedroom I really like this art
piece here made out of cardboard I just
realized what it was out of as you said
that uh creative yeah it's really cool
built-in desk here more open shelving
look how spacious this room is obviously
comes with a king-size bed but this can
easily be another office I love the
corner exposure because we have two
massive picture windows and one of the
windows actually has a door that opens
up to a wraparound balcony and you have
your full bathroom with a beautiful
stone walk-in closet bedrooms are very
very spacious and I know I cut some of
these bedroom tours really short because
we have so many now let's check out the
3,000 foot primary bedroom I want
everybody to get the full experience
that's why we're going to start off of
the entry of course you have a pivot
door that opens up to the room come on
in first we have the seating section of
the primary bedroom you have your couch
coffee tables double-sided fireplace TV
above beautiful wood clad ceilings and
you even get a really nice size balcony
that faces your backyard it also comes
with a fire pit more built-ins on this
side and this is just the seating
section of the primary bedroom now you
go this way to the bedroom itself and
look at the scale here you get your
king-size bed with a nice bed frame on
the back then you have your paneled
walls as well as ceilings to give more
warmth to the space multiple seating
areas and you even have a bar here with
a M coffeee maker fridge down belill
and look how big this bedroom is yeah I
really like always when they put natural
elements like Woods in bedrooms uh and
they have this like gray wallpaper I
don't know it's it's different than just
white and wood combo you know oh yeah
and it contrasts nicely too yeah and
over here we have the first closet this
one is the small one I can't believe I'm
saying this because it's actually a
really good size closet obviously the
entire system is on tracks that way you
can adjust the height of these drawers
open Shelf or hangers however you like
you have an island in the center
Chandelier and this is the first closet
second one is twice the size of this one
which is crazy now follow me this way
let's check out the primary bathroom it
feels like I'm going into a Lobby look
how spacious this bathroom is look how
little I look here it's massive it's
massive two water closets off of the
entry we have the first vanity here and
the reveal detail or the front of this
vanity is is actually almost Old Stone
which is not something we see quite
often and on the back we have this book
match Stone behind the mirror that
resembles a heart yeah and there's a few
more of them behind you few more of them
correct all right I'm going in to this
Walkin
shower this might be the biggest Walkin
shower we've ever seen yeah this is
absolutely massive Mikey come on in with
me like yeah I mean we could we could
fit the whole crew in here no problem
it's all Stone clad obviously you have
your rain head above shower head on this
side handheld steam feature and a
built-in
bench a lot to take care very big Walkin
shower now let's continue we have the
other vanity on the other side design
elements are pretty much the same Big
Stone counter top Cabinetry on the
bottom and then we have the free
standing tub here against this glass
wall looking down to your backyard and
you can simply enjoy this chanle setup
from your primary bathroom now let's
check out the the main walk-in closet
come on in tell me if this closet is not
massive yeah we keep saying that but
like how can we not the scale of
everything in this house is absolutely
huge massive island in the center
chandelier built-in Cabinetry floating
shelves hangers you have everything you
need here and there's actually an
exterior door that opens up to a balcony
with a fire pit where you can enjoy your
backyard and this tranquil
property
welcome to the roof up deck we're going
to start our tour with this section
outdoor dining area really nice bar with
some bar seating and then we have the
Skylight over here which is massive this
is the section that brings natural light
to the great room on the first floor and
continuing our tour another outdoor
seating area with an L-shaped fire pit
another one on the other side and your
rooftop deck continues lounging beds
more outdoor seating the scale of this
rooftop is insane and you have your
outdoor TV here look at the
backdrop so usually what do you see on
the roof you come on the roof and you'll
go ahead and you'll see air conditioning
and just a big mess with that right this
is another outdoor space and it's an
expensive outdoor space I was just going
to say just leaving it as a roof would
save you so much money and so much
headache too you know as soon as you
make it a usable space now you got to
worry about waterproofing differently
and you have safety measures you need to
frame it differently it's so much more
work I always try to emphasize this
anytime we see a rooftop deck just
letting you know developer really went
out of their way to make sure that you
get this outdoor space but I feel like
you're always about maximizing and
giving as much as possible definitely it
could be just you know whoever's living
in the house could be the kids coming up
here hey you're having an event you want
to go ahead and come up here and just
have your event upstairs I mean you
could have a beautiful event up here for
over a 100 people easily how do you sure
that this B is safe so one thing that
changes is the whole structureal right
now you're going full steel yeah right
so just the cost to be able to go if we
were not going to go ahead and do a roof
deck and holding the weight of over a
100 people you're probably saving close
to maybe a
million there you go easily that's in
just construction cost alone definitely
construction and there's time delay and
all that other stuff I mean the whole
nine yards you know but just the whole
structural design of it between lumber
and steel right which is a big price
difference and then all the finishes
with the waterproofing going on over
here and all the wood decking and
everything else that has to
happen this is crazy the amount of outdo
square footage you get with this home
think about it think about the entire
first floor the backyard pickle ball
cord basketball court a lot to take in
and yeah this is the rooftop
deck your houses light up so well at
night that's one one of the reasons why
we like touring properties at night
because it lives so differently to me
Twilight is extremely important it has
to look just as good if not better in
the evening than it does during
daytime I mean you walk in during the
day you walking around you already in
love and then you come back at night
time and you just you just obsessed and
it's game
over
all right everyone that's it for the
tour hope you all enjoyed this video big
thanks to rampton Ros for making this
tour possible and as always you can find
more information about this property in
the description of this video so make
sure to check it out now if you enjoyed
our tour give us a like subscribe and
we'll see you guys on the next
one Sange yeah another one maybe
yesterday he made this let
oh well he just made it again first try
first try yesterday was the same too
Mike you were you recording that all
right great you got it yeah
