this is a fun book to read because then
you just mention in there what the
original sources to read to you know
it's like the um it's like the heral
bloom of Economics right you just like
it's a book written for smart
people um okay so let's just jump into
it the book we're talking about is um
goat who is the greatest Economist of
all time and why does it matter all
right let's start with K's so in the
section in canes um you quote him I
think talking about Robert Marshall he
says Alfred Marshall oh sorry Alfred
Marshall he says um the master Economist
must possess a rare combination of gifts
he must be a mathematician historian
Statesman philosopher no part of man's
nature uh man's nature or his
institutions must lie entirely outside
his regard and you say well kanes is
obviously talking about himself because
he was all those things and he was
arguably the only person who was all
those things at the time he must have
known that okay well you know what I'm
going to ask
now
um so what should we make of Tyler Cowen
citing canes uh using this quote a quote
that's also applies to Tyler Cowen I
don't think it applies to me uh what's
the exact list again am I a Statesman
did I play a role at the Treaty of
Versailles or something comparable I
don't know we're in Washington I'm sure
you talk to all the people who matter
quite a bit well I guess I'm more of a
Statesman than most economists but I
don't come close to K's in the breadth
of his high level achievement in each of
those
areas um okay let's talk about them uh
those achievements so chapter 12 general
theory of Interest employment and money
um here's a quote it is probable that
the actual average result of Investments
even during periods of progress and
prosperity have disappointed the hopes
which promoted them if human nature felt
no temptation to take a chance no
satisfaction profit apart in
constructing a factory a railway a mine
or a farm there might not be much
investment merely as a result of cold
calculation
now it's a fascinating idea that
investment is irrational uh or most
investment throughout history has been
irrational but when we think today about
the fact that active investing exists
you know uh for venor CIS like reasons
VCS probably make on average less
returns than uh the market um there's a
whole bunch of different examples you
can go through right uh m&amp;a uh usually
doesn't achieve the Synergy as it
expects uh throughout history has more
most investment been selfish to
irrational well Adam Smith was the first
one I know to have made this point that
projectors I think he called them are
overly optimistic so people who do
startups are overly optimistic people
who have well-entrenched VC franchises
make a lot of money and there's some
kind of bifurcation in the distribution
right then there's a lot of others who
are just playing at it and maybe hoping
to break
even so the rate of return on private
investment if you include small
businesses it's highly skewed and just a
few perent of the people doing this make
anything at all so there's a lot to what
Cain said I don't think he described it
adequately in terms of a probability
distribution but then again he probably
didn't have the data but I wouldn't
reject it out of hand another example
here is uh this is something uh your
colleague Alex to Brock talks about a
lot is that innovators don't internalize
most of the gains they give to society
so here's another example where uh you
know the entrepreneur compared to one of
his first employees is he that much
better off for taking the extra risk and
working that harder um what does this
tell us about um is a it's a marvelous
Insight that you know we're actually
more risk-seeking than it's selfishly uh
selfishly uh good for us that was ruen
Brenner's claim in some of his books on
risk again I think you have to
distinguish between different parts of
the distribution so it seems there's a
very large number of people who
foolishly start small businesses maybe
they overly value autonomy when they
ought to just get a job with a
relatively stable company
so their part of the thesis is correct
and I doubt if there's really big social
returns to whatever those people do even
if they could make a go of it but
there's another part of the distribution
people who are actually innovating or
have realistic prospects of doing so
where I do think those social returns
are very high now that 2% figure that's
cited a lot I don't think it's really
based in much real it's maybe not a
crazy seat of the pants estimate but
people think like we know it's 2% and we
really don't so look at Picasso right he
helped generate cubism with Brock and
some other artists how good is our
estimate of Picasso's income compared to
the spin-offs from Picasso we just don't
really know right we don't know it's 2%
it could be 1% it could be
6% how different do you think it is in
art versus uh I don't know
entrepreneurship versus different kinds
of Entrepreneurship there's different
Industries there as well right I'm not
sure it's that different so say if some
people start blogging a lot of people
copy them right well some people start
painting in a particular style a lot of
people copy them I'm not saying the
numbers are the same but they don't
sound like issues that in principle are
so different in 2% overestimate or
underestimate it might be wrong but in
which way is it wrong uh my seat of the
pants estimate would be 2 to 5% so I
think it's pretty close but again that's
not based on anything firm here's
another quote from KES uh investment
based on genuine long-term expectation
is so difficult as to be scarcely
practicable he who attempts it must
surely lead much more laborious days and
run greater risk than he who tries to
guess better than the crowd how the
crowd will behave um so one way to look
at this is like oh he just doesn't
understand uh efficient market
hypothesis it's like before random walks
or something but uh there's things you
can see in the market today where uh you
know are the prospects for future
dividend so much higher after Co than
they were immediately after the crash um
how much of Market Behavior can be
explained by these sorts of uh claims
from kanes I think KES had the view that
for his time you could be a short-run
Speculator and in fact beat the markets
and he believed that he did so and at
least he did for some periods of his
life that may have been luck or maybe he
did have special Insight uh it probably
wasn't true in general though we don't
really know did efficient markets hold
during you know Britain at that time
maybe there just were profit
opportunities for smarter than average
people uh so that's a view I'm inclined
not to believe it but again I don't
think it's absurd KES is saying for
people who want money this is Spas
toward the short term you can get your
profits and get
out and that's damaging long-term
investment which in fact he want it to
socialize so he's being led to a very
bad place by the argument but again we
should didn't dismiss it out of hand why
is it not easy to retrospectively study
what how efficient markets were back
then in the same way we can study it now
in terms of like oh you look at um uh
the price earnings ratios and then what
were the dividends afterwards over the
coming decades for those companies based
on their stock price or something I
don't know uh how many publicly traded
firms there were in Britain at that time
I don't know how good the data are
things like bid ask spread at what price
you actually executed trades can really
matter for testing efficient markets
hypothesis so uh probably we can't tell
even though there must be share pric
data of some sort at what frequency well
is it once a day is it once a week uh we
don't have the sort of data we have now
where you can just test anything you
want he he also made a interesting point
as like not only is it not profitable
but even if you succeed um the society
will look at the contrarian in a very
negative light uh you will be like
doubly punished for being being a
contrarian but that doesn't seem to be
the case right like if somebody like
Warren Buffett or Charlie merer people
who do be the market are actually pretty
revered they're not punished uh in
public opinion and they pursued mostly
long-term strategies right but again
trying to make sense of can's if you
think about long-term investing and I
don't think he meant buffet style
investing I think he meant building
factories trying to figure out what
people would want to buy 25 years from
that point in time uh that probably was
much harder than today so you had way
less access to data your ability to
build an international supply chain was
much weaker uh geopolitical turmoil at
various points in time was much higher
so again it's not a crazy view I think
there's a lot in K it's very much of his
time that he presents out of a kind of
overconfidence as being General and it's
not General it may not even be true but
there were some reasons why you could
believe it uh another quote from KES uh
I guess I want to read the whole quote
and full but basically says over time as
Investments go or markets get more
mature more and more of equities are
held basically by passive investors
people who don't have a direct hand in
the involvement of the Enterprise um and
you know the the the share of the market
that's passive investment now is much
bigger should we be worried about this
as long as at the margin people can do
things I'm not very worried about it so
there's two different kinds of worries
one is that no one monitors the value of
companies it seems to me those
incentives aren't weaker there's more
research than ever before there's may be
a problem not enough companies are
publicly held but you can always if you
know something the rest of the market
doesn't buy or sell short and do better
the other worry is those passive
investors have economies of scale and
they'll end up colluding with each other
and you'll have say like three to five
mutual funds private Equity firms owning
a big chunk of the market portfolio and
in essence directly or indirectly
they'll tell those firms not to compete
it's a weird form of collusion
they don't issue explicit instructions
like say the same few mutual funds own
Coke and Pepsi should Coke and Pepsi
compete or should they collude well they
might just pick lazier managers who in
some way give you implicit
collusion maybe this is another example
of the uh innovators being unable to
internalize their gains as an active
investors who are providing this
information to the market you know they
don't make out that much better than the
passive investors but they're actually
providing a valuable Service uh but this
the benefits are diffused through
throughout Society
I think overconfidence helps us on that
front so there's quote unquote too much
trading from a private point of view but
from a social point of view maybe you
can only have too much trading or too
little trading and you might rather have
too much trading explain that why why
why is there why can it only be too much
or too little well let's say the
relevant Choice variable is investor
temperament so yes you'd prefer it if
everyone had the temperament just to do
what was socially optimal but if
temperament is
some this in inclination in you and you
can just be overconfident or not
confident enough and overconfidence
gives you too much trading that might be
the best we can do again fine-tuning
would be best of all but I've never seen
humans where you could just fine-tune
all their emotions to the point where
they ought to be yeah okay so we can ask
a question how far above optimal are we
or if we are above optimal uh in the
chapter Kane says that over time as
markets get more mature they become more
speculative and the example he gives us
like the New York Market seems
speculative to him than the London
Market at a time um but today finances
8% of GDP uh is is that what we should
expect it to be to uh to efficiently
allocate capital is there some reason we
can just look at that number and PR fash
you say that that's too big I think the
relevant number for the financial sector
is what percentage it is of wealth not
GDP so you're managing wealth and the
financial sector has been a pretty
constant 2% of wealth for a few decades
in the United States with bumps obvious
obviously 2008 matters but it's more or
less 2% and that makes it sound a lot
less Sinister it's not actually like
growing at the expense of something and
eating up the economy so you you would
prefer it's less than 2% right but 2%
does not sound outrageously High to me
and if the ratio of wealth to GDP grows
over time which it tends to do when you
have durable capital and no major Wars
uh the financial sector will grow
relative to GDP but again that's not
Sinister think of it in in terms of
wealth I see so one way to think about
it is like the the management cost as a
fraction of the assets under management
or something
and is not that bad yeah okay
interesting um I want to go back to the
the risk aversion thing again because I
don't know how to think about this so
you know his whole thing is these Animal
Spirits they guide us to make all these
bets and uh engage in all this activity
um in some sense it's he's saying like
uh not only are we not risk neutral but
we're more risk-seeking than is uh than
is rational whereas
the the way You' conventionally think
about it is that humans are risk averse
right they they have uh they prefer to
take less risk than is rational in some
sense um how do we score this well here
Milton Friedman another goat Contender
comes into the picture so his famous
piece with Savage makes the point that
risk aversion is essentially context
dependent so he was a behavioral
Economist before we knew of such things
so the same people typically will buy
insurance and gamble gambling you can
interpret quite broadly
and that's the right way to think about
it so just flat out risk aversion or
risk loving Behavior it doesn't really
exist almost everyone is context
dependent now why you choose the context
you do maybe it's some kind of exercise
and mood management so you insure your
house so you can sleep well at night you
fire insurance but then you get a little
bored and to stimulate yourself you're
you're betting on these NBA games and
yes that's foolish but it keeps you busy
and it helps you follow analytics and
you read about the games online and
maybe that's efficient mood management
and that's the way to think about uh
risk behavior I don't bet by the way I
mean you could say I bet with my career
but I don't bet on things what what is
the way in what's your version of the
lottery shed what is the thing where you
just uh for the entertainment value or
the distraction value you you take more
risk than uh than would seem
rational well like writing the book goat
which is not with any known publisher
it's just online online it's free it's
published within
gp4 took me quite a while to write the
book uh I'm not sure there's a huge
downside but it's risky in the sense of
it's not what anyone else was doing so
that was a kind of risk I invested a lot
of my writing time in something weird
and I've done things like that pretty
frequently so that keeps me you could
say excited or like starting mru you
know the online education videos and
economics uh no pecuniary return to me
at all indirectly it costs me a lot of
money that's a sort of risk uh I feel
it's paid off for me in a big way but on
one hand you can say well Tyler what do
you actually have from that and the
answer is nothing yeah well this
actually raised the question I was going
to ask about these go contenders in
general and how you're judging them
where uh you're looking at their work as
a whole given that I don't know some of
these risk payoff that these
intellectuals take some of them don't
pay off should we just be looking at
their top contributions and just
disregard everything else for Hayek I
think one of the points you have against
him is that his top three articles are
amazing but after that there's a drop
off uh the top risk you take are they
the only ones that matter why are we
looking at the other stuff I don't think
they're the only ones that matter but
I'll wait them pretty heavily but your
failures do reflect usually in how you
think or what you know about the world
so highx failures for instance his
inability to come up with the normative
standard in constitution of Liberty uh
it shows in some ways he just wasn't
rigorous enough he was content with the
kind of Germanic put a lot of complex
ideas out there and hope they're
profound and you see that even in his
best work now that is
profound but it's not as if the failures
and the best work for all these people
are unrelated and same with Cain's like
kan's more or less changed his mind
every year that's a strength but it's
also a weakness and by considering C's
really good works and bad works like his
defenses of tarff
uh you see that and the best work he
also moved on from in some way if you
read how to pay for the war in 1940 if
you didn't know better you would think
it's someone criticizing the general
theory how uh do does quantity have a
quality of all of it own when you think
of great intellectuals where many of
these people have like volumes and
volumes of work was that necessary for
them to get the great ass sets or is the
rest of it just a distraction from the
things that really stand a test of time
uh for the best people it's necessary so
John Stuart Mill wrote an enormous
amount most of it's quite
interesting but his ability to see
things from multiple perspectives I
think was in part stemming from the fact
that he wrote a lot about many different
topics like French history ancient
Greece uh he had real depth and
breath if canes is alive today what are
the odds that he's in AP poin Berkeley
writing the V and less wrong post you've
ever
seen I'm not sure what the
counterfactual mean so canes is so
British
maybe he's an effective altruist at
Cambridge and you know given how he
seems to have run a sex life I don't
think he needed a polycule like a
polycule is almost a williamsonian
device to economize on transactions
costs paines according to his own notes
seems to have done things on a very
casual basis he had a spreadsheet right
of his a spreadsheet and from Context it
appears he met these people very
casually and didn't need to be embedded
in oh where the five people who get
together regularly so that's not a
hypothetical we saw we think we saw what
he did and uh I think he'd be at
Cambridge right that's where he was why
should he not today be at Cambridge how
did a person um how did a gay
intellectual get that amount of
influence in the Britain of that time
when you think of somebody like Alan
touring you know helps Britain win World
War II and is castrated uh because of uh
you know one elstic encounter that is
caught uh did it was it just not public
how did he get away with it basically I
don't think it was a secret about canes
he had interacted with enough people
that I think it was broadly known he was
politically very powerful he was astute
as someone managing his career he was
one of the most effective people you
could say of all time not just amongst
economists and I've never seen evidence
that canes was in any kind of danger
uring Also may have intersected with
National Security concerns in a
different way I'm not sure we know the
full Allan touring story and why it went
as badly as it did uh but there was in
the past very selectively and I do mean
very selectively more tolerance of
deviance than people today sometimes
realize oh interesting and Kane's
benefited from that but again I would
stress the word selectively say more
what determines who is selected for this
tolerance I don't feel I understand that
very well but there's plenty say in
Europe and Britain of the early 20th
century where quote unquote outrageous
things were done and it's hard to find
evidence that people were punished for
it now what accounts for the difference
between them and the people who were
punished I would like to see a very good
book on that H um yeah I guess it's
similar to our time right we have
certain tabos and you can get away with
get away with them completely they say
whatever on Twitter and other people get
cancelled actually how have you got away
with I feel like you've never been in at
least as far as I know I haven't heard
you being the part of any single
controversy but uh Ops out there I feel
people have been very nice to me yeah
what' you do how did you become the
canes of our time if we're comparing M
Stakes after all
right um I think just being good-natured
yeah helps and helping a lot of people
helps and Turing I'm a huge fan of WR
wrote a paper on him with Michelle
Dawson but it's not obvious that he was
a very good Diplomat and it seems he
very likely was a pretty terrible
Diplomat and that might be feeding into
this difference how do you think about
the long-term value of um and the
long-term impact of intellectuals you
disagree with so do you think over the
course of history basically the
improvements they make to the discourse
and the additional things they give us a
chance to think about that washes out
their object level uh the things they
were object level wrong about or well
it's worked that way so far right so
we've had economic growth obviously with
interruptions but so much has fed into
the stream and you have to be pretty
happy with today's world compared with
say 1880 uh the future may or may not
bring us the same but if the future
brings us continuing economic growth
then I'm going to say exactly that oh be
happy they fed into the stream they may
have been wrong but things really worked
out but if the future brings us a
shrinking population ASM totically
approaching a very low level and greater
poverty and more war and you've got to
wonder well who who is responsible for
that right who would be responsible for
that
uh we don't know but I think secular
thinkers will fall in relative status if
that's the outcome and that's most
prominent intellectuals today myself
included yeah who who who would rise in
status as a result well there's a number
of people complaining strenuously about
fertility
declines uh if there's more war probably
the Hawks will rise in status whether or
not they should an alternative scenario
is that the pacifist rise in status but
I basically never see the pacifists
rising in status for any more than brief
moments like after the Vietnam War maybe
they did after World War
I yes but again that didn't last because
World War II swept all that away right
so the pacifists seem to lose long-term
status no matter
what and that means the Hawks would gain
in status and those worried about
fertility and whatever technology drives
the new Wars if that is what happens
let's say it's drones it's possible
right uh people who warned Against
drones which is not currently that big a
thing there are quite a few such people
but there's no one out there
known for worrying about drones the way
I say eler is worried about known for
worrying about AI now drones in a way
are AI but it's different yeah Al that
Freedman St Armstrong other people have
you know talked about we're not that far
away from does like I guess you have
assassinate millions of views whoever
made that would rise I think was no
sorry not anyways yeah but those people
could end up as much more important than
they are now yeah okay let's talk about
Hayek sure um so I before we get into
his actual views I I think his career is
a tremendous white pill in the sense
that he writes the rotis surom in 1944
uh when Nazi Germany and Soviet Union
are both you know prominent uh players
and honestly like the the way things
shaked out uh I mean he would be pretty
pleased that like a lot of the biggest
collectivism of the day have been uh
wiped out so it is a tremendous WIP
you're going to have a career like that
he
was uh not as right as he thought at the
time but he ended up being too grumpy in
his later years really he thought well
collectivism is still going to engulf
the world and I think he became a grumpy
old man and and maybe it's one thing to
be a grumpy old man in 2024 but to be a
grumpy old man in the 80s didn't seem
justified what was the cause what like
what specifically did he see that he he
thought they were atavistic instincts in
the the human Spirit which were
biologically built in that led us to be
collectivists right and too envious and
not appreciative of how impersonal
orders worked and that this would cause
the West to turn into something quite
crummy I wouldn't say he's been proven
wrong but a lot of the West has had a
pretty good run since then and uh
there's not major evidence that he's
correct the bad events we've seen like
some War coming
back uh something weird in our politics
I'm not sure how to describe it I'm not
sure they fit the hyek model sort of
Simply the accretion of more
socialism um but in terms of the basic
psychological urges towards envy and
resentment does the rise of wokeness
provide evidence for his view but now
wokness I would say is peaked and is
falling that's a big debate I I don't
see wokness as our biggest problem I see
excessive bureaucracy sclerotic
institutions cludge ocracy as bigger
problems they're not unrelated to
openness to be clear but I think they're
more fundamental and harder to fix let's
talk about hi's hi's arguments so
obviously he has a famous argument about
decentralization but when we look at
companies like Amazon Uber these other
big 10 companies they actually do a
pretty good job of central planning
right there's like a sea of logistics
and drivers and uh um tradeoffs that
they have to square uh do they provide
evidence that Central planning can work
well I'm not a Coan so Coen is famous
1937 article said the firm is planning
and he contrasted that to the market
right I think the firm is the market the
firm is always making contracts in the
market is subject to Market checks and
balances to me it's not you know an
island of central planning in the
broader froth of the market so I'm just
not Coan so people are a Coan this is an
embarrassing question for them but I'll
just say Amazon being great is the
market working and they're not centrally
planning even the Soviet Union it was
very bad but it didn't end up being C
planning it started off that way for a
few years so I think people misinterpret
large business firms in many ways on
both the left and the right wait but
under this argument it still adds to the
Credence of the people who argue that
basically we need the government to
control because if it is the case that
Soviet Union is still uh not Central
planning people would say well but yeah
but that's kind of what I want in terms
of there's still kind of checks in terms
of import exports of the market test has
still applied to the government in that
sense
uh what's wrong with that argument that
basic can treat the government as that
kind of firm I'm not sure I followed
your question I would say this I view
the later Soviet Union as being highly
decentralized managers optimizing their
own rents and setting prices too low to
take in bribes Allah Paul Craig Roberts
what he wrote in the 80s and that's a
very bad decentralized system and it was
sort of backed up by something highly
Central Communist party and the
USSR but it's not like the early
attempts at true Central planning in the
Soviet Union in the 20s right after the
revolution which did totally fail and
were abandoned pretty quickly even by
Lenin uh would you kind the 50s period
in the Soviet Union as more centrally
planned than or more decentralized by
that point decentralized you have
Central plans for a number of things
obviously Weaponry steel production you
have targets but even that tends to
collapse into decentralized action just
with bad incentives so your explanation
for why did the Soviet Union have high
growth in the
50s is it more catchup is it more that
they weren't communist at the time how
would you explain it a lot of the Soviet
high growth was rebuilding after the war
which Central planning can do relatively
well right you see government rebuilding
cities say in Germany that works pretty
well but most of all this is even before
World War II just
urbanization uh it shouldn't be
underrated today given we've observed
China but so much of Chinese growth was
driven by urbanization so so much of
Soviet growth you take someone working
on a farm producing almost nothing put
them in the city even under a bad system
they're going to be a lot more
productive and that drove so much of
Soviet growth before after the war but
that at some point more or less ends
right as it has well it hasn't quite
ended with China but it certainly slowed
down and people don't pay enough
attention to that I don't know why it
now seems pretty obvious uh but but
going back to the the point about firms
so I guess I I the point I was trying to
make is I don't understand why the
argument you make that well these firms
are still within the market in the sense
that they they have to pass these Market
tests uh why that couldn't also apply to
government directed production because
then people well sometimes it does right
government runs a bunch of
Enterprises uh they may have Monopoly
positions but many are open to the
market in Singapore government hospitals
compete with private hospitals
government hospitals seem to be fine I
know they get some means of support yeah
but they're not all terrible
but I guess as a general principle you'd
be against more government uh directed
production right well depends on the
context so if it's say the military uh
probably we ought to be building a lot
more of some particular things and it
will be done through Boeing Lockheed and
so on but the government's directing it
paying for it in some way quote unquote
planning it and we need to do that we've
at times done that well in the past so
people overrate the distinction between
government and Market I think especially
libertarian
but that said there's an awful lot of
government bureaucracy that's terrible
doesn't have a big Market check but very
often governments act through markets
and have to contract or hire Consultants
or hire outside parties and it's more
like a market than you
think um I want to ask about another
part part of Hayek so he has an argument
about how it it's really hard to
aggregate information towards a central
planner but then more recently there
have been results in computer science
that just finding the general
equilibrium as computationally
intractable um and which raises the
question well the market is somehow
solving this problem right separ from
the problem getting information make it
use making use of that information to
allocate scarce resources um how how is
that computationally a process that's
possible uh you know I'm sure you're
aware like the linear optimization
non-convex constraints how does the
market solve this problem well the
Market's not solving for a general
equilibrium it's just solving for
something that gets us into the next day
and that's a big part of the Triumph
just living to fight another day wealth
not going down not everyone quitting and
if you can do that things will get
better and that's what we're pretty good
at doing is just building a sustainable
structure and a lot of it isn't
sustainable like the fools Who start
these new small businesses but they do
pretty quickly disappear and that's part
of the market as well so if you view the
whole thing in terms of computing a
general equilibrium I think one of
Hayek's great insights is that's just
the wrong way to think about the whole
problem so lack of computational ability
to do that doesn't worry me for either
the market or planning because it to the
extent planning does work it doesn't
work by succeeding at that like
Singaporean public hospitals don't work
because they solve some computational
problem they seem to work because the
people running them care about doing a
good job and enough of the workers go
along with that yeah so related to that
I think in the meaning of competition he
makes the point that um the most
interesting part of markets is when they
go from one equilibrium to another
because that's where they're trying to
figure they figure out what to produce
and how to produce it better and so on
and not the equilibriums themselves and
it seemed related to the P teal point in
0 to one that uh Monopoly is when you
have interesting things happen because
when there's just competitive
equilibrium there's no profits to uh
invest in R&amp;D or to do cool new things
do those seem like related points am I
reading absolutely in high access a
competition as a discovery process or
procedure uh makes that point very
explicitly and that's one of his hand
full of greatest essays one of the
greatest essays in all of
Economics is there a contradiction in
Hayek in the sense that the
decentralization he's calling for uh
results in the results in have
specialist having to use the very
scientism and statistical Aggregates of
course that ha underrate scientism
scientism is great it can be abused but
we all rely on scientism if you have an
mRNA vaccine in your arm well how do you
feel about scientism and so on how much
are we worry about
uh this opening up the whole system to
fragilities if there's like no one mind
that understands large parts of how
everything fits together people talk
about this in the context of if there's
a war in China and the The Producers
didn't think about that possibility when
they put valuable Manufacturing in
Taiwan and stuff like that no one mind
understanding things is inevitable under
all systems this gets into some of the
alignment debates right if you had one
mind that understood everything or could
control everything you have to worry a
great deal about the corruptibility of
that mind so leg ility transparency are
not per se good you want enough of them
in the right places but you need some
kind of
balance so I think uh Supply chains are
no longer an under analyzed problem but
until covid they were and they're a big
deal and the hakan argument doesn't
always work because the signal you have
is of the current price and that's not
telling you how high are the
inframarginal values if you get say cut
off from being able to buy vaccines from
India because you're you know at the
bottom of the queue so that was a
problem it was the market faing because
the price doesn't tell you infr marginal
values and when you move from some
ability to buy the output to zero those
inframarginal values really
matter what would Hayek make of AI
agents and the as they get more powerful
you have some Market between the AI
agents uh there's some sort of
decentralized order as a result what
insights would you have about that well
a lot of Hans wrote about these issues
including at George Mason in the 1980s
and I think some of those people even
talked to Hayek about this and my
recollection which is imperfect is that
he found all this very interesting and
in the spirit of his work and Don Lavoy
was leading This research paragram he
died prematurely of
cancer uh bill talo was also involved
and some of this has been written up a
and it is very haki and and George Mason
George Mason actually was a Pioneer in
this area well what do you make of a
agent the market between them and the
sort of infrastructure in order that
would that you need to facilitate that
they're going to replicate markets on
their own is has been my prediction and
I think they're going to evolve their
own currencies maybe at first they'll
use
Bitcoin but there'll be an entire
property rights will be based at least
at first on what we now call nfts I'm
not sure that will end up being the
right name for them but if you want
property rights in the so-called
imaginary world that's where you would
start with Bitcoin and nfds so I don't
know what percent of GDP this will be at
first it will be quite small but it will
grow over time and it's going to show
haak to have been right if I had had
these decentralized systems evolve do
you anticipate that it'll be sort of a a
completely different sphere and there's
like the AI agents economy and there's
the human economy and they obviously
they have links between them but it's
not intermixed like they're not on the
same social media or the same uh task
rabbit or whatever it's like a it's a
very separate infrastructure that's
needed to uh for the AI agents to talk
to themselves versus talk to humans I
don't see why we would enforce
segregation now you might have some
segregated Outlets like maybe X Twitter
well we'll keep off the Bots let's say
it can even manage to do that but if I
want to hire you know a proof reader I'm
going to deal with the AI sector and pay
them in Bitcoin and I'll just say to my
like personal AI assistant hey go out
and hire an AI and pay them with
whatever and then just not think about
it anymore and it will happen maybe
because there's like much higher
transaction cost with dealing with
humans and you interacting with the
human world whereas they can just send a
bunch of vectors to each other it's much
faster for them to just uh just like
have a separate dedicated infrastructure
for that and but transactions costs for
dealing with humans will fall because
you'll deal with their quote unquote
assistance right so you'll only deal
with the difficult human when you need
to and people who are very effective
will segregate their tasks in a way that
reflects their comparative advantage and
people who are not effective will be
very poor at that and that will lead to
some kind of bifurcation of personal
productivity
like how well do you will you know what
to delegate to your AI I'll predict
you'll be very good at it you may not
have figured it out yet M but say you're
like AA Plus on it and other people are
D that's a big comparative advantage for
you um so you we're talking I guess
about like gb5 level models when you
think in your mind about like okay this
is gb5 what happens with gb6 gb7 do you
see it just do you still think in the
frame of having a bunch of raas or does
it seem like a different sort of thing
at some point I'm not sure what those
numbers going up mean or what a gpt7
would look like or or how much smarter
it could get I think people make too
many assumptions there it could be the
real advantages are integrating it into
workflows by things that are not better
gpts at all and once you get to GPT say
5.5 I'm not sure you can just turn up
the dial on smarts and have it like
integrate general relativity and quantum
mechanics why not I don't think that's
how intelligence works and this is a
hakan point and some of these problems
there just may be no answer like maybe
the universe isn't that legible and if
it's not that legible the
gpt1 doesn't really make sense as a you
know a creature or
whatever is is isn't there high argument
to be made that listen you can have
billions of copies of these things uh
imagine the sort of decentralized order
that could result the amount of
decentralized Tass of knowledge that
billions of copies talking to each other
could have that in itself as an argument
to be made about the the whole thing as
a as an emergent order will be much more
powerful than we were anticipating well
I think it will be highly productive
what tacit knowledge means with AI I
don't think we understand yet is it by
definition all non-ac it or does the
fact that how gp4 works is not legible
to us or even its creators so much does
that mean it's possessing of tacet
knowledge or is it not knowledge see
none of those categories are well
thought out in my opinion so we need to
to restructure our whole discourse about
tacet knowledge in some new different
way but I agree these networks of AIS
even before like gpt1 they're going to
be super productive but they're still
going to face bottlenecks right and I
don't know how good they'll be at say
overcoming the behavioral bottlenecks of
actual human beings the bottlenecks of
the law and
Regulation and we're going to have more
regulation as we have more AIS right
yeah when you say there'll be
uncertainties I think you made this
argument when you were responding to
Alex SE on fossil future where he said
uncertainties also extend out into the
domain where there's a bad outcome or
much bigger outcome than you're
anticipating that's right so can we
apply the same uh argument to AI like
the fact that there is uncertainty is
also a reason for worry well it's always
reason for worry but there's uncertainty
about a lot of things and AI will help
us with those other uncertainties so on
net do you think more intelligence is
likely to be good or bad including
against X risk and I think it's more
likely to be good so if it were the only
risk I'd be more worried about it than
if there's a whole multitude of risks
but clearly there's a whole multitude of
risks but since people grew up in pretty
stable times they tend not to see that
in emotionally Vivid terms and then this
one monster comes along and they're all
terrified what would Hayek think of
prediction
markets well there were prediction
markets in Hayek's time I don't know
that he wrote about them but I strongly
suspect he would see them as markets
that through prices communicate
information but even at the like the
time of the Civil War there were
so-called bucket shops in the US and New
York where you would bet on things they
were betting markets with cash
settlement probably never called
prediction markets but they were exactly
that later on they were banned but it's
an outstanding thing there were betting
markets on lives in 17th century Britain
different attempts to outlaw them which
I think basically ended up succeeding
but under the table I'm sure it still
went on to some extent yeah the the
reason it's interesting to think about
this is because his whole argument about
the price system is that you can have a
single dial that Aggregates so much
information but it's precisely for this
and that for that reason it's so useful
to somebody who's trying to decide you
know based on that information but it's
precisely for this reason that it's so
aggregated that it's hard to learn about
any one particular input to that dial
but I would stress it's not a single
dial and whether hyek thought it was a
single dial I think you can argue that
either way so people in markets they
also observe quantities they observe
reaction speeds there's a lot of
Dimensions to prices other than just oh
oh this newspaper cost $4 uh the terms
on which it's advertised so markets work
so well because people are solving this
complex multi-dimensional problem and
the price really is not a sufficient
statistic the way it is in arohan De
breu and I think at times Hayek
understood that and at other times he
writes as if he doesn't understand it
but it's an important
Point somewhat related question what
does it tell us about the difficulty of
preserving good institutions good people
uh that the media age of our corations
18 years and they don't get better over
time right decade after decade what
Corporation there's very few
corporations that continue improving in
that way well I think some firms keep
improving for a long time so there are
Japanese firms that date back to the
17th century right they must be better
today or even in 1970 than they were way
back when uh like the leading four or
five Danish firms none of them are
younger than the 1920s so Maris uh you
know the firm that came up with OIC the
pharmaceutical firm uh they must be much
better than they were back then so right
they have to be so how that is possible
to me is a puzzle but I think in plenty
of cases it's true can really say that
the um the best firms in the world
aren't ones that have been improving
over time
uh you know if you look at the biggest
companies in by market cap it's not like
this is what it what it takes to get
there is hundreds of years of continual
refinement uh what does that tell us
about the world or just well not
hundreds of years but again don't be
overly biased by the US experience and
the tech sector there's around the world
plenty of firms that at least seem to
get better as they get older certainly
their market cap goes up some of that
might just be a population effect maybe
their productivity per some unit is in
some ways going down uh but that's a
very common case and why the US is such
an outlier is an interesting question
right Israel clearly is an outlier in a
sense they only have pretty young firms
right and they've done very well in
terms of growth can it be explained by
the fact that in these other countries
it's actually just harder to start a new
company not necessarily the older
companies are actually getting
better uh possibly but it does seem the
older companies are often getting better
right like in
Denmark so you know take China is pretty
much entirely new firms because of
Communism uh Japan in particular seems
to have a lot of very old firms I don't
know if they're getting better but I I
don't think you can write that off as a
possibility MH um this is Hayak in
competition as a discovery process and
it seems like he predicted nimbyism so
he says in a Democratic Society it would
be completely impossible using commands
that could not be regarded as just to
bring about those changes that are
undoubtedly necessary but the necessity
of which could not be strictly
demonstrated in a particular case uh so
it seems like he's kind of talking about
what we today call nism uh I'm sure
there's plenty of nism in earlier times
I me you look at the 19 Century debates
over restructuring Paris Houseman and
putting in the broader boulevards and
the like uh that met with very strong
opposition it's a kind of miracle that
it happened yeah uh is this is this a
thing that's inherent to the democratic
system I recently I interviewed Dominick
Cummings and obviously planning is a big
issue in the UK it seems like every
country has every Democratic country has
this kind of problem and most autocratic
countries have it too now China is an
exception they will probably slide into
some kind of an nism even if they stay
autocratic uh just people resist change
interest groups always matter public
opinion Allah David Hume always matters
and uh it's easy to not do anything on a
given day right and that just keeps on
sliding into the
future so but I guess India has had a
lot of nimbyism it's Fallen away greatly
under Modi and especially what the state
governments have done but it's can be
very hard to build things in India still
mhm although it is a democracy I guess
the China example we'll see what happens
there that's right uh but it would be
very
surprising because the Chinese
government is highly responsive to
public opinion on most but not all
issues so why wouldn't they become more
nimi especially with the shrinking
population they're they're way over bill
right so the pressure to build will be
weak right and in cases where they ought
to build I would think quite soon they
won't um how how much of Economics is a
study of the uh the systems that human
beings use to allocate SC and how much
is this just something you'd expect to
be true of aliens AIS um it's
interesting when you read the history of
economic thought how often they make um
they make mention of human nature
specifically like KES is talking about
the people have high discount rates
right uh yeah what are your thoughts
here my former colleague Gordon tulk
wrote a very interesting book on the
economics of ant societies and animal
societies and very often they obey
humanlike principles or more accurately
humans obey non-human animal-like
principles so I suspect it's fairly
Universal and Depends Less on quote
unquote human nature than we sometimes
like to suggest maybe that is a bit of a
knock on some behavioral economics the
logic of the system Arman alian wrote on
this Gary Becker wrote on this there's
some debates on this in the early 1960s
and that the automatic principles of
profit and loss and selection at a firm
firmwide level really matter matters and
it's responsible for a lot of Economics
being true I think that's correct
actually that raises an interesting
question of uh within firms they the the
sort of input they're getting from the
outside world the ground truth data is
profit loss bankruptcy it's like very uh
very condensed information and from this
they had to make the determination of
who to fire who to hire who to promote
what project to pursue
uh you how do we make sense of how firms
disaggregate this this very condensed
information I would like to see a very
very good estimate of how much of
productivity gains is just from
selection and how much is from well
smart humans figure out better ways of
doing
things and there's some related pieces
on this in the international trade
literature so when you have freeer trade
a shockingly high percentage of the
productivity gains come from your worst
firms being bankrupted by the free trade
and Alex tabarok has some Mr posts on
this I don't recall the exact numbers
but it was higher than almost anyone
thought and that to me suggests the and
Becker mechanisms of evolution at the
level of the firm Enterprise or even
sector they're just a lot more important
than human Ingenuity and that's a pretty
hayekian Point Hayek presumably read
those pieces in the 60s I don't think he
ever commented on them interesting um
let's talk about uh
Mill Mill right not James Mill but he
was interesting too um so his arguments
about uh the law Force against uh women
and how basically throughout history
the the the state of uh woman in in his
Society is not natural or the wisdom of
the ages but just the result of the fact
that men are stronger and have codified
that can we apply that argument in
today's society against children and the
way we treat them yes I think we should
treat children much better we've made
quite a few steps in that direction it's
interesting to think of Mill's argument
as it relates to hyek so Mill is arguing
you can see more than just the local
information so keep in mind when Mill
wrote every society that he knew of at
least treated women very poorly
oppressed women women because they were
physically weak or were at a big
disadvantage if you think there's some
matrilineal exceptions Mill didn't know
about them so it appeared Universal and
Mill's Chief argument is to say you're
making a big mistake if you overly
aggregate information from this one
observation that behind it is a lot of
structure and a lot of the structure is
contingent and that if I Mill unpack the
contingency for you you will see behind
the signals
so Mill is much more irrationalist than
Hayek it's one reason why Hayek hated
Mill but clearly on the issue of women
Mill was completely correct that women
can do much better will do much better
it's not clear what the end of this
process will be it will just continue
for a long time uh women achieving in
excellent ways and it's Mill's greatest
work I think it's one of the greatest
pieces of social social science and it
is anti-hy akian it's anti- small sea
conservatism uh his other book on
Liberty is very haakan though right in
the sense that the free speech is needed
because information is uh is contained
in many different people's minds that's
right and I think Mill integrated sort
of you could call it Hayek and anti-
hyek better than Hayek ever did why I I
think Mill is the greater thinker of the
two but but on the topic of children uh
what would Mill say specifically I guess
you could have talked about it if you
wanted to but I don't know if you was in
today's world we send him to school
they're there for 8 hours a day most of
the time is probably wasted and we just
like use a lot of coion on them that we
don't need to how would we think how
would he think about this issue there's
Mill's own upbringing which was quite
strict and by current standards
oppressive but apparently extremely
effective in making Mill smart so I
think Mill very much thought that kids
should be induced to learn the classics
but he also stressed they needed free
play of the imagination in a way that he
drew from German and also British
romantic ISM and he wanted some kind of
synthesis of the
two uh but by current standards Mill I
think still would be seen as a meanie
toward kids but he was Progressive by
the standards of his own day do you buy
the arguments about aristocratic
tutoring for people like Mill and um
there's many other cases like this but
you know since they were kids they were
taught in the taught by one-on-one
tutors and that's that explains part of
their uh greatness I believe in
one-on-one tutors but I don't know how
much of those examples is selection
right so I'm not sure how important it
is but just as a matter of fact if I
were a wealthy person and just had a new
kid I would absolutely invest in one
on-one tutors you talk in the book about
how Mill is very concerned about the
quality and the character development of
the population uh but when we think
about the fact that somebody like him
was elected to the parliament at the
time the greatest thinker who's alive is
elected to uh one of to to government
and it's hard to imagine that could be
true in with today's world does he have
a point with the regards to the quality
of the
population well Mill as with women he
thought a lot of improvement was
possible yeah and we shouldn't overly
generalize from seeing all the Dunces
around us yeah so to speak H maybe the
the book is still out on that
one but it's an encouraging belief and I
think it's more right than wrong there's
been a lot of moral progress since
Mill's time not in everything but
certainly how people treat children and
or their their W how men treat their
wives
and uh even when you see negative
reversals Steph Pinker so far seems to
be right on that one but you do see
places you know like Iran how women were
treated seems to have been much better
in the 1970s than it is today so there
are definitely reversals but on the
specific reversal of somebody of Mills
quality probably wouldn't get elected to
congress in the US or parliament of the
UK is how how how big a deal advice may
get through the cracks due to all the
local Statesman who wisely advise their
representatives in the house right
so I don't know how much that process is
better or worse compared to say the
1960s I know plenty of smart people who
think it's worse I'm not convinced
that's
true let's talk about Smith Adam Smith
yeah um um okay the one of the things I
find really remarkable about him is he
so he publishes in 1776 the weth of
Nations and basically around that time
Gibbon publishes the decline and fall of
the Roman Empire yep um so he publishes
the decline and fall of the Roman Empire
and one of his lines in there is if if
you were asked to State a period of time
when man's condition was what is his
best it was you know during the re of
Commodus to demission uh and that's like
2,000 years before that right so there's
basically been at least it's like
plausible to somebody really smart that
there's basically been no growth since
for 2,000 years um and in that context
to be making the caser markets and
mechanization and division of labor I
think it's like even more impressive
when you when you put it in the context
that he has like basically been seeing
you know 05% or less growth strongly
agree and this is in a way Smith being
like mill yeah Smith is seeing the local
information a very small growth and the
world barely being better than the Roman
Empire and inferring from that with
increasing returns division of labor how
much is possible so Smith is a bit more
of a rationalist than Hayek makes him
out to be right now I I wonder if we use
the same sort of extrapolative thinking
that Smith used uses of we haven't seen
that much growth yet but if you apply
these sorts of principles uh this is
what you would expect to see what would
he make of the potential AI economy
where we see 2% growth uh a year now but
you have you know billions of potential
more agents or something would he say
well actually you might have 10% growth
because of this like this is a you would
need more economic principles to explain
this or that just adding that to our
list of existing principles would imply
big gains it's hard to say what Smith
would predict for AI my suspicion is
that the notion of 10% growth was simply
not conceivable to him so he wouldn't
have predicted it because he never saw
anything like it that to him 3% growth
would be a bit like 10% growth it would
just shock him and and Bowl him
over but Smith does also emphasize
different human bottlenecks and
constraints of the law so it's quite
possible Smith would see those
bottlenecks as mattering and checking AI
growth and its
speed but as a principle given the
change we saw pre uh pre-industrial
Revolution and after 1870 um does does
that does to you it seem plausible that
you could go from uh the current regime
to a regime where you have 10% growth
for decades on end uh that does not seem
plausible to me but I would stress the
point that high rates of growth decades
on end the numbers cease to have meaning
because the numbers make the most sense
when the economy is broadly similar like
oh everyone eats apples and each year
there's 10% more apples at a roughly
constant price
as the basket changes the numbers become
meaningless it's not to deny there's a
lot of
growth uh but you can think about it
better by discarding the number and
presumably AI will change the
composition of various bundles quite a
bit over time so when you hear these
estimates about whe the GDP per capita
was in the Roman Empire do you just
disregard that and think in terms of
qualitative changes from that time
depends what they're being compared to
so there's pieces in economic history
that are looking at say 17th 18th
century Europe comparing it to the Roman
Empire most of GDP is agriculture which
is pretty comparable right especially in
Europe it's not wheat versus Corn it's
wheat and
wheat and I've seen estimates that oh
say by
1730 some parts of Western Europe are
clearly better off than the Roman Empire
at its peak but like within range that
those are the best estimates I know and
I I trust those they're not perfect but
I don't think there's an index number
problem so
much and so when people say we're 50%
richer than an average Roman at the peak
of the Empire you this this kind of
thinking doesn't make sense to you
doesn't make sense to me and a simple
way to show that let's say you could buy
from a Sears robot catalog of today yeah
or from 1905 and you have $50,000 to
spend which catalog would you rather buy
from you have to think about it yeah
right now if you just look at changes in
the CPI it should be obvious you'd
prefer the catalog from 190 5
everything's so much cheaper that white
shirt costs almost nothing right at the
same time you don't want that stuff it's
not mostly part of the modern bundle so
even if you ended up preferring the
earlier catalog the fact that you have
to think about it reflects the
ambiguities uh when you read the
contemporaries of Smith other economists
were writing at the time uh were his
arguments just uh clearly given the
evidence of the time much better than
everybody around or was it just that exp
poost he was clearly right but given the
arguments of the time it it could have
gone any one of different
ways well there aren't that many
economists at the time of Smith so it
depends what you're counting I mean the
two fellow Scots you could compare Smith
to or Sir James Stewart who published a
major work I think in
1767 on some matters Stewart was ahead
of Smith not most clearly Smith was far
greater but Stuart was no slouch and the
other point of comparison is David Hume
Smith's best friend of course uh per
page you could argue Hume was better
than Smith certainly on monetary Theory
Hume was better than Smith now he's not
a goat Contender he just didn't do
enough but I wouldn't say Smith was
ahead of Hume he had more and more
important insights but Hume was pretty
impressive now if you're talking about
oh like the 18th century German cameral
lists uh well they were bad
mercantilists but there's people say
writing in Sweden in the
1760s analyzing exchange rates who had
understandings of exchange rates than
Smith ever did so it's not that he just
dominated
everyone um let me offer some other
potential nominees that were not in the
book for goat and I I want your opinions
of them um Henry George in terms of
explaining how land is fundamentally
different from labor and capital when
we're thinking about the economy well
first I'm not sure land is that
fundamentally different from labor and
capital A lot of the value of land comes
from improvements and what's an
improvement can be quite subtle it
doesn't just have to be you know putting
a plow of the land so I would put George
in the top 25 very important thinker but
he's a bit of a not a one note Johnny
his book on protectionism is still one
of the best books on free trade but he's
circumscribed in a way say Smith and
Mill were
not uh today is he would it does it
status rise we see rents in big cities
status is way up for this reason because
of Yim nimi and I think that's correct
he was undervalued he's worth reading
very carefully a few years ago we're
recording here at marcadis we had a like
12ers two-day session with Peter teal
just on reading Henry George it's all we
did and people came away uh very
impressed I think and for people who are
interested they might enjoy the episode
I did with Lars duet uh who oh I don't
know about this he's a georgist oh yeah
he's uh he's he's a really smart guy he
wrote uh basically he he wrote a book
review of Henry George that won Scott
Alexander's book review contest oh I
knew what this is and then then he just
turned it into a whole book of his own
which is actually really good um and I
think there's something truly Humane in
George when you read him that can be a
bit infectious that's
positive um and some insane there was
some insane turnout for his funeral
right like he he was very popular at the
time they wrote yeah right yeah and that
was deserved yeah uh I guess you already
answered this question but Ronald Coast
in terms of helping us think about firms
and you know property rights and
transaction costs well even though I
think the 1937 piece is wrong it did
create one of the most important genres
he gets a lot of credit for that he gets
a lot of credit for the coast theorem
the FCC property rights piece is superb
the lighthouse piece is very good again
he's in the top 25 but in terms of you
like his quantity its own quality it's
just not quite enough there's no
macro uh but of course you rate him very
very highly how about your former
adviser Thomas
shelling he is a top tier Noble laurat
but I don't think he's a serious
Contender for greatest Economist of all
time he gets the most credit for making
game theory intuitive empirical and
workable and that's worth a
lot uh economics of self-command he was
a Pioneer but in a way that's just going
back to the Greeks and
Smith he's not a serious Contender for
goat but a top TI your Noble laat for
sure you have a you have a fun quote in
uh in the book on Arrow where you say
his work was uh Nobel prize winning
important but not important
important well some parts of it were
important important like how to price
Securities so I think I underrated Arrow
a bit in the book If you ask like what
regrets do I have about the book I say
very very nice things about Arrow but I
think I should have pushed him even more
what what would Arrow say about
prediction markets well he was really
the pioneer of theoretically
understanding how they work yeah so uh
he was around until quite recently uh
I'm sure he had things to say about
prediction markets probably
positive
um you so one of the points you make in
the book is economics at the time was
really a way of carrying forward big
ideas about the world what discipline
today is where that happens well
internet writing it's not a discipline
but it's a sphere and plenty of it
happens more than ever before but it's
segregated from what counts as original
theorizing in the academic sense of that
word is that a good or bad segregation
I'm not sure
but it's really a very sharp radical
break from how things had been and it's
why I don't think there'll be a new goat
Contender probably not ever or if there
is it will be something AI
related yeah that's that sounds about
right to me um but within the context of
Internet writing obviously there's many
disciplines there economics being a
prominent
one when you split it up is there a
discipline in terms of I know people
writing in terms of computer science
Concepts or people writing in terms of
economic Concepts who's today
the discipline cease to matter that
really good internet writing is
multidisiplinary when I meet someone
like a Scott arenson who's doing like
computer science AI type internet
writing on his blog I have way more in
common with him than with a typical
research Economist say at Boston
University and it's not because I know
enough about computer science like I may
or may not know a certain amount but
it's because our two Enterprises are so
similar or Scott Alexander he writes
about man illness also that just feels
so similar and we we really have to
rethink what the disciplines are it may
be that method of writing is the key
differentiator for this particular
sphere yeah not for everything Scott
arenson was my professor in college for
a couple semesters yeah yeah yeah um
that's where I decided I'm not going to
go to grad school because you just see
because you just see like two standard
deviations above you easily uh you know
you might as well just choose a
different game but his method of
thinking and writing is infectious like
that Scott Alexander and any of the rest
of us yeah um so I think in the book you
say you were raised as much by uh
economic thought or the history of
economic thought as you are by your
graduate training more much more not
it's not even close uh today people
would say I was talking to Basil
Halperin who's a young Economist he said
he was raised on martial Revolution on
in the same way that you were raised on
the history of economic talk uh thought
how how do you uh does this seem like a
good trade are you happy that people
today are raised on Scot Alexander and
margal Revolution at the margin I would
like to see more people raised on
marginal Revolution I don't just mean
that in a selfish way but the internet
writing mode of thinking I would like to
see more economists and research
scientists raised on it but the number
may be higher than we think like if I
hadn't run emergent Ventures I wouldn't
know about basil per se maybe would not
have met him and it's infectious so it
might always be a minority but it will
be the people most likely to have new
ideas and it's a very powerful new mode
of thought which I'll call internet way
of writing and thinking and it's not
sufficiently recognized as something
like a new field or discipline but
that's what it
is I wonder if you're doing enough of
that when it comes to AI where I think
you have really interesting thoughts
about GPD 5 level stuff but somebody
with your sort of polymathic
understanding of different fields if you
just like extrapolate out these Trends I
I feel like you might have a lot of
interesting thoughts about when you
think just in terms of what might be
possible with something much further
down the line well I have a whole book
with AI predictions average is over and
I have about 30 Bloomberg columns and
probably 30 or 40 marginal Revolution
posts uh I can just say I'll do more uh
but the idea at which ideas arrive at me
is The Binding constraint I'm not
holding them back um speaking of Basil
he had a interesting question should um
should should Society uh or government
subsidize savings so that we're in
effect having uh at least so basically a
zero social discount rate so people on
average probably have you
know they they're prioritizing their own
lives they have discount rates based on
their own lives uh if we're long-term is
should the government sub be subsiding
savings I'll come close to saying yes
first we tax savings right now so we
should stop taxing savings absolutely I
think it's hard to come up with workable
ways of subsidizing savings that don't
give rich people a lot of free stuff in
a way that's politically unacceptable
and so unfair so I'm not sure we have a
good way of subsidizing savings but in
principle I would be for it if we could
do it in the proper targeted manner
although you had a good argument against
this in stubborn attachments right that
over the long term if the if economic
growth is high enough then the savings
of the rich will just be uh dissipated
to everybody below well I'm not sure to
whom it's dissipated it does get
dissipated the great fortunes of the
past are are mostly gone uh but they may
not go to people below and the idea of
writing into a tax system subsidies on
that scale in essence subsidies to
wealth not not GDP but wealth is say six
to eight times GDP I just think the
Practical problems are quite significant
it's not an idea I'm pushing but there
may at margins be ways you can do it
that say only benefit uh people who are
poor ways you can improve like the
workings of local credit unions through
better either regulation deregulation
that are a kind of defacto sub
without having to subsidize all of the
saved wealth there's got to be a lot of
ways you can do that and we should look
for that more uh relatedly I think a
couple years ago Paul scheming had an
interesting paper that if you look from
1311 to now uh interest rates have been
declining there's been hundreds of years
of interest rate declines what what is
the big picture explanation of this
trend I'm not sure we have one you may
know cow third law all propositions
about real interest rates are wrong but
simply lower risk better information
higher buffers of wealth would be what
you'd call the intuitive economistic
explanations there's probably something
to them but how much of that Trend do
they actually explain is like a percent
of the variance I don't know let's talk
about Anarchy you P about this I hadn't
read the last time we talked and they
really interesting um so maybe you can
restate your arguments as you answer
this question but how much of your
arguments about how Network Industries
lead to these cartel likee Dynamics how
much of that uh can help explain what
happened to social media Web 2.0 I don't
view that as such a cartel I think
there's a cartel at one level which is
small but
significant this is may be more true
three four years ago than today with
Elon owning Twitter and other changes
but if someone got kicked off social
media platforms three four years ago
they would tend to get kicked off all or
most of them right it wasn't like a
consciously collusive decision but it's
a bit like oh well I know the guy who
runs that platform and he's pretty smart
and if he's worried I should be
worried and that was very bad I don't
think it was otherwise such a collusive
equilibrium maybe some dimensions on
hiring uh social you know people
software Engineers there was some
collusion not enough bidding but it was
mostly competing for attention so I
think the real risk protection agencies
aside of network-based collusion is
through banking systems where you have
Clearing Houses and payments networks
and to be part of it the Clearing House
in the absence of legal constraint can
indeed help everyone collude and if you
don't go along with the collusion you're
kicked out of the payment system that
strikes me as a real issue uh do your
arguments against uh Anarchy do they
apply it all to uh web 3.0 crypto like
stuff do I think it will evolve into
collusion I don't see why it would I'm
I'm open to hearing the argument that it
could though what would that argument go
like well I guess we did see with crypto
that you have uh in order to just have
workable settlement you need these
centralized institutions and from there
you can get kicked off those and the
government is involved with those and
you can you can maybe abstract the
government away and say that they will
need to collude in some sense in order
to facilitate transactions and the
exchanges have ended up quite
centralized right yeah uh and that's an
example of Clearing Houses and exchanges
being the vulnerable node but I don't
know how much web 3.0 is ever going to
rely on that it seems you can create new
crypto assets more or less it will
there's the focality of getting them
started but if there's a real problem
with the pre-existing crypto assets I
would think you could overcome that so I
would expect something more like a two
and fro waves of centralization
decentralization and natural checks
embedded in the system that's my
intuition at least does your argument
against Anarchy prove too much in the
sense that globally different nations
have anarchic relations with each other
and they can't uh they can't enforce
course of Monopoly on each other but
they can coordinate to punish bad actors
in the way you would want protection
agencies to do right like we can
sanction North Korea together or
something I think that's a very good
point and very good question but I would
rephrase my argument you could say it's
my argument against Anarchy and it is an
argument against Anarchy but it's also
an argument that says Anarchy is
everywhere so within government well the
fed the state governments all the
different layers of federalism this kind
of Anarchy there's not quite a final
layer of adjudication the way you might
think we pretend there is I'm not sure
how strong it is internationally of
course uh you know how much gets
enforced by heiman how much is
spontaneous order even the different
parts of the federal government they're
in a kind of Anarchy with respect to
each other so you need a fair degree of
collusion for things to work and you
ought to accept that but maybe in a
straussian way where you don't trumpet
it too loudly
but the point that anarchy itself will
evolve enough collusion to enable it to
persist if it persists at all is my
central point my point is like well
Anarchy isn't that
different now given we've put a lot of
social political Capital into our
current
institutions I don't see why you would
press the Anarchy button but if I'm
North Korea and I can press the Anarchy
button for North Korea I get that it
might just evolve into
Haiti but I probably would press the
Anarchy button for North Korea if at
least someone would come in and control
the loose nukes yeah and this is related
to one of those classic arguments
against Anarchy that under Anarchy
anything is allowed so the government is
allowed therefore we're in a state of
Anarchy in some sense in a funny way
that argument is correct we would
revolve something go like government and
Haiti has done this but in very bad ways
where it's gangs and killings it doesn't
have to be that bad there's medieval
Iceland medieval Ireland they had
various forms of Anarchy clearly Limited
in their destructiveness by low
population ineffective weapons but they
had a kind of stability you can't just
dismiss them and you can debate how
governmental were they but the ambiguity
of those debates is part of the point
that every system has a lot of Anarchy
and anarchies have a fair degree of
collusion if they survive oh actually so
I want to go back to much earlier in the
conversation where you were saying
listen over uh it seems like
intelligence
is a net good so just that being your
her istic you should call forth the AI
um well not uncritically you you need
more argument but just as a starting
point yeah if like if more intelligence
isn't going to help you you have some
really big problems anyway but I don't
know if you still have the view that
we're we have like a 800 year timeline
for human civilization but that that
sort of timeline implies that
intelligence actually is going to be the
because the thing the reason we have an
800 year timeline presumably is like
some product of intelligence
right My worry is that energy becomes
too cheap and people at very low cost
can destroy things rather
easily so say if a nuclear if destroying
a city with a nuclear weapon cost
$50,000 uh what would the world look
like I'm just not sure it might be more
stable than we think but I'm I'm greatly
worried and I could readily imagine it
falling apart yeah but I guess the
bigger point I'm making is that uh in
this case the reason the nuke got so
cheap was uh because of intelligence now
that that doesn't mean we should stop
intelligence but it just that if if
that's like the end result of
intelligence over hundreds of years that
doesn't seem like intelligence is always
uh a NE good well we're doing better
than the other great apes I would say
even though we Face these really big
risks and in the meantime we did
incredible things so that's a gamble I
would take but I I believe we should
view it more self-consciously as a sort
of Gamble and it's too late to turn back
the fundamental Choice was one of
decentralization and that may have
happened hundreds of millions or
billions of years ago and once you opt
for
decentralization intelligence is going
to have
advantages and you're not going to be
able to turn the clock back on it so
you're walking this tight RPP and by
goodness you'd better do a good job I
mean we should frame our broader history
more like that and it has implications
for how you think about x- risk again I
think of the X x- risk people a bit of
them it's like well I've been living in
Berkeley a long time and it's it's
really not that different my life's a
bit better and we can't risk all of this
but that's not how you should view
broader history I feel like you're an ex
person you have yeah I mean even they
don't think we're like 100% guaranteed
to go out by 800 years or something they
I don't think we're guaranteed at all
it's up to us I just think the risk not
that everyone dies I think that's quite
low but that we Retreat to some kind of
pretty chaotic form of like medieval
Balkans existence with a much lower
population that seems to me quite a high
risk with or without AI it's probably
the default
setting uh G given that you think that's
a default setting I I why is that not a
big part of your when you're thinking
about how new technologies are coming
about uh why why not consciously think
in terms of is this getting us to the
outcome where we avoid this sort of uh
pre-industrial state that would result
from uh the the $50,000 nukes well if
you think the risk is cheap energy more
than AI per se admittedly AI could speed
the path cheap energy uh it seems very
hard to
control the strategy that's worked best
so far is to have relatively benevolent
Nations become hegemons and establish
dominance so it it does influence me I
want the US UK some other subset of
Nations to establish dominance in AI it
may not work forever but in a
decentralized world it sure beats the
alternative so a lot of the AI types
they're too rationalist and they don't
start with the premise that we chose a
decentralized World a very very long
time ago even way before humans and I
think you made an interesting point when
you were talking about canes in the book
where he said one of his faults was that
he assumed that people like him would
always be in charge that's right and I
do see that also in the the alignment
discourse like alignment is you know if
it's just handing over with the
government and just assuming the
government does what you'd expect it to
do and I worry about this from my own
point of view so even if you think us is
pretty benevolent today which is a
highly contested and mixed proposition
and I'm an American citizen pretty
patrio IC but I'm fully aware of the
long history of my government in killing
enslaving doing other terrible things to
people and then you have to rethink that
over a long period of time it may be the
worst time period that affects the final
outcome even if the average is pretty
good and then if power corrupts and if
Government even indirectly controls AI
systems so US government could become
worse because it's a leader in AI right
but again I've got to still take that
over China
or Russia or wherever else it might be I
just don't really understand when people
talk about National Security I've never
seen the AI doomers say anything that
made sense and I recall those early days
remember China issued that edict where
they said we're only going to put a AIS
that are safe and they can't criticize
the CCP how many super smart people and
I mean super smart like Z just jump on
that and say see China's not going to
compete with us we can shut up AI down
they just seem to have zero
understanding of some properties of
decentralized Worlds or Elie ezer's
tweet was it from
yesterday uh I I didn't think it was a
joke but oh there's a problem that AI
can read all the legal code and threaten
us with all these penalties it's like he
has no idea how screwed up the legal
system
is yeah it would just mean courtroom
weights of like 70 or 700 years it's not
it wouldn't become a thing people are
afraid of it would be a social problem
in some way what's your of how the
government reacts when the labs are
doing uh regardless of how they should
react how how they will react and when
the labs are doing like I don't know10
billion training runs and if if under
the premise that you know these are
powerful models not human level per se
but just they can do all kinds of crazy
stuff how do you think the government's
gonna are they going to nationalize the
labs or how staying in Washington what's
your sense I think our national security
people are amongst the smartest people
in our government uh they're mostly
well-intentioned in a good way they're
paying careful attention to many
things but what will be the political
will to do what they don't control and
my guess is until there's sort of an SBF
like incident which might even not be
significant but a headlines incident
which SBF was even if it doesn't affect
the future evolution of crypto which I
guess is my view it
won't until there's that we won't do
much of anything and then we'll have an
SPF like incident and we'll overreact
that seems a very common pattern in
americ American history and the fact
that it's AI the stakes might be high or
whatever I doubt if it will change the
recurrence of that
pattern H how would Robert nosak think
about different AI
Utopias well I think he did think about
different AI Utopias right so uh I
believe he whether he wrote or talked
about it but the notion of humans much
smarter than they are or the notion of
aliens coming down who are like in some
way morally intellectually Way Beyond us
he did write about that and he was
worried about how they would treat us so
he was sensitive to what you would call
AI risk viewed a bit more broadly very
early
on what was his what was his take well
nosic is not a thinker of of takes he
was a thinker of speculations and
multiple possibilities which I liked
about him he was worried about it this I
know and I talked to him about it but I
couldn't boil it down to a simple
take it made made him a vegetarian I
should add wait that made him oh because
we want to be treating the the entities
that are to us as aliens from outer
space might treat us we are like that to
animals may not be a Perfect Analogy but
it's still an interesting point and
therefore we should be vegetarians that
was his argument at least he felt he
should be I wonder if we should honor
past Generations more or at least like
respect their wishes more for if we
think of the the alignment problem is as
similar to how we react to our previous
generations do you know do we want uh
the AI to treat us as we treat people
thousands of years ago yeah it's a good
question and uh I've never met anyone
who's consistent with how they view
wishes of the Dead yeah I don't think
there is a consistent philosophically
grounded point of view on that
one I guess the the sort of Thomas Payne
view you don't regard them at all is
that not self-consistent it's consistent
but I've never met anyone who actually
lives according to it oh and what since
are they contradicting themselves well
say you know their their spouse were to
die and the spouse gave them
instructions sure they would put weight
on those
instructions somewhere out there there's
probably someone who wouldn't but I've
never met such a person and how about
the Burk view that you take them very
seriously why is that not selfconsistent
the birth view what do you mean Burke
Burk view oh well it's time inconsistent
to take those preferences seriously and
Burke himself understood that he was a
very deep thinker so well you take them
seriously now but as time passes other
ancestors come along they have somewhat
different views you have to keep on
changing course what you should do now
should it be what the ancestors behind
us want or your best estimate of what
the 30 or 40 Years of ancestors to come
will want once they have become
ancestors so it's time inconsistent
there's not again there's not going to
be a strictly philosophical resolution
there will be practical attempts to find
something sustainable and that which
survives will be that which we do and
then we'll somewhat rationalize it exp
poost yeah yeah there there's an
interesting book about um the Ancient
Ancient Greeks what is it called I
forgot the name but it talks about the
hearts that they have for the um for
their families where the the dead become
Gods but then over time if you keep this
heart going for hundreds of years
there's like thousands of ancestors that
like you don't even remember their names
right who are you praying to uh and then
it's like The Arrow impossibility
theorem for all the gods what do they
all want me to do and you can't even ask
them yeah um okay we were talking before
we started recording about Argentina and
the reforms they're trying there um and
they're trying to dollarize because the
dollar is more stable than their
currency but this raised the question of
why is a dollar so stable so we're also
democracy right but like the the dollar
seems pretty well managed uh what is the
larger explanation of why uh monetary
policies seems well managed in the US
well us voters hate inflation mostly for
good reasons and we have enough wealth
that we can pay our bills without having
to inflate very much and 2% has been
stable now for quite a while now it's an
interesting question which I cannot
answer and I have looked into this and I
have asked smart people from Argentina
why does Argentina in particular have
recurring waves of
hyperinflation is there something about
the structure of their interest groups
that inevitably recurringly leads them
to demand too much I suppose but there's
plenty of poor badly run countries that
don't have hyperinflation African
countries historically have not had high
rates of hyperinflation haven't had high
rates of
inflation why is that well maybe they
don't capture enough through seniorage
for some reason currency Holdings aren't
large enough there's some kind of
financial repression I don't know but
it's very hard to explain why some of
these countries but not others go crazy
with the printing
press and this is maybe a broader
question about uh different institutions
in the government where um I don't
understand enough to evaluate their like
object level decisions but if you look
at the Supreme Court or the Federal
Reserve or something just from a
distance it seems like they're really
well-run competent organizations with
highly technocratic you know uh
nonpartisan people running them they're
not nonpartisan but they're still
well-run yeah and what's the theory of
why these institutions in particular are
so much better run is it just that they
are divor they they're one step back
from direct elections is it that they
have traditions of knowledge within them
how how do we think about this I think
both of those I don't think the
elections point is sufficient because
there's plenty of unelected bodies that
are totally corrupt yeah around the
world most of them are
perhaps some sense of American civic
virtue that gets communicated and then
the incentives are such say you're on
the FED for a while what you can do
afterward can be rewarding but you want
a reputation for having done a good job
so your sense of morality and your
private self-interest coincide and
that's pretty strong and we're still in
that loop I don't really see signs of
that Loop breaking m it's also striking
to me how many times I'll read an
interesting article or paper and the
person who wrote it it's like the former
head of the Federal Reserve in New York
or something it just seems like a that's
a strong Vindication of these
institutions that the standards are very
high and if you speak with any of those
people like who've been on fed boards
ask them questions they're super smart
super involved curious uh really for the
most part do want the best thing for
their country going back to these
Economist you at the end you talk about
how you're kind of uh disappointed in
this turn that economics has taken Maybe
just not surprised right it's division
of labor Adam Smith who said it would
make people a bit feeble-minded and
incurious was completely
correct wait Adam Smith said what would
make people I see right y not stupid you
know current economic researchers
probably have never been smarter but
they're way less Broad and less curious
um uh Patrick Allison put it an
interesting way where he said in the
past maybe thinkers were more interested
in uh delving into the biggest question
questions but if they they couldn't do
it rigorously in a tractable way they
would just they would make the trade-off
in favor of the big question and today
we make the opposite trade-off does that
seem like a fair comparison I think
that's correct and I would add that say
in the time of Smith there was nothing
you could do rigorously so there was no
other option well oh I'm going to
specialize in you know memorizing all
the grain prices and run some great
econometrics on that and that'll be
rigorous it's really William Stanley
jevans who to the Anglo World introduced
this notion there's something else you
can do that's rigorous it was not yet
rigorous but he opened the door and
showed people the
alternative of of the J's
Paradox well I would say his work in
statistics originally on the value of
money right but his statistical work on
Coal also had some rigor so you're not
wrong to cite
that and jevans just showed that
rigorous statistical work and economics
could be the same thing and that was his
greater Innovation than just marginalism
so he's an underrated figure maybe he
should be in the book in a way but it
had some unfortunate secondary
consequences too many people crowd into
specialization crowd is a funny word to
use because they're each sitting in
their separate nodes but it's a kind of
crowding is there some sort of hakin
solution here where in markets the
effect of having this sort of
decentralized process is the that the
sum is greater than the parts whereas in
academic disciplines the sum is just a
bunch of different iCal Aggregates uh
there's no Grand theory that comes
together as a result of uh all this
micro work is there some haking solution
here well yes you and I are the hakan
solution that a Specialists proliferate
we can be quote unquote parasitic on
them and take what they do and turn it
into interesting larger bundles that
they haven't dreamt of and make some
kind of living doing that and we're much
smaller in number but I'm not sure how
numerous we should be and there's a
bunch of us right you're a s category
Tyler I'm running a podcast here I I run
a podcast we're not a separate category
we're exactly in the same category is my
point uh and what do you see as a future
of the sort of uh the kind of sort of
thinking you do are are you do you see
yourself as the last of the literary
Economist or is there a future of this
kind of is it just going to be the SAR
codexes are they going to take care of
it or this sort of lineage of thinking
well the next me won't be like me yeah
in that sense I'm the last but I don't
think it will disappear it will take new
forms it may have a lot more to do with
AI and I don't think it's going to go
away this's just a demand for it there's
a real demand for our products we have a
lot of readers listeners people
interested whatever and there'll be ways
to monetize
that the challenge might be competing
against Ai and it doesn't have to be
that AI does it better than you or I do
that it might but simply that people
prefer to read what the AIS generate for
10 or 20 years and it's harder to get an
audience because playing with the AI is
a lot of fun so that will be a real
challenge I think some of us will be up
to it you'll be faced with it more than
I will be uh but it's going to change a
lot yeah okay uh one of the final things
I want to do is I want to go into
political philosophy a little bit okay
and uh ask not that we haven't been
doing it already but yes um okay so I I
want to ask you about sort of certain
potential weaknesses of the democratic
capitalist model that we live in and in
terms of both in terms of whether you
think they object level long wrong uh
sorry object level right and second um
how regardless of how right they are how
how um persuasive and how powerful a
force they will be against uh our you
know our system of uh uh government and
functioning okay uh okay so there's a
Libertarian critique that basically
democracy is sort of a random walk with
a drift toward socialism and there's
also a rashed effect where government
programs don't go away and so it just
ends up towards socialism at the end it
ends up with having government that is
too large yeah but I don't see the
evidence that it's road to surum France
Sweden have had pretty big governments
way too large in my opinion but they
haven't threatened to turn autocratic or
totalitarian certainly not and you've
seen reforms in many of those countries
Sweden moved away from government
approaching 70% of GDP and now it's
quite manageable government there should
be smaller yet I don't think the trend
is that negative it's more of a problem
with regulation and the administrative
state but we've shown inability to
create new sectors like big parts of
tech they're not unregulated laws apply
to them but they're way less regulated
and it's a kind of race uh that race
doesn't look too bad to me at the moment
like we could lose it but uh so far so
good so it's the critique should be
taken seriously but it's yet to be
validated uh how about the egalitarian
critique from the left that you can't
have uh the inequality the market
creates with the political and moral
equality that you know humans deserve
and demand they just say that what's the
evidence us has high degree of income
inequality uh so does Brazil a much less
well-functioning
Society Brazil continues on average it
will probably grow one or two percent
that's not a great record but Brazil has
to go up in a puff of smoke I don't see
it and how about the nichan critique and
in uh in the um the end of history
fukiyama says this is more powerful this
is the one he's more worried about than
the more more so than the leftist
critique and over time basically what
you end up with is the last man and you
can't defend the civilization you know
the story it's a lot of words I mean is
he short the market I've asked fukiyama
this he's not this is a long time ago
but he wasn't short the market then
again it's it's a real issue it seems to
me the problems of today for the most
part are more manageable than the
problems of any previous era
we still you know might all go poof
return to Medieval Balkan style
existence in a millennia or whatever but
it's a fight and we're totally in the
fight and we have a lot of resources and
talent so like let's do
it okay that's I don't see why that
particular worry it's it's a lot of
words and I like to get very concrete
like even if you're not short at the
market if that were the main relevant
worry where would that show up in asset
prices as a CAU worse it's a very
concrete question question I think it's
very useful to ask and when people don't
have a clear answer I get worried where
is your prediction that uh 100 Z down
the line will have the $50,000 nukes
where does that show up in the asset
prices I think at some point vix you
know an index of volatility will go up
uh probably not soon nuclear
proliferation has not gone crazy which
is wonderful but I think at some point
it's hard to imagine it not getting out
of control um last I read vix is
surprisingly low and stable that's right
I think 2024 is on on the path to be a
pretty good year yeah or do you think
the market is just wrong in terms of
thinking about what geopolitical risk
from you know Israel or no I don't think
the Market's wrong at all I think that
war will converge I'm not saying the
humanitarian outcome is a good one but
in terms of the global economy I think
markets are thinking rationally about it
though the rational forecast of course
is often wrong what's your sense on the
scaling stuff when you look at the
arguments uh in the terms of what's
coming how how do you react to that well
your piece on that was great uh I don't
feel I have the expertise to judge that
as a technical matter it does seem to me
intuitively it would be weird on the
technical side if scaling just stopped
working but on the knowledge side I
think people underestimate possible
barriers and what I have in mind is
quite a bit of reality the universe
might in some very fundamental way
simply not be legible and that there's
no easy and fruitful way to just quote
unquote apply more intelligence to the
problem like like oh you want to
integrate general relativity and quantum
mechanics it may just be we've hit the
frontier and there's not a final layer
of oh here's how it fits together so
there's no way to train an AI or other
thing to make it smarter to solve that
and maybe a lot of the world is like
that and that to me people are not
taking seriously enough so I'm not sure
what the net returns will be to bigger
and better and smarter AI that seems
possible for you know P versus NP type
of reasons it's just like harder to make
uh for further discoveries but I feel
like we have pretty good estimates in
terms of like the declining uh
researcher productivity because of low
hanging fruit being gone in this sort of
sense of we're reaching the frontier and
whatever percent it is a year if you can
just keep the AI population growing
faster than that if you just want to be
crude about it that seems enough to if
not get to the ultimate physical
synthesis at least much farther than
where human civilization would get in
the same span of time that seems very
plausible I think we'll get further I
expect big productivity gains as a side
note I'm less convinced by the declining
researcher productivity argument than I
used to be so the best way to measure
productivity for an economist is wages
and wages of researchers haven't gone
down period in fact they've gone up now
they may not be producing new ideas you
might be paying them to be functionaries
or to manage PR or to just manage other
researchers but I think that's a worry
that we have a lot more researchers with
generally Rising researcher wages and
that hasn't boosted productivity growth
China India South Korea brought into the
world economy scientific
Talent it's better than if we hadn't
done it but it hasn't in absolute terms
boosted productivity growth and maybe
that's a worrisome sign uh on on the
metric of researcher wages it seems like
it could just be a fact that even the
even the the less marginally useful
improvements are worth the extra cost in
terms of if you think of a company like
Google is probably paying as Engineers a
lot more than it was paying in the early
days even though they're doing less now
because you know changing a pixel in the
the new Google page is going to affect
billions of users the similar thing
could be happening in the economy right
that might hold for Google researchers
but take people in in Pharma biom
medicine there's a lot of private sector
financed research or indirectly financed
by buying up smaller companies and it
only makes sense if you get something
out of it that really works like a good
vaccine or good medication OIC super
profitable so wages for biomedical
researchers in general haven't gone
down now finally it's paying off but I
I'm not sure AI will be as revolutionary
as the other AI optimists believe I do
think it will raise productivity growth
in ways which are visible to what extent
uh in the conventional G story you think
in terms of population size right and
then so you just increase the population
SI you get much more research at the
other end to what extent does it make
sense to think about well if you have
these billions of AI copies that we can
think of that in terms of as a proxy of
how much progress they could uh produce
is that a not a sensible way to think
about that at some point having billions
of copies probably won't matter it will
matter much more how good is the best
thing we have and how well integrated is
it into our other systems which have
bottlenecks of their own and the
principles governing the growth of that
are much harder to concern it's probably
a much slower growth than just juicing
up oh we've got a lot of these things
and they're trained on more and more
gpus but precisely because the top seems
to matter so much is why we might expect
bigger gains right so if you think about
Jews in the 20th century you know 2% of
the population or less than that and 20%
of the Nobel prizes it does seem like
you can have a much bigger impact than
um if you're on the very tale if you
just have just a few hundred John monan
copies maybe that's a good analogy that
the impact of AI will be like in the
20th century the impact of Jews right
which would be excellent right yeah but
it's not extraordinary it's not a
science fiction novel it is I mean you
read the early 20th century stuff as you
have you know it's like a slow takeoff
right there of like you know go from V2
Rockets to the moon and a couple of
decades it's a it's kind of a crazy pace
of change yeah that that's what I think
it will be like again great stagnation
is over we'll go back to those earlier
rates of change transform a lot of the
world uh mostly a big positive a lot of
chaos disrupted institutions along the
way that's my prediction but no one
writes a science fiction novel about the
20th century it feels a bit ordinary
still yeah even though it wasn't I
forget the name of the philosopher you
asked us to but the uh the feminist
philosopher you asked the
question uh you asked the question what
would have to be different for you to be
a social conservative right uh what
would have to be different for you to
not be a doer per se but just one of
these people who like this is the main
thing to be thinking about during this
period of history or something like that
well I think it is one of the main
things we should be thinking about but I
would say if I thought International
cooperation were very possible I would
at least possibly have very different
views than I do now or if I thought no
other country could make progress on AI
those seem unlikely to me but they're
not logically impossible so the
fundamental premise where I differ from
a lot of the doomers is my understanding
of a decentralized world and its
principles being Prim
their understanding is some kind of
comparison like here's the little people
and here's the big monster and the big
monster gets bigger and even if the big
monster does a lot of good things it's
just getting bigger and here the little
people that's a possible framework but
if you start with decentralization and
competition and well how we going to
manage
this in some ways my perspective might
be more
pessimistic but you you don't just think
you can wake up in the morning and like
legislate safety
you look at the history of relative
safety having come from hamon and you
hope your hamon stays good enough which
is a deeply fraud proposition I
recognize that what's the next book I'm
already writing it uh part of it is on
jevans but the title is the marginal
Revolution but not about the blog about
the actual margin but it's maybe a
monograph like 40,000 words but I don't
think book length should matter anymore
I want to be more radical on that I
think 40,000 words is perfect because
it'll actually fit in context so when
you do the GP yes I thought about this
now context may be bigger by then yeah
but I want to have it in GPT in some way
or whatever has replaced
it okay uh those are all the questions I
had Tyler this is a lot fun pleasure and
uh keep up the great work and uh
delighted you're at it thank you thank
you uh yeah thanks for coming on the
podcast it's the third time now so a lot
of fun fun okay bye
everyone hey everybody I hope you enjoy
that episode as always the most helpful
thing you can do is just share the
podcast send it to people you think
might enjoy it put it in Twitter your
group chats Etc just splits the world I
appreciate you listening I'll see you
next time
cheers
