I am not claiming that I have any
knowledge of the probabilities of what
will happen I'm much more interested in
possibilities rather than probabilities
in what we have been capable of doing
but which isn't necessarily easy or
likely to happen we are on a pathway
towards ecological and technological
self-termination but I don't think it's
a definite root it's not cast in stone
that that will happen because we know
that throughout history we have managed
to change systems to recalibrate how our
economies and our politics works and
that's why in this book I talk about the
idea of radical hope which is being
committed to making change even if you
think the odds are against you to always
act as if change were possible because
imagine getting to the end of your life
regretting the fact you hadn't taken
action when it may have been possible to
change I am pleased to welcome Roman
krisar to the program Roman is a social
philosopher and the author of many books
such as the good ancestor Carpe DM
regained and most recently history for
tomorrow inspiration from the past for
the future of humanity which is the
subject of today's conversation Roman is
a senior research fellow at the Oxford
University Center for udonia and human
flourishing as well as the founder of
the world's first empathy Museum he is a
member of the club of Rome and a
research fellow of the long now
Foundation he has previously worked as a
gardener a conservation activist and on
human rights issues in Guatemala further
trivia about Roman is he is the husband
of frequent TGs guest my friend the
Renegade Economist Kate rayworth in this
conversation uh which I expect will be
the first of several because we just
scratched the surface uh we delved into
what we can learn about societies who
have succeeded in the face of crises
during the last few centuries and how we
can apply these learnings to the global
crises we Face we especially dove into
social Innovations in the realm of
governance and Community
organization um and it's a it's a big
topic that I want to unpack more in the
future if you are enjoying this podcast
I invite you to subscribe to our
substack letter when you can read more
of the system science underpinning the
human predicament where my team and I
point out special announcements related
to the great simplification you can find
the link to subscribe in the show
description also if you learned and
enjoyed from this podcast I encourage
you to send it to a couple people in
your community uh ask them to watch it
or watch it together and have a
conversation uh about uh what you
learned the implications for where you
live in in our world uh with that I am
pleased to welcome my new friend Roman
krisar
Roman krar welcome to the program and
it's a great pleasure and privilege to
be here Nate really looking forward to
the adventure of our
conversation what was the quote you just
told me uh off off camera I was just
telling you that the great historian
Theodore zeldon once said to me a
satisfying conversation is one in which
you say things you have never said
before and I'm sure this will be one of
those from both our perspectives perhaps
um so you have written many books uh it
seems that you read you write a book
every 3 years or so I wonder if it takes
3 years to properly write a book um
among the better known ones the good
ancestor Carpe DM regained uh but one
that's just come out history for
tomorrow inspiration from the past for
the future of humanity will be the main
uh topic of of today's conversation in
this book you cover lots of topics
including water shortages inequality AI
Revolution genetic
engineering however I would like to
focus the discussion on governance and
movement building based on your
learnings from looking at the past
thousand years ago um so first of though
what what inspired you to take this
particular take using an applied history
approach to the current Myriad crisis
that that humans in our planet
face sure so for the last 10 years I've
been writing a series of books like a
Trilogy about Humanity's relationship
with time so uh one of the books you
mentioned that the good ancestor was
about our relationship with the with the
future carpedm regain was about our
relationship with the present and this
new book history for tomorrow is about
Humanity's relationship with the past
and these are all explorations of what I
think of as temporal intelligence so you
know that Daniel Goldman concept you
know from the 1990s emotional
intelligence well I think we need to
nurture temporal intelligence by which I
mean the human capacity to think on
multiple time Horizons different modes
of time linear cyclical backwards
forwards um and I think particularly one
of those areas where we're lacking
temporal intelligence is about thinking
about our relationship with the past and
I think we all know that our politicians
our policy makers are so caught in the
tyranny of the now you know they can
barely see be on the next election most
of them will be on the latest tweet or
opinion poll or they are looking to the
Future they're crossing their fingers
and hoping that the tech Bros and
Silicon Valley um are right in thinking
that technology will sort out our
problems for us and here we are in an
age of poly crisis or metac crisis
depending how you define these things
climate and nature emergency risks from
Ai and genetic engineering ing threats
to democracy growing inequalities and
the one thing I feel our politicians and
policymakers many Nos and so on are not
looking at and not recognizing is that
history is one of our greatest resources
for thinking about the future of
humanity and in a way you know it it's
not a new idea by any means you can go
back to fiddies the Islamic thinker iban
caldon makavelli Hobs uh gerter the 18
in the 18th century the German writer
gerter said he who cannot draw on 3,000
years is living from hand to mouth so
there's an idea that that the past the
wisdom of the past the way we have faced
crises and challenges and built cities
and civilizations is a source of
nourishment hope of inspiration and
that's what I've tried to do in this
book and of course one other sort of key
aspect of this is that you know often we
hear that famous George santiana quote
you know those who cannot remember the
past are condemned to repeat it which is
an idea about learning from the warnings
of history and there are plenty of great
books that look at the warnings of
History uh Tim Snider's book on tyranny
for example great historian looking at
interwar fascism how we shouldn't be
repeating what happened between the wars
or books about the heritage of
colonialism and how we can move beyond
that and what I've tried to do is not
just look at the warnings from history
but to look at the moments of
possibility the moments of inspiration
look at what went right as much as what
went wrong and so I found history like
Gerta a source of nourishment for seeing
where we can find ways to tackle these
multiple crises facing Humanity this
Century I'm really looking forward to to
getting into some of uh your learnings
um but let me ask you kind of a
tangential question you mentioned the
import the importance of temporal uh um
experience tempor you know how we relate
to time and for the first generation
perhaps in our species history we have
the ability to understand and perceive
deep time and where we came from and the
grand Arc of big history that that
brought us here but at the same time
with social media and Tik Tock and and
um uh supernormal stimuli our attention
spans are less and less able to look at
the last thousand years or the last 500
million years so is the relationship
with time changing because of our social
media at the same time we have the
scientific tools to understand and
research what happened in the past what
are your thoughts on that yeah it's a
great question because the concept of
deep time that human beings are just an
eye blink in the cosmic story is a new
idea really it only comes really from
the late 18 Century um when you know
geologists started seeing all those
layers of rock and realizing that when
the Bible said that the Earth was
created a few thousand years ago well
maybe there was a question to be raised
about that but of course even though
we've known about deep time for a couple
of hundred years you know the
geologist's hammer has lost out against
the iPhone um and the acceleration of
time due to communication Technologies
has been far more dominant as a social
Force than the idea of deep time itself
and hence we have moved from the factory
clock of the 19th century to the nanc
speed share trading of today of course
the short termism of today has even
deeper Roots going back to how we began
measuring time in the 15th 14th century
the mechanical clock you know started
slicing up time first into hours and
sets of 15 minutes by 1700 most clocks
had minute Hands by 1,800 they had
second hands but I think what's going on
today is a recognition that we need to
think longer I mean this is a big Topic
in my book uh the good ancestors and
there's lots of reasons for this I think
the climate emergency itself has helped
us think beyond the here and now and
acted somewhat as a counter to the nanc
speed share trading you know just think
about all those ipcc reports you know
doing long-term predictions about sea
level rises and temperature rises on a
scale
looking at 30 years ahead 100 years
ahead 200 years ahead and you think back
to forecasting as it emerged in the
1960s and70s in business and other
fields like companies like shell maybe
they were looking 5 10 15 20 30 years
ahead not much more than that but we're
starting to think longer in many ways
but there is still a a a cultural battle
going on between the short and the long
um and that then raises the question
well can we think historically back in
time as well as forward in time and I
think what's really interesting if you
even think about your own life Nate you
know if you think about the year your
grandmother was born you know maybe that
was you know however many years ago 80
years ago 100 years ago um you know
people are obsessed with tracing their
family lineages even going back several
Generations when they can so we have
this capacity to look back I mean look
at the popularity of History podcasts um
or history documentary so even though we
are constantly checking our phones and
and and having our dopamine uh
stimulated by uh you know the social
media Barons um we also have a capacity
to pause and breathe and think long I
mean look at the obsession of people you
know reading historical biographies as
well so I think there's hope for
thinking historically we just need to
kind of nurture this part of our
temporal intelligence it's not like we
don't have the capacity to do it I mean
what do you think well what I think is
um I find it kind of bizarre that it's
taken me two years to have you on the
program is what I
think well I've been listening to I've
been listening to your podcast for ages
we are all fans in my household as I
think you know well for viewers that
don't know in your household is also
another uh former guest uh The Economist
Kate rayworth is your wife um so thank
you for for both of you listening so um
in your book you touch on the idea of
moving away from telling history uh
based on the biographies of Great Men
can you explain what you mean by that
and why that's important sure so in the
19th century the British historian
Thomas cile said that you know history
is but the bio biography Great Men it
was this idea that the way societies
change the way we shift is through the
role of the exemplary individual the
politicians the great political leaders
the key religious figures and that idea
has been so powerful I mean that is
partly why people today still read
biographies of Churchill and Napoleon
and Nelson Mandela but I think one of
the benefits of the rise of Marxist
history in the mid 20th century
particularly after the second world war
was the recognition that history also
changes due to the impact of collective
action organized social groups class in
Marx's sense though that of course is
too narrow because we've also have other
ways that people organize themselves
around different identities but since
the second world we've had the rise of
what sometimes called history from below
the idea that collectivities can shape
the past as much as great individuals or
as much as new technologies as well um
and so in the British tradition you've
got historians like Eric Hobs Bor uh who
are key Christopher Hill in the US
tradition I think of I don't know A Book
Like Howard Z of people's History of the
United States you know multi-million
copy bestseller which tried to
recast the story in the US since 1492
From Below looking at the perspective of
enslaved people of workers of women of
uh Native Americans so I think that's
important so what I'm doing in my new
book history for tomorrow is I'm
focusing as much as I can on that
history from below and the reason to do
it really has to do partly with
Collective agency and a sense of what
can I do you know I'm a reader of a book
I'm a citizen of the world what can I do
and if I'm told a story
about the past that it's only the great
leaders who can change things or it's
only cataclysmic events like Wars and
pandemics which change things things out
of my control then maybe there's nothing
I can do about anything yet I think
there's a very powerful way of thinking
about history that history from below
attitude the idea that social Innovation
is as important as technological
innovation which tells us that we can
shape the Contours of our
times so kind of how we read history uh
maybe a microcosm of some of the broader
hierarchical Social Challenges we have
today because the the winners write
history we've heard about that and so we
look at history from the you know the
great um notable uh biographies of Great
Men that you mentioned earlier but the
reality is that there were all kinds of
other things underpinning those eras and
we we hear less about those in our
geography and history classes uh it's
about Napoleon and and things like that
so just just out of curiosity for this
book was this mostly things that you had
uh interpolated and figured out on your
own over time or how many books did you
actually have to read to get this
Bottoms Up perspective on History uh to
write this one oh God hundreds of of
books and articles you know literally
hundreds wow literally hundreds some of
them I read during the last four years
of writing this book but a lot of them
like Howard's in that people's history
of United States has been with me for 20
years um and you know it's when writing
a book like this you know I am not a
professional academic historian I've got
a PhD in political science so my
background is very much about thinking
about political institutions and
governance and some of the iology of
Politics as well um but I've always
tried to look at the world through the
historical lens at what human
civilizations have done and not done
what are we capable of um so I have had
to draw on the work of extraordinary
experts you know this is a book that's
got discussions of um witchcraft in
Germany in the 16th century um it's got
discussions of the circular economy in
Japan in the 18th century it's got
discussions of Alternative forms of
democracy in West Africa in pre-colonial
times now I cannot claim to expertise in
all of these areas so I have had to rely
on um you know people who spent years in
the archives in a way acting as a kind
of ambassador of the past because a lot
of academic
historians I think are a little bit
afraid about trying to connect their
work to the present day even though
a lot of them are doing it because they
believe it matters if you talk to
someone who's writing about enslaver uh
the enslaved enslavement in the 18th
century in the United States most of
them they may not write about its
relevance to racial Injustice struggles
today they may not directly do that some
of them do um but most of them are
engaged in that issue because they think
it speaks to today so in a way I've
tried to draw out some of these stories
some of which I knew many of which I
didn't I love the surprising things the
stuff I knew nothing about um and uh
those things that have inspired me I've
also put in the book so other than
people reading your book how can we
culturally uh move away from the
biographies of Great Men view of History
to the there were lots of uh Bottoms Up
responses for social Innovation and and
change is it is it an education thing is
it a personal experience thing how do we
get to shift that
perspective yeah I'd like to see a world
where the idea of Applied history like
applied science is taught in uh schools
in elementary school you to Elementary
years there are university courses
increasingly on applied history but they
tend to be quite conservative um so they
tend to focus on let's learn from the
history of warfare and international
diplomacy in Harvard there's a big
Center on this but why not also learn
from social movements and Collective
action more broadly um so I think we
need to do all of those things but you
know I'm a book person you know so I
tend to write books not make films um
and there are many ways of doing it do
you read science fiction ever I'm
totally obsessed with science fiction um
I've got more I mean for example the the
the author I've read most of in the last
decade is Kim Stanley Robinson um I've
got a sh about three foot long of his
books and he I mean just to pick out one
science fiction author amongst many I
mean I think he's completely brilliant
and one of the most important political
writers in America is someone who thinks
about the past as much as he thinks
about the future and you find this
amongst some of the great sci-fi writers
who might be writing about the 24th
century but they can also tell you about
medieval Society uh Ursula lwin was
another one of these great sci-fi
writers whose knowledge and thinking
about history and anthropology were
really extraordinary why do you ask are
you a Sci-Fi person I am I am but the
reason I asked is I wondered if um the
Isaac azimoff Foundation Trilogy Where
they talk about the K uh the concept of
psychohistory is akin to what you're
talking about applied history that we
can learn kind of some fundamental
aspects of what it means to be human and
then maybe overlay Marvin Harris uh
super structur social structure rure
infrastructure in different cultural
millus to come up with actually
categories of of interventions based on
what our study of the past
suggests um yes and no is my answer to
that um I love azimoff um the idea of
psycho history is so enticing but in
asimov's work um history was the basis
for a new statistical science and I am
not claiming that I have any knowledge
of the probabilities of what will happen
I'm much more interested in
possibilities rather than probabilities
in what we have been capable of doing
but which isn't necessarily easy or
likely to happen um because I think that
some of the good stuff that's happened
in the past has not been all pervasive
there are models in the past that we can
look to I mean if I think about the
human future I mean I remember once
listening to uh one of your discussions
with uh Daniel schmachtenberger and he
used a phrase something along the lines
of that hum is on a course of kind of
ecological sort of self-termination you
know we're we're on that kind of pathway
and I too believe that we are on a
pathway towards ecological and
technological self-termination but I
don't think it's a definite rot it's not
an iron law it's not cast in stone that
that will happen because we know that
throughout history we have managed to
change systems to recalibrate how our
economies and our politics works again
I'm not saying this is very like to
happen and that's why in this book I
talk about the idea of radical hope
which is being committed to making
change even if you think the odds are
against you to always act as if change
were possible because imagine getting to
the end of your life and thinking well
you know regretting the fact you hadn't
taken you know action when it may have
been possible to to change so you know
going back to someone like azimoff um
I'm I'm not trying to create a science
of learning from history I'm trying to
think of History
not as a as a mode of Clairvoyance but
more as history as a kind of as a
suggestion um for what might be possible
it's like it's an Overton window of
possible social
Innovations
um way to put it we need examples of how
to be altruistic or how to uh innovate
uh we want to but if we don't have
examples of what worked in the past it's
I think it's like it there's a test
showing that if people see an altruistic
act with their own eyes they're 300%
more likely to do something altruistic I
think that maps on to what you're saying
that's a really fundamental point about
being able to witness the altruism
because again when I was writing this
book history for tomorrow some of the
most striking examples of learning from
history are ones which are examples of
History that's still with us today so
just to give you one instance of this if
you go to the the Spanish city of
Valencia uh on the East
Coast outside the west door of the
cathedral every Thursday at 12: noon you
can witness a ritual known as the
tribunal of waters the tribunal deas AAS
and this is a water Court a Grassroots
From Below watercourt which may be
Europe's oldest legal Democratic
institution and eight black cloak
figures sit in a semicircle outside the
door of the Apostles Thursdays at noon
and they wear these black cloaks and
each of them is a democratically elected
representative of one of the local
irrigation canals which are part of the
Valencia agricultural Hinterland which
provide all the Valencia oranges which
can be found over Europe it's very
important um and it is a uh an example
of managing scarce Water Resources they
fine the farmers who maybe violate the
rules um and again there are public
hearings for this and this institution
has been around for hundreds and
hundreds of years meeting on Thursday
since at least 1500 um it's an
institution goes back even know it's an
example of course of what Elena ostram
called The Commons right it's it's a
living history when people see that I
think that's a way of thinking okay if
they can do it in Valencia where else
could we do something like this that
will bring me even further a field from
from your book maybe but I think the
importance of ritual uh especially
ritual connected to ecology and nature
and the commons as you say is something
really overlooked in our society of
frenetic Pace social media just in time
delivery of stuff from a six continent
supply chain so that that ritual aspect
of it that in Valencia you can go and
and see that and it's been going on for
centuries I I think we a lot of us feel
like we missed that um you have any
thoughts on that yeah I think that we
need to invent rituals for a
ecologically sustainable future I think
it's a really important point because
the tribunal of waters in Valencia is
indeed a ritual or think of the subac
water management system in barley which
I don't write about in the book but
there's some really fine writing on this
book by Steven Lancing called perfect
order and in barley they have something
a bit like the tribunal of waters a kind
of a system for managing a scarce
resource but there are rituals around at
kind of there are rituals around worship
at Water temples in barley and things
like that and I think that's something
that's missing from people's lives in a
hyper individualistic atomized Society
but we need to connect rituals to a kind
of different ecological mindset to a
kind of biophilic rituals that we need
to invent and I happen to live in the
city of Oxford in the UK not Oxford
Mississippi or any other Oxford and
Oxford has maintained a few
pre-christian
festivals of connections with n with
nature which are highly ritualistic so
on May morning the 1st of May in the
city I live in people dance on the
streets decked out in with Ivy wrapped
around their uh heads and uh Dressed in
green um they are celebrating the uh
facundity you know the the the
nourishment the rising of the spring and
the coming of the summer it's a kind of
Harvest Festival and me and my partner
Kate and my kids we all get dressed up
and we dance on the streets at 6:00 in
the morning and it is a
moment but then by 8:00 the cars are
just coming and going and the buses are
back and it's totally disappeared and I
think we need more of that in order to
in a way embed the kinds of ideas that
we're talking about that you've been
talking about on this podcast uh for all
of this time would you agree with that I
would totally agree with that um but I
have a a dark asterisk on it as as those
things happen and they interrupt the
cars and such um is that going to be a
threat to the momentum of the
superorganism uh fellow U British
citizen Roger halam is has just been
sentenced to prison for making a speech
that's a more extreme version of what
you're talking about but the ecological
rituals at some point May um have a very
small overlap with business as usual I I
hope not um and uh yeah I mean I I
totally agree with you sentiment wise
and I think globally Suddenly at this
11th Hour there is a recognition of our
kinship with nature and uh slowing down
and reconnecting with others and and
with natural systems I feel that but I
feel like I'm also maybe in a in a
minority group that talks about it and
champions it yeah well I I completely
agree with with that I mean I certainly
don't think that Reviving or recreating
or inventing new kinds of nature rituals
is enough to it's not enough to just go
on a pilgrimage to Stonehenge a couple
of times a year when you've got the that
super organism bearing down on you you
know I think we need a plethora of uh
approaches including disruptive social
action the kind of thing that Roger
Ham's been doing we can maybe get on to
that but I do think that you know one of
the ways I think about this is I think
you know we all we need a biosphere
which provides the the air that we
breathe but we also need to think about
the ethnosphere what I think of is the
ethnosphere which is the cultural air
that we breathe the sets of assumptions
and um beliefs and World Views the
veltan chaung which shape what we think
and don't think what we do and what we
don't do and the idea of rituals are
part of reconstituting the ethnosphere a
book like I've just written is also part
of that too it's in the world of ideas
um but of course the story of history is
not just ideas changing things but it's
also about Collective action it's about
various kinds of disruption so the super
organism is not going to be scared of me
dancing uh with some Ivy wrapped around
my head but that is part of a different
narrative still in conversations around
your house how do you decide who gets to
speak for how long because both you and
Kate have a lot to say like is that ever
problem that you're finishing each
other's sentences and such it's funny
over the years our work is growing
closer and closer together I mean I
began in the 1990s really involved in
human rights activism and working with
indigenous people in Guatemala writing
uh articles in politics Journal about
measuring the quality of democracy and
so on and and Kate came from the
perspective of development economics um
working for the human development report
the United Nations development program
but over time our interests have
slightly merged she kind of led the way
really on um learning about the
importance of ecological economics which
of course is something that you've gone
into very deeply I was a latecomer to
that to reading Herman Daly for example
when I read Herman daily it blew my mind
um to recognize that economy Society
politics is a subset of the ecosystem
and to get that to go in deep into my
bones has taken even longer um and you
know another key thing for me was
reading Bill mckibben's the end of
nature a book he published in 1989 I
didn't read it till 2003 um and but it
absolutely shifted my thinking and in
that sense K and and my own thinking
started getting closer together so when
I think of well what should the goal of
humanity be I yeah I think of donut
economics but I'm also interested in
well what are the mechanisms to get us
there um you know so I'm very much
thinking about what are the kinds of
political institutions that we need to
create a donut style economy um and and
I like drawing on history in doing that
exploration well well let's get into
that because one uh area um well all
areas so far but one area I particularly
agree with you on is that understanding
uh and mitigating Global collapse of of
of various systems they're currently is
a really large demographic of what
shorthand we might call techno optimists
who believe that the energy transition
is merely switching out the bad energy
uh with good energy and that Innovation
will save us but in your book you talk
about social Innovation and and in my
opinion the energy transition is much
more about how we use energy than what
kind of energy it is so so why don't you
break it down for us what is social
Innovation the way you talk about it in
your new book and do you have a
particular potent example on how it has
propelled a civilization in the past
towards Rapid
change yes so I think one of the ways
that people often think about how
history shifts is through technological
innovation it's the spinning jenny it's
the iPhone it's the combustion engine
but I think that if you look through the
annals of the past the rise and Falls of
civilizations the comings and goings of
Nations and Empires I think we can see
that social innovation has been just as
an important a force and by social
Innovation I mean the human capacity to
organize themselves in movements uh to
commonly manage um resources to develop
shared ideals for the common good and
these social Innovations come in many
forms so you've got the kind of slow bur
social Innovations the ones that take a
long time to develop so things like that
Valencia water tribunal I mentioned the
rules to develop how to manage a common
resource like water um very deeply
embedded there as are commons management
um rules in many other spheres the kind
of things that Ellena ostram wrote about
you know managing forestry in in
Switzerland or Fisheries in West Africa
so that's one form of social Innovation
something like the principles by which
we manage common pool resources you know
who can have access to them what are the
rules for those who violate and so on
and then we've got other kinds of social
Innovation so think for example of the
rise of social movements and trade
unions in the late 18th 19th century a
way that you know workers particularly
organizing around the workplace to
create change so the second half of the
19th century in Europe was a time huge
shift because of the rise of the Trade
union movement you have all sorts of
legislation around limiting the work day
the 8 hour day the creation of the
weekend work safety all of that coming
out of a form of social organization and
then you've got social movements like
the the this the the uprisings of uh
enslaved people in Jamaica in 1831 so
slave uprisings all these things have
been a form of organization which didn't
necessarily exist in the same way uh you
know 2,000 years ago um but have have
emerged since and have been potent and
then I think a third really interesting
category um and there are many
categories of social Innovation uh
Innovations in the E economic sphere
particularly around Mutual Aid and the
rise of cooperatives again you can think
of the 19th century go to somewhere like
Emilio Roman the region in Italy which
today it's a region of 5 million people
today about onethird of the economy is
based on cooperatives and Steward owned
companies and about one-third of people
are employed in cooperatives and Steward
owned businesses and these emerged from
the 19th century even kind of earlier um
a different kind of model of
organizing um how we provision ourselves
so all of these are different kinds of
forms of social Innovation and what they
have in common is something that the
great Islamic historian from The 14th
Century iban kaldun recognized which is
the importance of what he call
assia Asia a a b i y a which is an
Arabic word meaning Collective
solidarity or group feeling and this
historian one of the first great
historians iben kalon in the
1370s um he was a he was a famous judge
from North Africa and and a legal and
historical scholar and he went to uh
spent a few years in uh Algeria what is
today Algeria in the early 1370s and in
a little bit like the um British
historian Edward Gibbon uh in the 18th
century he went to Rome and saw all
these crumbling buildings um and
wondered what explained the rise and
fall of the Roman Empire and he WR wrote
a famous book about that of course the
decline and fall of the Roman Roman
Empire ibben kalun did the same thing in
the 14th century um he was surrounded by
crumbling castles in North Africa and
thought where have these civilizations
gone what explains their rise and fall
and in his famous book the madima um his
book on History a cyclical theory of
History he said well the reason
civilizations tend to rise and fall the
key reason is because of this term assia
Collective solidarity he mentions it
more than 500 times and basically he
said that civilizations which Thrive
which are strong which have resilience
have a very strong social glue social
trust modes of collective action and
social responsibility and those which
tend to Crum
are ones where that social glue that
asaba falls apart so he looked at the
you know the Islamic regime in the south
of Spain in the 13th 14th century began
to fall apart partly because of growing
wealth inequalities where the rich got
richer the poor got poorer we know that
old story very few civilizations can
survive for a long time with those kinds
of long-term inequalities very clear um
finding from the study of of
civilization or collapse um and it was
about a kind of social solidarity
Collective solidarity so I think when
you go to IB kalun something so obscure
it seems that concept of asab I think
captures the importance of social
Innovation uh as opposed to other forms
of
innovation does the concept of asaba
which I would say today um broadly has
been religion can have a collective uh
purpose and also economic growth um
globally the last 50 years the rising
tide of energy Surplus and Innovation
have have lifted all Tides uh all all
boats but but can it apply to things
that are longer term and distant like an
ecological crisis because when we um
look at climate change and species loss
and insect loss and declines in sperm
count and all that stuff it's it's it's
hard
to get a collective Asia around that um
also in your book you wrote that most
turning points uh in history stem from
an externally derived threat like War
disease um or resource shortages or
something like that so how do climate
change biodiversity fit into this
historical model or is this a a no
analog um example
yeah that's a really great question
because I think the if you read someone
like iban calun today you know a 14th
century historian there's something
really missing fundamentally I think
from his analysis of civilizational Rise
and Fall so he focuses on that Asia that
social solidarity or what might call um
intras species solidarity what's missing
is interes solidarity in other words our
relationship with the ecology around us
on which our
civilizations depend so when I think
about what are the fundamentals of
helping us to to bend rather than break
to use you know some of your terminology
which I think is so fantastic um how do
we Bend rather than break well I think
we need three things one is we need the
Asia we need the intras species
solidarity we need to have ways of
acting collectively and being able to
support each other through tough times
but we also need a hyper sense of
interdependence with the Living World um
that kind of biophilia that inters
species solidarity if we are going to
recognize that we need to create
societies which exist within planetary
boundaries or exist or work with the the
cycles of the Living World and then the
third Factor we need is we need to have
a capacity to respond effectively to
crisis right and I've got a a model of
that we can maybe talk about that called
the disruption Nexus but I think on the
the topic of that inter species
solidarity interdependence with the
living world one of the things I've
tried to emphasize in this book and I
have no easy way around how do we do
this right um it's one of the big and
difficult questions but I do think if
you did I would be skeptical but go on I
mean if I if I look at some of my own
writing in the past like my book The
Good ancestor talked a lot about
indigenous cultures um and and that idea
of kind of interdependence the idea that
you can find in many indigenous cultures
that um that the rivers are are not a
resource they're our relatives or the
idea of Seventh Generation decision-
making which can be found amongst adun
people and in other cultures um and I'm
very inspired by that very much but I'm
also thinking that it's very important
that in Western hyper capitalist culture
we try and find the elements of that
biophilic interdependence inside our own
cultures in our own histories because
it's not that far away because I think
there's
a a false story which has been told
about Humanity's
relationship um with the Living World
over the last say 500 years and that
story is that we have become
increasingly alienated from Nature by
the Industrial Revolution basically and
that Christianity has played into that
through the idea of the domination of
nature um the machines of the Industrial
Revolution did that by sending us into
the cities and disting us from um The
Living World and
treating the Earth as a resource for
exploitation and that's all true but
there's a parallel story which is and
there's an absolutely brilliant book on
this by the uh British historian Keith
Thomas called man in the natural world
um 1500 to 1800 and he says that there's
a parallel story of just as we were
becoming alienated from nature at the
same time at least in parts of Western
Europe there was a sense that we needed
to reconnect with this thing that we
were losing so you had the rise of
things which might seem trivial like the
rise of recreational gardening 16th and
17th century the obsession with tree
planting across Germany and England in
in the same period um you get people
starting to write nature journals like
Gilbert whites natural history of
selborn all of these things and then at
the same time you had the preservation
of some of these rituals like I talked
about earlier like Mayday connecting
with nature and those rituals are right
across Europe in Estonia in Sweden in
Germany um and so I like sort of
thinking let's try and reconnect with
those things that are already in our
culture as well as those things which
are in other cultures which are equally
inspiring and but that's only the
beginning and just one final thought on
on this you mentioned religion um
religions have been the most powerful
force in human history for giving us new
values um for creating visions of change
I'm not a religious person by any means
but what I
recognize um is that I think the global
ecological movement as it has emerged
since the 1960s is basically a massive
decentralized religion without calling
itself that that you've got all these
different movements to preserve Wildlife
some of them are very conservative some
of them are more radical which are about
people scaling cied power stations but
all of them have something in common
which is a kind of sense of the worship
of the earth of Gaia they may not say
that on their websites right but that's
kind of what they're doing and
that that's something quite hopeful and
and interesting um that gives me hope
for that sense of interconnection but
then trying to mobilize it is another
thing well you claim not to be a
religious person Roman but it sure
sounds like you're a a devotee of what
might be called animism to
me actually I really like animism
actually I you know but I like coming to
animism through science write out my
window above the screen that I'm looking
at are two ash trees now those ash trees
provide enough oxygen for eight human
beings so I realize that they are my
external lungs wow
now so we have this kind of Mythology
that our bodies kind of end with our
skin and bone but when you open your
mind to the idea that the trees are my
external lungs or that I'm breathing in
argon atoms which were breathed in by
the Buddha and Jesus and Cleopatra um
David Suzuki the Great Canadian
environmentalist is very good at talking
about this that science for me is a
route into the kind of into connection
with the Living World which I didn't get
culturally you know I happened to grow
up in Australia and I did have some
exposure to indigenous culture through
my grandfather who gave me in fact when
I was eight years old I met one of
Australia's great indigenous writers a
man called kubala thalon um also known
as dick ruffy who wrote a book called
The Rainbow serpent about how human
beings were born out of the rocks and
and and the rivers and the desert but
really that stuff isn't deep in me so
going via science is actually I think
quite a a helpful route for a lot of
people at least that's how that's what
makes me feel connected on a kind of
more existential level too a sense that
I am not just this body but a real part
of me the living breathing part of me
which part of who I am is something
bigger than that a kind of you are
therefore I am I don't know how how do
you feel about your relationship with
the Living World do you feel that kind
of um culturally do you
feel that connection with the kind of
landscape that you live in or or the
world that you are part of the cultural
part is is brand new I've always felt a
biophilic uh
camaraderie kinship with nature from
when I was three or four years old uh
nature and and hikes in the forest were
my
Cathedral uh and I then approached it
from a scientific perspective you know
EO Wilson and and um Bill Plotkin and
and many other writers and now only
recently am I looking at the cultural
ecological
connections uh the way you describe and
I do feel like at this 11th Hour our
species our culture is starting to
remember these things uh from our from
our ancient past and I just hope it's
not too late and the tsunami of finance
and geopolitics and depletion and and
other things doesn't uh snuff out the
Ember of of this of this Awakening
because this is a species level
conversation we're at this real critical
juncture of you know what what are the
seeds that we plant for um our children
and and the you know The Unborn children
of many other Generations uh and other
species it yeah I I think about it a lot
well here's the other
thing I've always loved
nature uh when I left W Street to pursue
this path my dad referred to me as his
environmental wacko son to his
friends was
right but now like we go fishing I went
fishing in Canada a few weeks ago with
um 13 of my male relatives we've done it
maybe 40 times since I was uh young and
we catch some fish and we eat some and
we let the rest go but now I'm starting
to like empathize for the fish's
suffering and I think about it and if we
have to dispatch them to eat them I I
want to do it as quickly and like I
think about what other species you know
even worms or chickens or foxes I I I
empathize from their perspective which I
never did when I was younger even though
I cared about nature so something is
happening in me talking to people like
you and other Scholars and recognizing
the fragility of the biosphere and the
safety of the zone of the hallene that
we've all accepted as permanent kind of
in our culture and it's not and it's at
risk so I'm I'm kind of a melstrom of
different emotions on this some days I I
Revel in the beauty of the natural world
and other days I view it as a snapshot
in the movie and I anticipate the later
scenes that are going to be unpleasant
and that gets me down um so that's my
answer to your question you're like Kate
I'm gonna have to have you back and
interview me in the future um always
ready to do that always ready to do that
so so one of the ideas I got from your
book um is that there's kind of a a um a
Clearing House of ideas from the past
that we can apply to our current
situation and the way that I see it is
there's this um steps of higher uh
height and hurdles to get to where we're
going the first step is understanding
the metac crisis and and how everything
fits together just Loosely you squint
and see it then the next step is caring
and obviously you and I uh in this
discussion are are voicing our care for
nature and and the natural world and I
think a lot of followers of this show
are are past those two steps and then
the next hurdle is what the hell do we
do and as individuals and as a culture
so um dur during the rest of this
episode um and I've I've not even gotten
to 90% of the questions that I had
planned on asking you that always
happens to you that you say that in
every episode do I yeah well especially
the ones I'm I'm interested in um but I
want to take a deeper dive of your
learnings from the past that are
applicable and let's start with with
governance um so you have an entire
chapter dedicated to democracy and as it
happens in my country we have a major
election coming out in a in a couple of
months um and you argue that it's
actually by Design in a representative
democracy system that we don't have an
electoral option um that that we support
So in your opinion do you think we've
over Amplified the weight of the
representative part of representative
democracy um and what are the most
viable open Society Democratic
Alternatives you've studied from the
past that we might be able to lean on or
learn from with respect to what's coming
our way
yeah so where I start with thinking
about democracy is certainly recognizing
that the political systems that we have
today particularly representative
democracy were designed in the 18th and
19th century in a different era to solve
different problems they were a
replacement for um aristocratic
government monarchical government um and
they have seemed to be as far as I can
tell absolutely hopeless at dealing with
the ecological crisis that we face you
know we know that you know since the
alarm Bells about CO2 that's the thing
about CO2 not materials you know started
to ring with the Rio Earth Summit in
1992 what's happened to Global carbon
emissions well more than doubled um we
clearly have political systems which are
dysfunctional when it comes to dealing
with crisis that are very long term in
particular the sort of Slow Burn slow
violence of the the ecological emergency
um and so we need to look for different
kinds of systems and look you can have
all the sustainable development goals
and targets or whatever that you like
but if your political system is still
caught in short-term Cycles you're not
going to get very far and I I find it
slightly um frustrating a lot of
discussions in the in the ecology sphere
which are not taking the politics
seriously enough so I think it's really
important to recognize that the
representative democracy that we have
invented in the 18th 19th century was
designed to exclude people not to
include them and what I mean by that is
that when the framers of you know the US
Constitution the French Revolution uh
parliamentary democracy in England were
doing their thing they were scared of
the demos the people um they were scared
of direct participation so they
developed a system called representative
government where you would have expert
politicians who would um be the voice of
the people cuz they didn't trust the
people you can see this in the US
context in the writings of Madison uh
you can see it in a whole load of other
writers across Western Europe so let's
just first recognize that the
representative system is just one
particular way of organizing our
governance which is actually designed to
exclude or that functions to exclude
people and then if you start thinking
historically are there other modes now I
used to teach in universities in the
late 1990s early 2000s I used to teach
political science democratic Theory and
history and all that kind of stuff I
thought I was an expert in democracy I
wasn't because I didn't even realize
that we were basically just pushing one
particular mode of democracy
representative democracy um and that
there are other forms through history
which have been kind of written out of
the
story um you know Winston Churchill
famously said well democracy is the best
form the worst form of government except
for the all the other forms that have
been tried from time to time but he was
blind as well to the other options cuz
by democ he meant representative
government so where do we look for
history in history for other options
well the one obvious place to go of
course is to ancient Greece which
everybody knows that ancient Greek
democracy well a lot of people know that
one of its trait was it was exclusionary
excluded women it excluded slaves it
excluded immigrants but its two key
forms of decision-making were really
important one of them was what they had
they had a form of assembly government
in other words anybody could turn up
almost every week to the pinix which was
their decision-making body any male
citizen so that meant about 50,000
people and they could vote sometimes
6,000 people would come and make a
decision so it didn't they weren't they
didn't have elected representatives in
the way we do today it was direct
participation right that was one aspect
of it the second aspect they had former
government they had is what's called
sortition which is selection by lottery
selection by lot so for the 500 key
positions of what was basically the
legislature uh or or or their Congress
as it were um was effectively chosen
randomly by random selection of Greek
citizens and it was a very effective
system it lasted you know at least a
couple of hundred years and it wasn't
the only the ancient Greeks who did this
I mean if you look in the
Renaissance Republican Florence before
it got taken over by the medich dynasty
they selected their um major political
positions through Lottery as well like
the ancient Greeks did or if you go to
Switzerland in the 16th and 17th century
in fact when I was researching this book
I discovered this um country in effect
um which I'd never heard about it was
called the free state of rtia spelled r
h AE t i a or the Republic of the three
leagues I'd never heard of it but
between 1523 and
1799 a a group of uh re a region in in
Switzerland basically had a form of
Grassroots assembly style democracy a
bit like ancient Greece where what they
had but it was more sophisticated they
had um about 250 local neighborhood
assemblies where anyone could
participate um men yes but uh all men so
cow herds as much as Merchants they
would make decisions for local issues
like local taxes or whose turn it was to
clear the Alpine paths and then for more
important decisions
they sent delegates not elected
representatives but delegates up to the
next level of 49 communes and then they
had a a federal assembly that met a
couple of times uh a year and it was
basically what today we would call an
anarchist form of government really if
you look at the writings of uh Mari ban
the social ecologist from the US who
died some years ago he was very
interested in these kinds of alternative
Democratic models which are Grassroots
and that very model
the one in the free state of Ria the in
Switzerland in the 16 17 18th century
actually has been replicated today in
various parts of the world the most
important is if you go to Northeast
Syria today the area known as rava in
the middle of a war zone basically the
Kurdish people have created a form of
assembly government based in fact
bizarrely on the ideas of Mari bookan
the great social ecologist former
Anarchist thinker
who and they've been their their leader
Abdullah aelan read maray bookan read
about the ancient Greeks and thought
this is a better way of running a
society than by having a revolutionary
Marxist overthrow of the state
Grassroots politics functioning for
several million people it's completely
extraordinary um and I know you've got
questions now so I'll just hold back
from talking about citizens
assemblies that's where I was going I I
mean we could spend the entire interview
on on this topic because I I have so
many questions and and
insights um and constraints I mean the
first is I I think this fits who we are
as an evolved social tribal ape um and
it makes sense to me but I think
certainly I don't know that this would
work with um centralized
financialized economic growth for 8
billion of us um but I think could work
in some postgrowth uh more Biore
Regional future sort of thing but it
also depends on the education and and
understanding of what we Face by the
people that are that are chosen uh in
the in the assemblies uh because if
everyone doesn't understand climate
change or the fact that two asht trees
um give enough oxygen for eight people
then you know worse decisions will be
made
um
so H how do well go on and tell us about
a citizen assembly or or follow up with
what you're saying the the the challenge
here this is the first time we've ever
spoken and there's way too much to fit
into a 90minut interview U because I
love I love it all and I have questions
on it all yeah I will try to be succinct
um I think your question is very
fundamental and I like your skepticism
and I think it's absolutely right to be
skeptical about
you know there's a real danger of
cherry-picking examples from history and
and thinking that we can just sort of
place them in today's world to deal with
today's problems and you know this is
always a problem of analogical re
reasoning we need to look for
similarities and differences that every
dictator is not another Hitler every war
is not another Vietnam but when it comes
to Citizens assemblies that ancient
Greek tradition which continued in
Europe has reemerged amazingly in the
last 20 years so the idea of randomly
selecting citizens to talk about issues
is undergoing an extraordinary
Renaissance and that Renaissance really
in many ways goes back to Ireland um in
the 2010s where they started Reviving
The idea of the citizens assembly and
they famously had a Citizens assembly on
the Hot Topic of abortion uh very Hot
Topic in in Ireland that the politicians
didn't want to touch but they randomly
selected about a 100 citizens using a
kind of algorithm to make sure that you
had a mixture of old and young and
people from different ethnic backgrounds
and different ages and and and different
parts of the country and they discussed
this issue and they recommended that
there should be a referendum um to
change the Constitution to make abortion
legal and that referendum was passed and
that Irish example then kickstarted a
wave of what's called deliberative
democracy which is direct participation
through random selection across European
countries that have been more than 250
citizens assemblies in the last decade a
lot of them have been on the climate
issue some of them have been on AI or on
Aging populations and they're really
fascinating
because you know if I'm trying to think
about them in a positive sense I do
believe they're the most exciting
innovation in democracy since the
extension of the franchise to women in
the early 20th century fabulously
interesting and exciting the fact that
there had been hundreds of them but and
you know you know this as well as I they
are highly problematic in many ways so
the way that they tend to be structured
at the moment is that politicians set up
the assemblies invite citizens to have a
discussion about something the citizens
come up with a bunch of recommendations
and then the politicians basically often
ignore those recommendations because
it's not
binding what's interesting about
citizens assemblies is they tend to come
up with much more radical and
transformative policy proposals than
regular politicians so the you know the
French climate assembly in one in in
Spain they put forward the proposal that
EOS side you know the violation of the
Living World should be a crime right uh
in National and international law and
you know one of the reasons I got
interested in this was thinking about
long-term decision-making when I was
writing my last book because there's
very strong evidence that citizens
assemblies tend to take a longer view
than the politicians caught up in short
term cycles and so what we're facing now
is a question about how can we bring
citizens assemblies into a more
institutional place in politics and so
that they're not ignored by the
politicians so you know in East Belgium
now they have a permanent citizens
assembly Brussels now has a permanent
citizens assembly on the climate um in
Gdansk in Poland the mayor has said that
any citizen assembly which has more than
80% of people voting for a proposal they
will put it into practice these are baby
steps in a larger change of of politics
um let's see how far we get with
citizens assemblies what do you
think here's what I think
um I've always said that I am a fan of
local currencies um because not that
they're going to replace the US dollar
or the British pound but because of the
Social Capital they create and I think
the same thing applies to Citizen
assemblies is ostensibly the proximate
reason for them is to have better
decisions made with the politicians but
ultimately especially in the times that
we face you are organizing and getting
to know other people where you live and
talking about the issues of the day and
that may be the ultimate benefit of
scaling citizen
assemblies um I I think so so how does
someone listening to this in Topeka
Kansas uh or grand morray
Minnesota Wow Let's try to start a
citizen assembly where we are is there a
a checklist or or a way to for people to
start that yeah I think it's an
absolutely great point that the purpose
of a lot of this is to sew the seeds of
asaba of social trust that glue I think
that's partly what's going on it's about
building a new Society in the Shell of
the old that may when particular moments
of Crisis happen we are ready in terms
of social solidarity in terms of New
Economic and political Visions uh having
an ecosystem of currencies rather than a
monoculture of currencies um and anyone
can set up a Citizens assembly um in
their own town in fact lots of towns are
doing this even when the politicians are
not doing it um Extinction Rebellion the
direct action movement in the UK has
started you know trying to say well
let's just set up our own citizens
assemblies have public hearings and in
fact you know I talked about that
Valencia tribunal of waters well partly
inspired by that in Latin America um a
body has been set up called the Latin
American tribunal of waters where they
hold it's not an official government
body but it's a kind of a a
community-based organization an NGO in
effect um which holds public hearings
for example when a big Corporation wants
to build a dam in Honduras that will
wipe out the traditional lands of
indigenous people or something like that
they hold these public hearings which
get enormous media attention and which
help build the social capital to create
change so I think you're absolutely
right that we can I think there's
enormous possibility for this but also
and this is going to say sound a little
bit way off but you may not know but
when I left
Academia I started working with this
historian called Theodore zeldon who I
quoted the beginning of the conversation
um he set up an organization called the
Oxford Muse spelled m m e and it was
invented to create conversations between
strangers and to overcome social divides
to overcome the hyper individualism of
neoliberal consumer capitalism and what
I did for several years when I left
Academia was I used to organize these
things called conversation meals where
we would invite strangers from a city
maybe a hundred people sometimes a
thousand people in a public park we'd
invite them for a meal rich and poor
black and white you know different
religions and instead of giving them a
menu of food we gave them a menu of
conversation with questions about life
on it like what have you learned about
the different varieties of love in your
life life or in what ways would you like
to be more courageous or how have your
priorities changed over the years and it
was like the opposite of speed dating we
people would talk for an hour not for a
minute but the purpose of it a fun
activity of of community building was a
deeper one about recognizing how social
change happens which is that if you and
I sit down and have a conversation and I
see the world from your point of view if
only for a moment and you see it from
mine we create a
microcosmic little little bit of
equality and this is a mode of change
and a mode of holding societies together
in in difficult times so anyone can put
on a a conversation meal in fact there's
brilliant projects around the world
which do exactly this
yeah that that is brilliant um I was
going to ask whatever happened to that
that Oxford Muse because that's sorely
needed in today's world things like that
yeah I mean the Oxford Muse I mean I
left it after three or four years it's
still puts on some of these conversation
meals but there are there have been lots
of other ones which have been spawned
since then so the big ecological project
in in the UK called the Eden Project
which is a kind of like a biosphere that
you can go and visit as a kind of as an
ecotourist they set up something called
the big lunch where hundreds of
thousands of people and a particular Day
in the UK each year in their local
communities put out chairs and tables in
the streets and they simply have lunch
together um it's totally brilliant I
think it could be improved with putting
menus of conversation on the table um
that's what I'm into and in fact
historically in a sense this is what we
did if you go back to the coffee houses
of the 18th century and I write about
this in in my new book history for
tomorrow the coffee houses of the 18th
century which uh exploded in popularity
in London uh there were over 2,000 of
them you know in the early 1700s when be
50 years before there had been none one
of the things that they had was a
communal table and on that communal
table you would sit with a stranger and
the communal table would have on it
periodicals and pamphlets so the the
printing Revolution helped with this but
these were places where
strangers um not of very different
social backgrounds but of relatively
different social backgrounds mostly men
so it had its limitations they would
discuss the big ideas of the day
republicanism anti-slavery that's where
Daniel defo and Tom Payne were doing
their thing if you just think of again
I'm thinking of the UK but in the UK
there are 30,000 coffee shops right
today imagine if they were using imagine
if you put in communal tables in each of
them and there were just 10
conversations between strangers a day
that would make over a 100 million
conversations a year I think that's
actually quite interesting and as
important and serious as thinking how
we're going to you know tax
carbon there's 30,000 coffee shops how
many pubs do you know offand probably
more than
30,000 yeah I mean the question is
whether we can convert the pubs into
conversational hubs in fact you could
probably change churches which are dying
out in this country sort of traditional
Anglican you know Church of England but
there's all these social spaces that we
need to reclaim I think for building
Asia for building resil for having
conversations for
sharing you know communal food because
again as you say this is
about actions which don't necessarily
change the system right now but they
start eroding it at the edges and so
that when the time comes we have enough
of that Social Capital to rebuild reform
but it's part of bending not breaking
for sure speaking of bending not
breaking does your applied history and
the hundreds of books and such that you
read um on the last Thousand Years offer
you any
um Vantage or speculation on what's
going on right now in the UK with the
Immigrant um murders and the chaos in
the streets uh over this past weekend
today's Monday August 5th is is there
any lens from history that you can apply
to that uh situation
yeah I think there are lots of lenses
from history I mean I've got a whole
chapter in my book on the history of
migration um because as we
know you know by 2050 it's possible that
there will be one billion people who are
migrants one in 10 people that's partly
due to climate change be due to the
impacts of AI automation all sorts of
things like that and we're going to have
to find ways of living together on a
scale which you know people are going to
be moving on a scale which we have not
seen since the shift from the
countryside to the city in the 18th and
19th century in the industrial
revolution so partly and if you look at
the history of that well look at the
history of Chinese immigration in the
United States for example when you had
Chinese migrants started coming in in
the 1840s and 50s fleeing the taiping
rebellion and Civil War in China coming
to the the gold mines coming to build
the railroads well as soon as the
economic crisis hit like in the 1870s in
California boom you start getting
lynching of Chinese immigrants right and
the burning of Chinese quarters you've
got the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 I
think the first piece of federal
legislation to exclude a particular
ethnic or cultural group um so what
we're seeing partly today is something
similar is that when you know you have
moments of economic instability um when
people are can't pay their mortgages
when food and energy prices are going up
well the first targets are The Outsiders
of course
um and you see this you know replicated
through history but um I think that's
partly what's going on today that you
you target The Outsider um who isn't
actually the cause of your fundamental
problems because we know that migrants
uh fantastic economic data on this tend
to be net um they net beneficiaries to
in terms of of B of government budgets
because migrants tend to pay more taxes
than the average person they take less
from the social system in terms of
social soci security you know education
and health um so that they're net
contributors um to to to budgets but
that's not how the issues that are
framed but I think there's something
really important here about this
particular moment what's happening in
the UK um but more generally about the
importance of crises for creating change
in history and I really love to just say
something about this for a moment
because if you think about how
civilizations change what makes them
survive and
thrive one thing as I you need is that
social glue of Asia the second thing you
need I think is the interdependence of
biophilia with the N living world but
the third thing you need is a capacity
to respond to crisis and you know I've
been so frustrated over the last 15
years 20 years thinking of all these
ecological crisis going on in the world
the wildfires in California floods in
Bangladesh melting eye sheets record
temperatures in the Artic and yet our
governments still don't act well why not
well it tends of course if you look at
history governments tend to act on
certain kinds of crises like Wars or
pandemics these sort of very big ones
but most crises there are too many
reasons not to act so I became really
interested in what is it that what are
the contexts in which you get rapid
transformative change to deal with an
urgent issue what is needed um and I
think what's needed is what I call in in
my book that that the model I developed
is called the disruption Nexus so
imagine a triangle with three corners in
one corner you've got some kind of
Crisis like the 2008 financial crash or
you know the heat waves across Europe
last year a climate induced one and then
in a second corner of the triangle
you've got disruptive movements that can
amplify the sense of Crisis which push
the politicians to change and then the
third Corner you've got new ideas or
Visionary ideas in society which can
Inspire the movements which become
relevant at the moment of Crisis you
know I don't quote Milton Friedman very
often but as you know he famously said
you know a crisis is an opportunity for
change but the actions that are taken
depend on the ideas that are lying
around so if you get those three things
together that is when I think you're
most likely to get changed you think of
just one example Berlin 1989 why did
That Wall come down well because they've
been protest for years and years and
years right from from from movements
from below and it hadn't brought about
change what it's because you had this
conjunction of three things you had the
crisis in the East German leadership
they were fighting each other partly
through internal power struggles and how
they were going to respond to Mikel
gorbachov the Soviet premier's reforms
of glos and peris ster you had the ideas
lying around in terms of ideas around
Democratic freedoms Freedom of movement
freedom of speech partly spread by batav
H in essays like the power of the
powerless and then you had the
disruptive movements taking to the
streets the big uprisings in leig in
October 1989 then finally the big shifts
in uh of of the big mobilizations in
Berlin in early November 1989 which
tipped the system and so there's a kind
of conjunction going on and so the
question let me just say one more point
about this is
that at a moment of Crisis as Society
can go in multiple directions so in the
depression in the 1930s um you know
after the Wall Street Crash some
countries like Scandinavia responded to
that crisis with social democracy
welfare states in other places it
accelerated the shift towards fascism
Italy Germany so here we are at a moment
of of Crisis um being expressed in riots
in the UK right now being expressed in
the capital attack in 2021 with a proud
boy and Q or n which direction we going
to go we've got to be ready for the
change so if if people are interested in
um this concept of A disruption Nexus
and this triangle that you just
described and if they believe that your
speculation and framing there is on to
something um given an unknown timeline
from 1 month to 10 years before the next
Mega crisis what what would we do now as
individuals or as um Community U Mayors
and local leaders or
nationally um given what you've learned
what what could you advise people do now
uh under that um disruption Nexus
framework I think the historical message
is very clear that you don't get the
rapid transformative change unless we
act collectively in disruptive movements
that's the history of the slave
uprisings in Britain in the 1830s which
accelerated the change towards the
abolition of slavery act in 1833 that's
the story of the suff forets taking to
the streets in Finland and and and
Britain in the early 19th century that's
the story of um the civil rights
movement in the US and the 19 uh 60s of
rule baking disruptive movements uh and
I think that's the story of where we
need to be today I mean on this very
podcast I remember hearing Bill McKibben
saying you know the best thing to do as
an individual is to be less of an
individual I think that's pretty much I
mean that's a rough quote let's say I
think it's about Collective action it's
about asking yourself what can I do with
others to be part of this new story and
you might act in very different ways it
doesn't mean you have to be doing what
me and my daughter have sometimes done
which is lie on the street in the front
of the houses of Parliament and block
the block the roads with Extinction
Rebellion taking direct action on the
ecological crisis you know I don't do
that naturally I like staying in in old
libraries in Oxford and writing books
but I found that the the best way to be
a good ancestor is to join those
disruptive movements as well as writing
the books but that's not for everybody
you know for some people it's saying
let's join the parent teacher
Association at the local school and get
solar panels on the roof let's be part
of a collective reading Circle um you
know there's all sorts of things we can
do but I think together to we rather
than
me is the way we're going to create
change it is too late to leave the
problems of our time to simmer on the
low flame of gradualism to quote Howard
sin you know it is too late for that
stuff um and of course one other thing
is we also need not just movements but
we need the new ideas we need the
podcasts like this we need the books we
need the films we need to change the
ethnosphere so that we are
ready is there anything that surprised
you in your research like here's a book
I'm going to write um looking at the
past to inform and is there anything
like whoa I never would have expected
that um studying the past either in a
positive or A negative uh light yeah
there were so many examples but one of
the ones that really struck me was that
you know people today they're so often
talking about the circular economy how
do we create a circular economy where
we're reusing
refurbishing uh materials and things
like that and I'd always thought that
well yeah past societies did that but
often on a really small scale you know
sort of indigenous cultures where um you
know they would live within the means of
of the resources that they had with them
but one of the things I found was Japan
in the 18th century in the city of Edo
today's Tokyo that was a society with a
million people living in it so large
scale and they had basically what we
would today call a circular regenerative
economy so partly because of resource
scarcity they weren't trading with the
outside world so they had um scarcity of
things like cotton of Timber so if you
had a kimono you might wear it during
the day and when it wore out you would
turn it into pajamas you'd wear at night
then you would chop it up and turn it
into nappies for your baby after that
you turn it into cleaning cloths and
then you would burn it for fuel um there
were thousands of recycling and
refurbishing repurposing businesses in
Ido in the 18th century people
collecting used candle wax and reforming
them into candles down and out summar
repairing umbrellas people would pay you
for your human waste and sell it on as
agricultural fertilizer so you I look
back at that you think God they had a
kind of a no waste Society back then and
at scale um and what a thing why didn't
I know that why hadn't anybody told me
about that I love those examples which
kind of surprised me well and with a
million people and not that long ago
really so it goes to show you how the
benefits and thear L J from the carbon
pulse have blinded us to simple things
like that things have been so cheap that
we just oh this breaks I go buy a new
one and I think that's going to going to
change uh in the not too distant future
can I say one other thing about Japan in
the 18th century you may you know just
that you know people often say oh
environmentalist you just want to go
back and live in caves well in 18
century Japan they weren't living in
caves this was a time of cultural
flourishing of the artworks of hirosi
and the poetry of baso of kabana you
know flower ranging and Street Theater
sumo wrestling you know I think that we
can have cultural thriving within the
boundaries of of an ecological
civilization I don't see that it's one
or the other do you take any like herbal
supplements or anything because you have
so many facts figures names dates on the
tip of your tongue I don't think my
brain fires that way what how how do you
manage that or is that just all your
life if you've been that way it's I
don't know I know people who do it a lot
more than me but I think it's actually
when you write a book like this it's
just so fascinating you know that you
know to recognize that it doesn't have
to be this way the kind of world that we
have and so these examples just kind of
stick in my mind and in a way I've been
slowly educating myself in the
possibilities of a different kind of
world it's a little bit like you know
that idea of um shifting Baseline
syndrome Roman ecology you know the way
that the the researchers take as their
Baseline their kind of childhood levels
of forest cover or fisheries and and
then the Baseline shifts up and we
forget what the abundance that there was
in the past that's what I think that
history is like that there's this
abundance of possibilities and we need
to break through the Baseline of our own
imaginations and I've tried to fill my
head in my my latest book with these
examples and there are so many others as
well I mean one tiny example so I was
telling we had a visitor to our home the
other day the great um uh native
Hawaiian scholar a guy called kamana
Beamer brilliant thinker um uh thinker
about indigenous knowledge in in Hawaii
and I was telling him about hey Kam do
you did you know about that Japan in the
18th century they had this incredible
circular economy and he said well we had
that in Hawaii too before 1810 before
the Colonial period we had what he calls
the ancestral circular economy again at
scale Hawaiian Islands over a million
people so I didn't write about that in
my book I wish I'd known about it right
let us let us you know in Mai culture
they say I walk backwards into the
future with my eyes fixed on the past
Kia faki Tahari faka let's do a little
bit of that walking backwards and in
most of these cultures that you studied
in the past on average had a fraction of
the material throughput that our modern
culture does so this has been my point
all along I that's why I call the
podcast the great
simplification yes I think our current
uh civilization and the trappings and
expectations and and Footprints uh has
an expiry date but that doesn't mean
that something wonderful still can't
come out the backside we don't know what
it's going to look like but but thank
you for your your work in describing uh
some of these things um and let let's
move on to some closing questions and
and you know what's coming since you
listen to the podcast but in addition to
becoming less of an individual uh as you
recommended uh echoing Bill mckibben's
sentiments what sort of personal advice
to the viewers of this program do you
have who are aware of the meta crisis
and and all that it entails well yes I
think there is the aspect of acting
collectively I think I'd like to send a
message of radical hope or Draw
distinction between optimism and hope
rather I think optimism is a kind of
glass half full attitude that
everything's going to be okay as I said
at the beginning I don't think
everything's going to be okay I mean we
are heading down that curve towards
civilizational breakdown but I think
always remember to have hope to act as
if change were possible because changes
have happened in the past you know
nothing in history is inevitable until
it happens
take that thought with you in your
mental back
pocket what can someone listening to
this episode right now due today this
week this month to help address some of
the the broader challenges that we
discussed and they're they're learning
about on this podcast or is it all up to
politicians and and
leaders I think it's the opposite of
that I think politics is what happens in
between elections you know it's how
we reconstitute our communities I think
that is going to be the Bedrock of a
different kind of civilization it's that
asaba point once again so think about
what can you do in your neighborhood to
with other people in any field it could
be running a football team you know a
soccer team um it could be setting up a
conversation meal it could be taking
part in an ecological protest actually
it doesn't matter because
the great challenge we face as society
today I think is to shift from the 20th
century age of individualism to a 21st
century age of more Collective values to
shift from what I've sometimes call
introspection to outros you know the age
of introspection We inherited from
neoliberal individualism from Sigman
Freud and Oprah Winfrey where we are
said to ourselves the way to answer the
question of what should I do with my
life is to look inside ourselves well
outros is about saying the way I'm going
to live my life is by discovering other
people other cultures stepping outside
of who I am be an outrospective uh
Adventurer I love that and how would you
change your general advice for young
humans uh you used to teach College uh
you have children um what do you say to
a young 20s something listening to this
show I would
say that's such a difficult
question what would I say to a young
person I mean I know what I say to my
own young people you know I have kids
which is I don't tell them too much in a
way I you know I try not to ram my
politics down their throat and so I
wouldn't like to do that to a young
person but I would say to a young person
to carry around with you a
question you know Steve Jobs gave this
very famous um I think Stanford
address college address where he it was
all about carpedm seizing the day and he
said you know ask yourself every day you
know if this is the last day of my life
what should I do with my life and I
think that's such a limited way of
thinking about the world I would say ask
yourself a different question if you're
young person which is this at the end of
every day ask yourself this question
what have I done today to be a good
ancestor what have I done today to be
remembered well by the generations to
come I think the philosophy of being a
good ancestor or a better ancestor is a
pretty good one for driving your life
I'm not telling you where you should
stand particularly on the political
Spectrum I'm not telling you who you
should talk to who you should not talk
to but think about your legacy how you
be remembered and what do you want your
grandchildren in 90 years time to say
about who you were and what you left to
the
world it's a good framing
um what do you care most about in the
world Roman and uh in your particular
case among all my guests you're the only
one that the answer Kate rayworth would
be
acceptable what I care about most of the
world you
know my thinking about what I care about
has changed so much over the last 20 or
30
years
um you know in the 1990 when I was sort
of involved in developing my I guess
intellectual apparatus as it were doing
a PhD and becoming a university
professor and all this stuff I look back
at that time and you know think about
how narrow my thinking was and and the
way it was really narrow was the lack of
recognition
of that we only have this one planet on
which to Survive and Thrive and
all my fundamental thinking now is
framed by that question of how do we
create a world you know you know this
this is like bread and butter stuff to
you you know but it's new to me really
in the last 10 years how do we create
all our institutions political economic
social so that they are at least
consistent with the idea of not using
more resources than we can naturally
regenerate and not creating more waste
then then we can naturally be absorbed
how do we really put that giant circle
of the bio spere around all that we do
so that it is so deep in us we don't
even have to think about it it is
literally like the air that we breathe
and I know I'm not there yet I'm still
on this journey because part of that
Journey requires something that I think
your podcast is so important for which
is systems thinking getting us to think
on the system level to escape from the
linearity of Steven Pinker
esque you know continuous progress kind
of thinking we need to be thinking in
terms of systems and without that we
ain't getting anywhere if you could wave
a magic wand and there was no personal
recourse to your decision what's one
thing you would do to improve human and
planetary Futures hypothetical example
on that one rather than talking big let
me just talk small or
practical over the last year or so I've
become
really interested in the the idea of
Steward ownershi companies so companies
which are not necessarily cooperatives
but they own basically by a trust um
which has a fiduciary duty to look after
the planet or to care about a community
so you've got companies like Patagonia
you know which basically they now say
you know the the Earth is our one
shareholder they basically become a
steward owned company Mozilla you know
the people who who own Firefox that's a
steward owned company lots of examples
of this so I would if I could wave my
magic wand I would turn every W you know
footsy 100 every Fortune 500 company
immediately from a shareholder
driven um company into a steward owned
company and that's never going to happen
because in fact we need to grow those
companies right shell Exon Mobile
whatever they're never going to go down
that route right um we need to grow
those new companies and that's why I
need the magic wand to turn those ones
into the kinds of companies that can
help us negotiate a Bend rather than a
break well that's why I asked the
question because it it your answer acts
as an Overton window in in a
directionally uh desirable way and then
you never know what the the individuals
collectively listening to this show come
up with um I think that's a a really
novel uh idea so um clearly we we just
scratched the surface of your work here
today Roman um if you were to come back
and do a follow-up conversation on any
topic something that may be in one of
your books or or not that is that you're
really passionate about um and you think
is relevant to our future what is one
topic that you would like to take a deep
dive on oh that is such a good
question the one that pops into my head
is that concept I mentioned earlier
which is the idea of temporal
intelligence how do
we or one might call it Temple temporal
wisdom my son thinks I should call it
temporal wisdom not temporal
intelligence he thinks I'm too analytic
he's only 15 but you know
um for 15 yeah but and I think this is
something that I I see very much in your
work to to the importance of taking a
different time
perspective we've partly talked about
that but I think we could take that
conversation in many other directions
how do we cognitively and
culturally rethink that fourth dimension
of time um because I think if we are not
able to do that we are
missing something that humans are good
at the temporal pouette we are good at
dancing across time but our institutions
don't match that capacity it is hugely
underdeveloped how are we going to do it
how does it link to the kind of issues
that you're think thinking about how we
reconstitute ourselves as we wean
ourselves off the carbon pulse and shift
a new Energy Systems how can time be
part of creating a new postmaterial
culture as well as a post carbon culture
all of these issues time I think is um
something that we need to learn to play
with and dance with and think about I
agree it's a great it's a great topic um
thank you so much Roman uh this is our
first conversation and I I expect not
our last and I appreciate all your work
uh on being a good ancestor and and
passing that baton to other humans thank
you very much Nate and look there's so
much that I wanted to ask you as well I
only asked you a couple of questions but
I I have so many more written down on my
little piece of paper here so let us uh
continue the journey um sooner rather
than later so thank you very much to be
continued my friend if you enjoyed or
learned from this episode of the Great
simplif if ation please follow us on
your favorite podcast platform you can
also visit the greats simplification
tocom for references and show notes from
today's conversation and to connect with
fellow listeners of this podcast check
out our Discord Channel this show is
hosted by me Nate Hain edited by no
troublemakers media and produced by
Misty stinet Leslie bat Luts Brady hyen
and Lizzy serani
