hey there folks welcome to today's
episode of the strategy and Leadership
podcast my guest today Toby Southgate
who is the global CEO at fman and Borden
F and hopefully I got it with my singing
uh words there uh former Chief growth
officer at mccan World group uh part of
an organization that's been around a
long time Global organization uh Toby
just excited to have you here and thanks
for listening to the podcast and and
being ready to uh give it everything you
got today so thanks for being here
that's my pleasure thank you very much
for having me Anthony and great job by
the way on the uh on the pronunciation
took me a little longer to get it that
close so well done I got a good teacher
so thank you for that so um why don't
you tell our listeners a little bit
about you personally a little bit about
the organization that I can't promise I
will be able to get as perfect the next
time and we'll get into some
questions uh sure no problem um Forman
and Bowden fors first uh this has been
the last three three years or so of of
of my life but Forman and Bowden force
is a a global creative Collective an
agency as some people might describe it
born in Sweden 37 or so years ago um now
global we've got about 450 people across
New York Toronto Dublin um London
England where I'm speaking to you from
today uh two offices in Sweden
gothenberg where we were born uh and
Stockholm where we I guess where we had
some children or we sent some children
to build a business there uh and
Singapore and Shanghai so in our world
of creative agencies um you know we have
we have a couple of Fairly uh not unique
but fairly special points of
differentiation what one being that we
are truly Global but kind of more
bouquey in in scale and and secondly
that we we were born as I said in Sweden
and and still operate the the agency in
ways that reflect the founding
principles you know we we use the word
Collective to describe how we expect our
people to behave as well as how we're
organized uh We've grown up you know
very much in a sort of bottomup
leadership environment you it was made
very clear to me when I was coming into
the business that uh you know if we have
an organizational pyramid um then Forman
and Bowden forses is is inverted it's an
upside down triangle not the you know
the classic hierarchical one um and my
job was at the bottom you know my job is
to make everybody else better so there
was lots about that that appealed to me
based on things I'd done in the past uh
as well as you know this is a uh this is
a creative business with a kind of
disproportionate reputation to its scale
um you know it's done some staggeringly
successful work over time uh for clients
like Volvo and visit Sweden and H&amp;M uh
and sk2 which PG skincare brand highly
regarded and with a reputation in the
creative
Industries um that we work pretty hard
to to protect you know it's um it's a
special place and I'd wanted you I'd
wanted to be in a conversation with them
for a little while before it came up and
then uh and then when I had the
opportunity to learn more personally
about this this little place that I'd
heard a lot about from the outside and
whose work I'd admired for a really long
time um you know it was just
increasingly attractive and the
interview process while hellish um was
absolutely worth it in the
um and then so working backwards me I
guess uh yeah if I work backwards
chronologically before joining Forman
and Bowden Force which is also part of a
of a Holding Group um whose mission is
is to transform marketing stagwell uh
mission to transform marketing which is
a kind of New Era marketing Services
holding company um that story also was
sort of Big Driver of appeal for me um
but I've been in other Market Services
holding companies and really sort of
just I guess three three career chapters
of reasonable success and and and a
couple of epic failure that came at the
beginning but sort of in in Reverse
chronological order before Forsan and
stagwell I spent uh four years or so at
macam World group as you said as Chief
growth officer in the Global Group in
New York um working around and alongside
some some brilliant people who' taken
Manan Network on on a real journey um as
someone else I think who's appeared on
this podcast has said you know from from
like the worst big creative Network to
the best and I was by no means um you
know in charge of that Journey but I I I
was a contributor to a part of it and it
was a a brilliant learning experience
for 10 years before that or almost 10
years before that I worked um I worked
inside wpp um which was run or built and
run at the time by S Martin sorl
probably one of the biggest
personalities and biggest influencers
over the whole marketing industry over
the last few decades it was a brilliant
experience to
working uh in just one agency actually
inside wpp but all over the world I I
started in the Middle East I moved to
the US and spent some time there with
the business then back to London then
back to the US then back to London so so
bouncing around a little bit um and then
before th that sort of 14 15 years in in
in the big holding companies or the big
creatively LED networks I did a couple
of um stin of three years or so each in
independent agencies one very design and
strategy Le the other very um the other
one very much driven around of corporate
brand strategy um brand purpose brand
Vision how you get an organization
pulling in the same direction in terms
of connecting business strategy to
marketing strategy uh and those were all
those sort of sequential Journeys I
guess um the two epic failures one when
I uh my my sort of dream and ambition
when I was a kid did was to was to play
professional sport specifically Cricket
um and I believed I could do that until
I was well probably it lasted the belief
lasted way longer than the the potential
I think um but I I I really wanted I
really wanted to be a professional
Cricket
player I think I think you got the the
right the right career sounds like you
ended up in the right career for you
maybe yeah maybe
maybe years whatever oh yeah yeah so two
failures like sports and banking but I'm
I'm probably glad of the failures right
and I've certainly enjoyed everything
that happened since even though honestly
a bit of an accident well you know if I
were to bet there's probably more than
two and that's why you've become so
successful but chiefly in in those two
so let me ask of course you know I want
to ask you questions about people I want
to ask you about you know aligning
creatives fundamentally the difference
between the network of you know
creatives versus a collective of
creatives and we'll get there but the
the thing I really want to start with
because we start with softball questions
here is is how do you
personally communicate the value of
creative because you know as as we work
with so many organizations around the
world as you know and different
organizations and if you haven't grown
around advertising media this kind of
like value based kind of tool um is kind
of hard to quantify you're like hey I
just need like I need marketing versus
creative or I need something that is I
need need a brand versus something that
connects with my audience and stirs
emotion so you know of course you're
representing you know the organization
but personally how do you view the the
value of creative how do you view
positioning the importance of creative
and how do you communicate the
importance of what you do and if you can
do that in three minutes or less that'd
be
great well you touch on something there
that I think our industry is really good
at which is making up words to describe
things that can be unclear but should
probably be much more easily defined or
much more easily codified uh and I think
I think honestly we we we also invent
things sometimes across the marketing
world to justify what it is that we do
because we can't always explain the the
core impact of an individual strand of
work which is essentially the problem
and therefore So my answer to the
question I I I actually always start
with
understanding what clients believe the
value of creativity is and how they
Define creativity because if their
answer is advertising or a piece of
packaging or a logo design we need to
work harder to understand that actually
there's something bigger and broader at
stake and and my my view on this which
has sort of firmed up and been
influenced by a lot of people is that
really really creativity at its core is
about solving problems um solving
problems for businesses solving problems
for the world and societies and culture
around us what can can we do to
influence the big themes that our
clients businesses are facing and if
that's the discussion that clients want
to have like how do we find an
interesting Innovative unusual
unexpected answer to that problem then
actually whether we're using a piece of
communication design a piece of an
advertising campaign uh whether we're
using a naming architecture system for a
suite of products whether we're using
packaging design or a more
innovative spend or allocation of a
Media budget you know those things
matter far less than defining the
problem up front and I think a lot of
folks it's too easy in an industry
that's evolved so much over the last 10
plus years the rise of digital uh to
think about marketing as a cost and
we've got to remember that it should be
an investment right marketing period is
about helping businesses and Brands grow
and and we we if we sit in our
individual silos looking at the
immediate requirements around us it it's
too easy to fall into uh defending a a
cost rather than supporting an
investment we always want to be
supporting the investment and
understanding the bigger goals behind a
a client's brief and their business
challenges yeah so what I hear
ultimately it's you know the clients are
facing some sort of Challenge and then
you are solving it through you know dare
I say well you're solving it through
creative which is fundamentally Creative
Solutions within the kind of sphere
bundle of marketing you know when we
talk to or transforming marketing
effectively because that's the the
mission when we talk to folks about like
what their mission and purpose is the
amount of times people default to say
Solutions and going back to that naming
something that is hard to be named
Solutions doesn't actually tell you what
it does and so for me I ban it I just
say you can't use the word Solutions
whatever it is because that doesn't
actually say what you really do what is
the outcome what is the you know what
are the value for them that they get and
what I heard the value out of creative
in this case created from your agency
and Collective is is really like being
able to kind of like wiggle through that
like place to connect to your customer
to like bring them to you because at the
end of the day that's that's why you do
it
um what would you say to let's say a CEO
or an organizational leader who is
trying to decide if they need marketing
and branding or creative and then kind
of said another way in your experience
um what have you seen be the
differentiator between you know I'll
call it the best customers or the best
Partnerships the ones that really see
hey creative is the way that I want to
go versus potentially a customer or or
partner that wasn't a fit because
they're saying hey I just need I just
need this level whereas I really need
something yeah Transcendent or you know
you gota get what I mean by the question
yeah I do it's it's a great question
it's a good analysis of some of the
challenges of of this industry actually
at the moment and I think if I you know
one of the things that really appealed
to me when I started talking to to the
team that runs stagwell you know Mark
Penn who put it together Jay lton who
says right hand our Global president um
you know they we had good conversations
about the kind of dream what does a
dream client look like what what's the
best work you've done with your clients
in the past and it actually all came
from a kind of common definition of what
the problem was and a comfort with
taking uncomfortable conversations and
and I think it was it was probably Mark
who said something like you know that
that was how he built his businesses in
the past he wants to be the guy who
clients phone when they have a problem
that they don't know how to solve and
and be comfortable enough in the
relationship to sit around a table and
Define what the problem really is and
work a way through it and do that in an
agnostic way without trying to sell the
services that your specific agency or
capability might might lead you to want
to recommend and so that that's that's
been my experience um and and mark
probably summed it up more neatly than
that than I would have done before I'd
had that conversation with him but it
was always being on the end of a tricky
and you know opaque conversation in some
ways I've got this problem how do we
solve it and a willingness to work
through it together that Define great
relationships or great Partnerships the
ones that that sort of start in a in a
pretty tactical place a very
prescriptive place you know I I've I've
got this idea we we're running this
campaign it's not quite doing XYZ for us
with demographic trff ABC in Market n o
so what we really need to do is tune it
and replicate it in that market to
achieve these goals and that's a really
tactical single Channel single
discipline request that some businesses
are really set up to deliver
against it was a great relief to
understand that Forman bden force is not
set up to deliver on that brief that it
is set up to have that sort of big meaty
initial discussion and work through a
plan together even if it means that
actually what we really need to do is
connect you client partner with uh with
a PR agency with um with a research
business that's going to help you really
get under the skin of what you think
this problem is but it might not be that
and and those things you know again very
agnostic very collaborative by Nature
that's again a sort of founding founding
principle of of a business that you know
I think the way we work could only have
been created in in Sweden or perhaps
other parts of the nordics 2o but you
know speaking about about how we do
things radical collaboration is a big
part of that that means giving things
away sometimes and not overclaiming your
ability to solve the problem with a
piece of you know let's call it creative
output for for Forman and Bowden Force
creativity is the approach it's not the
output that the approach to solving the
problem and you you said Squig Wily or
Wiggly or something you know amazingly
and we didn't talk about this in advance
I can assure all your listeners of this
that we call all our strategic process
the squiggle process that's how we talk
about it because it isn't linear it
doesn't have three steps or five steps
or seven PS or whatever the hell you
want to use it it recognizes that it's
human and flawed and you're going to go
around in circles a bit and that's okay
because that's how you often get to some
of the best and most unexpected answers
and and that that squiggle you know that
squiggle means a lot to us we use it in
our it's part of our visual language I I
I have it tattooed on my arm like this
little squiggly thing here is part of
our our process and so when when clients
ask us that so great creativity ideas I
get it you know I think we do need an
unusual problem how are we going to get
there you know I've been in places
before when when you know the the answer
is the working process and and the truth
is that the working process is just
easier to sell sometimes it doesn't mean
it's the way of getting to the right
solution and and I'm using that word
purposefully because you you ban it you
know it's like get get it because you're
trying to you're trying to stop people
from using woly language and and and
this world is unfortunately full of
wooly
language so you know one of my questions
that I alluded to earlier and and
highlighted that I would ask you is you
know how do you how do you lead
creatives you know like uh well from
what I've hear about your process the
sque L process is fundamentally the
folks coming into the
door they need to be ready to solve
problems they do it through their set of
tools which happens to be creative you
know language you know motive that kind
of stuff um so it's it's kind of a Tark
question I guess and I'm forming it as I
go one is how how do you align those
folks and to solve a problem and B how
do you um how do you get a group of
people to solve a problem and and I'll
kind of translate it to our kind of
typical audience who typically let's
call Senior managers middle managers
they're leading their teams they want to
drive something they want to drive
culture they want to drive Revenue sales
they want to have process people
following their process and they're
sitting here they're in their offices
and they're like well fundamentally I
know what I want I know the end State I
don't necessarily know where I'm at I
don't even know where to start and from
our perspective it's he have a
conversation about something so how do
you lead your team at a macro level to
drive forward those outcomes at scale
and then how do you lead them at a micro
outcome when there is a big hairy
squiggly problem that you have to
somehow come up with a solution for for
which the language of the problem or the
language of the solution might not exist
and I'll give you more than three
minutes on that one well that was it two
parter right so I only get six minutes
six minutes um I don't know I don't have
a I don't have a timer up so so feel
free to to interject um at any point I
think the I mean I've seen um what I
consider to be good and bad examples of
leadership inside creatively LED
businesses um and and the things that
I've you know again part of the appeal
of Forman and Bowden force was the
things that I'd always found appealing
though difficult to articulate or
synthesize for
myself I really found in in this place
um and those things would be uh probably
probably three probably three key
learnings right um and and I'll try and
attribute each of them to to people or
places um the first and it took me going
to to mcwell group to hear this
explained so so clearly and by by so
many senior leaders so with such
consistency right and it was the
real constant affirmation of the
importance of why the agency exists like
the agency's purpose in the world and at
Macan they had this incredible uh 120
year old story or something called Truth
well told um and by finding what they
call and I believe still call a Brand's
meaningful role the the meaningful role
a brand will play in people's lives um
you're able to get very quickly to a a
smart answer to a creative Challenge and
they've done an in incredible job of
aligning this organization of 20,000
people people behind that that
commitment and and it was in every
presentation it was the first slide of
every client meeting every internal deck
like everybody knew and that's very
powerful so um Forman bden Force had
some similarly codified assets but the
importance of those assets is is is
critical why are we all here we have
everyone in the organization has to be
able to answer that second is that um
most great work no matter how complex
the problem no matter how big the task
or the output no matter how long it
lasts is genuinely done by small groups
of
people right you know and and and no you
know no one Amazon has something like
this you know Jeff bezel is to Pizza
rule or whatever it is you know the prep
that goes into Amazon meetings so when
you come in you're all on the same page
all that stuff you know I I think I
think the same you know I've seen and
learned that actually the more people
you have trying to solve a
problem especially if there's a number
of people involved
for uh either hierarchical or structural
reasons the longer you're going to take
to get to a great answer and and that's
something that bigger groups tend to get
bued down by you know I've been in
briefings where our agency's brought
three or four people and another agency
has brought 30 and and there are maybe
five clients and I know if that happens
that we stand a really good job of
differentiating ourselves and engaging
more quickly and getting to a better
answer faster and and I think that the
size and scale of teams is another
defining aspect of great great
leadership in Creative companies and
then the third is but is sort of a tough
balance it's like teams need empowered
they need to be given space time and
they also need to be accountable like
you can't send three people off into the
Wilderness for a few weeks and hope that
they come back with a great answer you
know and actually I think guidance
accountability and understanding that
you you can have the space and the time
and then we need to get very quickly to
some well- defined results or outputs
and and those those things for me sort
of tend to tie it together right Clarity
of why we're here small teams able to
get quickly to answers and giving those
teams enough space and also clear
account ability which often is something
that creatively LED businesses can can
lack right they're really good with the
space um and they either get too harsh
with the accountability you've got 7.5
hours today to get these three things
done um or we've only been paid for
three days on this client so we've got
to get the answer out quickly like that
that doesn't work um that's too
prescriptive and it doesn't allow for
the messy squiggle the human element
which actually you know that's that's a
that's the defining at the most the
defining um Power of of certainly
forcement and bden forces Global
footprint is is the kind of density of
talent in that group you know it's only
450 people but it's properly Global and
all 450 of these people are pretty damn
good uh there's nowhere really to hide
because we we give the empowerment and
we also clear with the accountability
yeah and I think that's critical like
setting the expectations of and setting
the culture such that yes you have
freedom and space but it's also I'm
going use the word intense it's not one
that you used um but to say like hey we
demand a lot but we give a lot um and
for some folks that's not the right
environment some people would be like
well I need how much time should I spend
on this 7.5 hours okay great I need that
direction and then I find at least in
the creative problems that I solv that
they are solved when you're not working
on them uh whether that's in the shower
whether that's driving whether that
that's doing whatever and so finding
that like balance but I also caution you
as the listener if your CEO says I'm
going to go off into the woods for three
days and I'm going to come back with our
strategy like run and I have a very
close personal experience uh with that
so uh sorry to those of you that have
been affected by that that wasn't me by
the way I'm not the in the wood CEO but
you know I I've seen it very recently
and it it didn't go well so anyway um
point of that is I love the framework I
love you know small teams being able to
solve a problem I love being able to
support them in being successful while
also holding them big um and then
allowing them to do that and then you
know that's where it's the blank space
it's the the Jeremy baramy for those of
you that might understand that reference
that it's you know sometimes always
sometimes never and maybe on a Tuesday
um that's a the good place kind of thing
anyway um okay last question that I want
to ask
you not including your Cricket career
what advice would you give to someone
who is interested in the creative
industry
who wants to both cut their teeth but do
meaningful work um and within the
context of you know this is recorded in
2024 you've been in the industry 15
years and you know the red Ocean Blue
Ocean it's it's evolved greatly across
the world looking 15 years ahead you
know what kind of guiding principles
what would you encourage uh potential
creatives to think about as they enter
this career and then you can expand that
out broadly to leadership should you
wish okay I mean there's never been a
better
description of the kinds of people that
I think will always thrive in I say the
creative Industries generally but
certainly in the creative elements of
marketing and Communications um then
than the
phrase that wpp used to use and I think
that John steel the guy who was the
global head of planning for wpp for for
a while one of the most
famous is advertising and comm's
planning brains ever and he created or
was part of the team that created for
wpp the fellowship program which was uh
sadly sadly I don't think it exists
anymore but it was essentially a place
where talented young people could could
could go to learn how the industry
worked and they did a three-year
rotation around three different
disciplines inside the group and and
three markets I think as well at one
point and John's description of the kind
of people he was looking for were
ambidextrous brains you know people with
a little bit of left and a little bit of
right little bit of analysis a little
bit of creativity and and I think that's
something that isn't teased out or
taught enough in in schools like I I
fell into this industry I had no idea
about what marketing was or what
creative agencies did or that you could
be in advertising if you weren't an
artist or a writer I didn't I didn't
know um I wasn't taught it I didn't
study subjects that led me in this
direction but I but I wish I had you
know I really wish that I was talking to
you now with 25 years experience not 15
or 18 or whatever it is because I I
would have found it earlier and I think
I wouldn't have been able to Define it
as you know it's not a I wouldn't have
been able to define or claim that that I
believed I had an ambidextrous brain um
but I've seen I've seen and would stand
by the fact that that there are group of
people in a certain you know approach to
life if you don't quite know which way
you lean
that marketing and creativity is a great
place to go and and I think that that
you find that out by putting yourself in
the position where you you get
uncomfortable quickly and see how you
work through it and you can do that
anywhere right you know what's the right
way to solve a problem that applies when
I'm I know putting my shoes on in the
morning um or driving my car to the
garage because something's gone wrong
with it again or talking to my kids
about why I need them to eat their
vegetables not only the the the the
beige stuff on their plate these are all
acts of solving problems and and I think
that there's talent in that regard in in
everyone if they choose to tap into it
so find it if you can and that that
description of ambidextrous brains I
think is is never going to change um and
I think throwing that forward you said s
15 years out you know uh you know 15 15
years ago you know the mobile internet
on a on a smartphone didn't exist barely
existed um and of course everybody in my
world right now is talking about you
know what is AI going to do to all our
jobs well it's going to change a lot of
them um but I don't think it will ever
change the need for that ambidextrous
human brain to scope an idea to frame a
challenge to add human context because
uh you know Brands exist and companies
Market to a human world um even in you
know I'm using air quotes even in B2B
marketing you know it's human beings
that make the decisions right you know
and instit ution does not make a
decision on which software platform to
invest its next three years of capex in
you know people within that institution
make the decision so there's a human
element um that I believe is that how
work is made how ideas are created
generated
executed um and sometimes even where
where and how they appear in the world
will will change radically in the next
15 years in the way it has in the last
15 years but those ambidextrous brains
um I believe will always be in demand I
love that I couldn't agree more uh Toby
where can people connect with you where
can they learn more about the work that
you're doing and if they're going to
Google it's spelled in English like
Forceman B and
for well luckily luckily for anyone
wanting to find us forsman domcom uh
fan.com um is uh is our Global website
all our work all our history some of our
stories are there even a picture of my
squiggle process tattoo I think um I'm
easy to find uh LinkedIn Toby Southgate
Forceman bow and force um you'll find me
anywhere you need me to to be um but
yeah it's uh it's good to talk to you
Anthony I I love talking about this
world I'm passionate about it um and I
wish more people more people would would
uh would pick up the phone and and have
a chat about about what makes what makes
leadership easier uh some of the
challenges we face that they're often
common um and it's great to uh to be
part of your your show I appreciate well
that it sounds like that's an invitation
to give you a ring um to talk about big
problems but Toby soui thank you for
being here today it's been a pleasure
and and given us lots to to think about
not only about uh you know the Lessons
Learned in our past um but what skills
and attributes are needed in the future
so thanks for being here on the show
really my pleasure folks my guest today
is Toby Southgate from fman
Bon um you know one of the things I'm
taking away from today is you know of
course the idea of solving problems but
you know we talked about solving
problems at the beginning and tied it
through at the end what do you need you
need a good team you need space you need
creativity but you also need the skill
and and what does that skill mean you
know if you're programmed to only look
at things every if you are a ham or
everything you see as a nail that
probably doesn't work for the future
because the nail now is going to look
different than the nail in the future so
maybe you need to be a multi-tool and
Toby if you don't mind me saying so
you're like hey I wish I was in the
industry sooner I bet that the thing
that makes you freaking awesome I almost
dropped a f bomb but I can it's my show
that's the thing that makes you great
because you didn't just go into it you
got to have you know that experience
that truly made you the person that you
are which makes you the great creative
and leader that you are and so for folks
here if you think your journey is windy
it's probably supposed to be so really
like embrace the journey Embrace what
you're working up and um my favorite
quote personal quote it's how I live and
I will end the show with this it's a
tool quote and it's ride the spiral to
the end you may just go where no one's
been and so I encourage you to just ride
the spiral today and uh something great
could happen so thanks for being here
thanks for watching thanks for
subscribing um if you want to help us
get the show in the hands of more people
give us a review just let us know what
you thought of this episode it helps us
you know expand that um so Toby can have
more people calling him asking him about
leadership so once again my name is
Anthony Taylor this has been the
strategy and Leadership podcast I
appreciate you I'll see you next time
