today we are going to talk about a very
interesting model uh which helps us uh
understand small scale Fisheries in the
German North
Sea first um you know can I ask you to
tell us a bit about yourself and you
know how you got involved uh with this
modeling
project sure um hi my name is carsten
carsten
lemon um I am a outside senior
researcher now um with the helm hols
Center Haron in Germany that's a
research facility a large infrastructure
research facility just outside of
Hamburg and the last project where I was
involved in was called muscle multi
stressors on North Sea Life it ran for
three years was funded by the German
Research Ministry much so let's start at
the beginning uh why was this model
created and I mean can you tell us about
the purpose behind this
model um now we do have already advanced
um models for ecosystems in the North
Sea so we are quite confident modeling
kind of algae uh Z plankton
not so confident doing that with jellies
and fish yet um but we have never before
connected those ecosystem models with
the soo eological models of the
Fisheries so the purpose is to represent
the um
Fishers in that very narrow economic
sector of small scale northly German
Fisheries
um in its environmental contexts and by
doing so by having that
representation we aim to a provide the
modeling
platform as a tool for better and
structured dialogue with stakeholders
with Fishers with agencies along the
coast that's also the reason why we do
that in a on a net logo
platform um and the second reason is of
course to explore scenarios uh with the
model and also in the dialogue with
stakeholders on how the system could
evolve given other pressures like the
removal of the resource the closure of
areas uh the interference with shipping
with offshore wind farming this sea area
that we looked at is one of the most
heavily trafficked one in the world
so what were the biggest challenges uh
you faced When developing this model um
some of the challenges that we
had um did not have to do so much with
the modeling process itself um we spoke
to lots of expert on fishery so we think
we're quite confident that we have a a
good view of what the agent does and how
she or he thinks and
decides um we have lots of data
available on the North Sea
system um of course you could there
could always be more data but I think
sufficient for this purpose um we rely
on many um I think 20 or so I listed
them all in the model repository open
data sources to describe the environment
and now that's all it's it's it's a lot
of work to put all of that together but
it's not a major major challenge I say
so yeah I guess that was just a it was
was good it was it was not a very
difficult thing to do but of course what
we have now is has become quite complex
after three years of development so now
uh let's talk about the outcomes of this
work uh what are the key insights or
findings from analyzing uh this
model well the
key purpose that the model was built on
was
to look at to explore
scenarios of um mostly area closures
that occur here in the W and sea if you
look at the map behind me yeah that's
kind of the coast and uh you see all the
the colored dots that's that's where the
fissures well in dep snapshot of the
model we're actively fishing um and much
of that area that you see now is being
fished uh is reserved offshore for
offshore wind farming in the future so
they won't be able to go there and much
of the area that you see close to the
coast so gray is Coast blue is sea um
much of that area is National Park area
where the shrimp Fisheries is still
Exempted from any bands so they actually
fish in the protect
area and it is under discussion in the
European Union that uh in all Marine
protected areas like the Wen sea area um
here the Fisheries should be entirely
banned or ban at least uh 30% of the
area and we wanted to look
at mitigation strategies that those
Fishers have um to deal with those
closures of their traditional fishing
grounds um usually that always
means um to spend more money um because
if you go somewhere else you probably go
somewhere that's a little bit further
away you spend more time at Sea you
spend more diesel you have to yeah burn
more diesel um that's it gets a little
bit more expensive um we have also seen
that of course you know fuel prices have
been drastically changing in the past
and they make up about 20% of the entire
Co um cost so maybe it's it's not
critical yeah but it's one of those
factors that will make uh shmp probably
more expensive and that these Fisher
women and men have to deal with to
balance their cost the emergent pattern
that we observe and that we wanted to
observe in the model is of course
the change of the fish area now we have
about
200 um shrimp Fishers and about 100
Fishers that go for place and soul so
flat fish on the ground um we
concentrate here on shrimp so the near
Coastal
fisheries and we observe in our current
scenario simulations um how those the
the pattern of the used fishing area
shifts of course if you close it
Nearshore yeah it will move more
offshore we also look at the economic
balance for the Fishers in those cases
so uh you have archived your model on
com.net and um I believe sharing your
work uh with the scientific Community is
a very big step so uh what were some of
the challenges uh in this process I mean
uh are there any challenges in the
process of archiving your model from the
beginning of the project we all had
agreed among the project Consortium that
all the data we were um using no we were
producing and all the models would be
open source and open data um actually
that was very difficult um if you deal
with an
economically uh sensitive sector like
Fisheries there are only about
uh 200 boats here shrimpers um from
maybe 100 something different operators
as soon as you have access to economic
data and to location data that is
sensitive data um that data per se is
not allowed to be published so I think
that was the the largest challenge that
we had here so what we did is
um um um well lots of discussions with
people who own the data um but then um
to come up with the idea that we had to
aggregate the
data um obtain the statistical
properties of the
data um and then produce a surrogate
data set of the boats um that we can use
in our model what helped immensely
was that not only the product Partners
had agreed but that also I'm a teacher
of ecosystem modeling at lfan University
I teach ecosystem modeling I use net
logo agent based models with my students
I encourage my students to put their
models up on commes net and I've had a
long uh knowledge of the platform commes
that is just my own expertise that I
brought in here so for me um to do this
all open source was uh agreed before but
to put it especially on comis net that
was my own
effort um and because I like the
platform I think for environmental
models for me it's the go-to platform um
it's it's rich in very um well very
short small models that are good for
Education that I use in my teaching um
so even though this is a larger effort
and research model I think it fit well
into the comes suit of so what's next
for this model are there any follow-up
studies or or developments planned um
the project has ended the funding for
the project has ended um but my
Institute agreed to continue yeah to
fund me or to allow me as part of my uh
institutional funding to continue using
this model applying it and my personal
uh major goal for maybe version two is
to make it a real participatory model so
I'm now um looking and there's already a
branch a feature branch on the
repository looking into a hubnet
activity where we could actually have
well a part of the 200 boats or or or
single ones I don't know yet yeah
operated or the decisions would be made
by a participant in the room or in an
online uh Community thank you so much
for sharing your work and insights with
us
today well thank you for inquiring and
your interest about our model
