when I was a child I heard about this
mad man called the unibomber named Ted
kazinski he was this crazy guy who
launched a bunch of bombs and he wanted
us to return to being Stone AG tribes
supposedly he was also a genius who had
a math degree from Harvard and built up
a brilliant plan to destroy modern
civilization from all of this he sounds
like a classic comic book villain but in
real life the sort of Thing Marvel would
make up this also all occurred like 10
years earlier and was something adults
still had in the back of their minds but
not something which they brought up that
much something very important happened
in the next 10 years after I grew into
an adult the world around us changed I
like to say that the only way I could
explain the America we live in today to
my childhood self is that we turned into
a Sci-Fi dystopia in this context the
attitudes towards the unibomber changed
very markedly among disaffected young
male circles he's become known as Uncle
Ted as the society we live in has
deteriorated before our own very eyes
people have gone back through the
unibomber work and thought a lot of it
seems quite preent this video is meant
to be a sort of day in court for the
unibomber as someone who never lived
through the event I hope to be objective
about this historic figure he died of su
last year in federal prison in North
Carolina so I guess this is some form of
bladed obituary we will look through the
uni bomber's life to see whether or not
he was right or
wrong hi everybody I'm rard the walst
guy and the unibomber wrote very
extensively about the dangers of
industrial civilization and one of those
dangers is data brokers who collect and
distribute your private information
that's why I use incog the sponsor of
today's video data Brokers collect all
your private information like your
address birthday online activity and
even stuff like your financial
information and security card number
this information can be sold without
your consent and used for various
websites where anyone can look this data
up and then use it to stock you and
again all of this happens without your
knowledge or control the good news is
that you can request for this data to be
removed and the bad news is that it
could take years to do so manually
that's where our sponsor incog comes in
they make the process of taking back
control of your information quick and
easy their service will work on your
behalf to contact these data Brokers and
request the removal of your information
while keeping you informed and in the
loop the whole time
you just create the account Grant incog
the right to work for you and sit back
and watch them do the work they'll even
handle objections for you incog goes
above and beyond to give you back
control of your personal information for
my fans they're offering 60% off for an
annual plan for anyone who clicks the
link below and uses the code what if Al
test they offer a 30-day back money
guarantee so there's no reason to not
click the link and start using incog
today they offer a 30-day back money
guarantee so there's no reason to not
click the link and start using incog
Today part one kazinski as a man there's
this whole intellectual School of death
of an author which basically says you
shouldn't judge authors for their own
personal lives but rather their body of
work I think this is a tool which was
invented to counteract the Marxist
tendency to troll through the personal
lives of authors they dislike to create
ad homonyms to discredit ideas they
don't want to actually have to deal with
at face value I don't really like this
mental model though if you read the
history of philosophy for example it's
really clear that the essence of a
philosopher is em bibed into his
philosophy another intellectual variant
of this is the founder effect which my
friend Sam o b discovered or that the
character of the founder of of an
organization can be seen replicated
across its internal structure long after
his death with kazinski as an individual
he lived a very interesting life just by
itself so let's look through that
kazinski was born into a workingclass
Polish American Family surprise in
Chicago in 1942 he was incredibly
intelligent and graduated high school
going to college at age 15 when his IQ
was tested it was 167 which is something
around the 1 millionth percentile for IQ
which is basically at the protected
National Treasure threshold for
intelligence he went to Harvard and his
original plan was to be an academic next
comes a point in his life which in
general again seems like a story that
would be written by Marvel but which
nearly jumps the shark plot-wise when he
was at Harvard he participated in
illegal Government testing program
called MK Ultra this was part of the
cia's research into brainwashing the
Paranormal and psychedelics if you're
interested in this kind of stuff watch
the video I made about the decades worth
of research the CIA put into their
explorations of the spirit world keep in
mind MK Ultra is not a conspiracy theory
we have loads of records of people who
were involved and the CIA has even
released their own documents saying they
did it MK Ultra involved the CIA using
psychedelics hypnosis sensory
deprivation isolation verbal or sexual
abuse and sleep deprivation another
important variable is that when the CIA
realized that MK Ultra would get out and
would make them look very bad they
shredded a lot of the documents this
really does beg the question what else
were they doing that they don't want us
to know about keep in mind this is a
government agency that releases what it
wants us to see we've seen other stuff
come out in that time period of the CIA
manipulating the news doing research in
the spirit world manipulating foreign
governments funding Modern Art the
feminist movement selling Coke in Latin
America or crack in inner city ghettos
again this is what we know about
kazinski was involved in this in which
we know at least that he was part of an
experiment in which the government
agents tried to break apart his
worldview he would posit his ideas out
the world and then the CIA agents tried
everything they could to rip it apart on
any level someone's worldview is the
reason they have to live and so doing
this as an experiment without his
consent is just incredibly Ru we also
have records of the CIA verbally and
emotionally abused him again this is
what we know happened men tend to not
talk about abuse that readily especially
back then and especially with the
perpetrator being an obscenely powerful
government agency so it wouldn't
surprise me if kazinski went through a
lot worse that we don't know about as I
read about his biography first of all
it's obvious that kazinski wasn't
comfortable in his own skin he was
constantly wandering around clearly
trying to find some kind of Escape he
lived Off the Grid in the woods of
Montana left Academia because he
couldn't take it he felt immense shame
for this and tried to go to a
psychiatrist about it but didn't trust
them as someone with PTSD it's so clear
and obvious to me that kazinski has PTSD
or had there's just no way he doesn't he
acts exactly how someone with unhealed
PTSD would I can very easily see how the
trauma he faced around his experiences
with the CIA would inform his views on
Modern civilization in that this
faceless bureaucracy did something
objectively evil and then faced zero
consequences he saw firsthand the
bureaucratic state of the banality of
evil having no qualms about manipulating
human nature to make people more docile
or brainwash them I can immediately hear
people saying that his trauma made him
biased but what I would say is let's
look at his ideas out of their own Merit
rather than looking for an ad homonym
takedown after his murders kazinski was
diag noed with schizophrenia I don't
want to overextend my armchair
psychologist credentials in that my only
pretentions to this field are having
read a few dozen books on it but I don't
get any sense that he was a
schizophrenic I know what paranoid
schizophrenia looks like and it's not
that through reading his Manifesto if he
was actually schizophrenic you would see
jarring logical and writing style gaps
in his work which just aren't there
schizophrenics don't have a coherent
sense of the world and that the world
seems discreet atomized or cold to them
kazinski even through the intense genius
through which he carried out his
terrorism demonstrates that he had a
pretty good grip on reality when he was
tried kazinsky lawyers begged him to
plead Insanity he refused which I see as
admirable in that by pleading Insanity
he would devalue his own Manifesto as
the ravings of a Madman he did plead
guilty thus receiving eight consecutive
life sentences I guess he's got a lot of
jail time for his future Hindu after
lives
the irony is that by diagnosing him as a
schizophrenic the society was literally
just proving his point one of the great
ironies I see personally is when a
system or person literally validates
what you just said with their actions
after you told them what they're doing
but they lack the self-awareness to
realize they're doing it I see it a lot
with political radicals in which I'll
tell them that they've lost the ability
to think rationally and have devolved
into ad homonyms then in response to
that they remain IR rational and throw
ad homonyms at me the unibomber said
that modern civilization is an
all-encompassing bureaucratic machine
which exists to consume the human soul
look at how that machine responded to
his life it said he was insane to
invalidate his ideas recognizing his
sanity would be too difficult since we'd
have to think about whether or not he
was correct it used a bureaucratic
system to carry out this power play and
then locks him up in another
bureaucratic system it's comparable to
how in the Soviet Union they would send
political denters to mental asylums
since if you weren't acclimated to the
society you were by definition not
mentally adjusted modern society does
this very well telling the centers they
have anger issues or are repressed just
look at the authoritarian personality as
an example which was a psychological
manual it became incredibly popular in
that it basically created the modern
political spectrum and culture in about
a dozen different ways which I explained
through this text wall it said that
conservative ISM or being against
leftism was a mental illness caused by
repressive parenting thus we had to make
parenting more permissive so we could
leave behind our racism and irrational
conservatism with all this going on the
unibomber didn't get tenure in Academia
he had tried to become a math professor
and many of the teachers or co-workers
he worked with have publicly stated that
he was one of the most intelligent
people they had ever met his area of
study is again math which I could see
very easily from The Logical structure
through which he wrote his Manifesto he
developed some new incredibly Advanced
mathematical theories that one of his
colleagues wrote only about a dozen
people around the country are capable of
even comprehending it kazinski developed
a theory that our society is based off
doing surrogates for real things it's an
idea I see reflected in bodard
simulacrum or that everything in our
society is a fourth level abstraction of
something real junk food is is an
abstraction of Real Food social media of
real Community Walmart of a general
store we do things like play video games
since the actual things that video games
simulate like hunting or Waging War
which our ancestors actually did are 2D
stabilizing to the complex
interconnected machine that is
industrial civilization this is very
obvious in Academia in which academics
are the most oversocialized demographic
out there if you know academics you know
that they as a demographic
with some exceptions are cowardly
envious anxious process driven and stuck
in their heads they are exemplifications
of the over socialization which was the
main Crux of the uni bomber's critique
of modernity I can empathize with Ted
that while he was thinking about the
great issues B deviling modernity he saw
their exact Reflections inside Academia
yet Academia lacked the self-awareness
or wisdom to see his ideas at their own
face value Academia today is a
bureaucratic machine which doesn't
reward genius anymore and just spits out
engineered products which benefit their
class interests the uni bomber then
moved back to his family in Illinois
first and then became a homesteader
living off the grid in rural Montana he
lived off the land without electricity
when foraging and farming for his own
Survival over time he realized that this
was basically an impossible life today
partly it was the environmental
degradation he saw caused by large
companies and also the government just
doesn't like people living outside of
their sphere of control this made him
decide to turn violent this is what made
the unibomber famous he delivered and
sent bombs which killed three people and
injured 23 he aimed at the leaders of
technological Industries in that he
blamed the Industrial Revolution for the
oversocialization which he worried about
would destroy the human race we will
explain why he made this calculation in
the next chapter he did a brilliant job
at doing this demonstrating his
intelligence isn't purely academic he
did such a good job that the FBI
couldn't find him for the longest time
turning his crimes into a sensational
National Story the name unibomber stems
from the FBI case University and Airline
bomber given kazinski targeted Airlines
and universities which specialized in
technology his goal was to make these
fields terrifying for people to work in
thus slowing down technological
development he was only caught since he
told a major newspaper that he would
stop killing if they publish his
Manifesto his brother was able to study
the writing ticks and style that the
unibomber used his brother gave the
government a lead on him turning him in
the feds were finally able to capture
him in his isolated Montana cabin
sending him to jail part two overs
socialization kazinsky thesis with
what's wrong with modernity is actually
pretty simple the thesis is that
modernity is such a complex
interconnected system that it forces
humans to operate like cogs in a machine
repressing the things that make us human
in order that the machine runs more
smoothly it's easiest to start
explaining this by giving one example I
found which does fit into this logical
scheme that being family structure for
most of history as I've explained in
this video the family was the most
important thing in life in most
societies over history your family
determines your work your spouse the
education system social network
Insurance among anything else people
lived in large Clan compound
in which extended families supported
each other even in non-clan
individualist societies like Christian
Western Europe the family was still an
incredibly integral aspect of daily life
if you look at family today and this
isn't just true in the western world you
can see that it's a shell of its former
self half of marriage is end in divorce
most young people don't get married
marital happiness rates have crashed
it's completely normal for family
members to never see each other or not
even really like each other this is
something that the rest of History would
view as completely incomprehensible or
even evil what happened in modernity
which precipitated this I recently read
an interesting book called the history
of work it talks about how people's
daily work has changed over human
history one of the fascinating things it
talks about is that the family was super
important in a pre-industrial society
given the family was the dominant
economic unit there's basically no
parallel in the pre-industrial world
except for slavery of clocking in at a
giant company and then working 10 hours
a day 5 days a week almost everyone were
independent renting Farmers or
self-employed besides them you had
Craftsmen merchants or the nobility all
of these were family businesses keep in
mind that pre-industrial Europe was
incredibly moderate by the standards of
this stuff what this meant is that the
family was critically important to this
Society you had to get along with your
family since your dad was your boss then
when your parents were old you had to
take care of them the husband and wife
was an economic unit in which the
husband secured resources and the wife
took care of the children or passive
tasks you have more kids since they're
free labor for your small business this
all made perfect sense and seemed
completely intuitive and obvious to
everyone involved the idea of entrenched
social classes or casts made sense given
your family supplied your work education
social network and spouse thus people
ended up associating with their own
class which crystallized you can also
see why the state was incredibly weak in
these Societies in which in most
pre-industrial societies 70% of the
state's budget went into the military
while the government made up something
between 1 to 5% of the nation's total
economy while in most Western countries
today it's between a half to 2/3 the
family performed all the functions that
the state does today likewise you can
see why religion is incredibly important
since without the ability to have rules
for interpersonal relationships the
entire Society falls apart since it's
all based upon social relationships
let's look at what industrialization did
to this firstly if everyone lives in a
big city or a suburb the sorts of
communities that developed in
pre-industrial villages naturally can no
longer exist the scale just gets too big
I think you can't overestimate the
importance of this when you move from a
community where everyone knows everyone
with their s strengths or weaknesses to
anonymity our brains process that
completely differently Society changes
from an accumulation of relationships
you have with everyone involved to a
series of bureaucracies which provide
you Services when you're operating at
the scale of modernity with the
atomization that goes with urbanization
this means that bureaucracies fill the
void which community and family used to
rather than working on the Family Farm
dad works at a big company we're at the
point where 75% of adult women work
which is statistically more than any
demographic wanted thus the wife also
works independently then child rearing
is what happens when the parents are
free the child rearing itself however is
mostly outsourced to schools and
daycares depending on social class what
you might notice is that for most of the
waking hours the family members don't
associate with each other in the
pre-industrial society a wife would
respect her husband since she was
dependent upon him for survival and she
saw him daily or the things that he did
to support her and the family when you
work with someone it creates a bonding
and shared
experience now she and her husband are
apart for most of the day then they
return together for a relatively short
nighttime which is often used to
accomplish various boring tasks the same
thing is true with school in which the
kids spend most of their waking day in
effort at school in this case the
survival of the people involved in the
important relationships occur in
external bureaucratic impersonal
organizations the husband and wife are
really dependent on pleasing their boss
not each other since the kids don't have
to work with their parents neither party
has to understand the other it's a very
modern complaint one that I can attest
to that your family doesn't understand
you I think a very modern feeling is not
being understood like you wear lots of
different masks for different situations
you wear a ask for your boss for your
wife for your children you
compartmentalize your life but none of
it's really you in the pre-industrial
world you just lived worked and did
everything with your local community the
only comparable group were servants or
slaves everyone in your local community
knew you and there was more of a concept
of the flaws implicit in human nature
keep in mind our society's conception of
human nature isn't accurate from looking
at both ancient wisdom and modern study
humans tend to under prioritize material
wealth or comfort for happiness and over
prioritize interpersonal relationships
community and religion this is why
historic societies lived in poverty as
do people in the third world do today
but they can be happy thus the weakening
of all this stuff isn't a side effect
it's the main course you're creating
this silent gnawing pain inside the
modern world something which is so
personal you'll never get people to talk
about it but which is secretly killing
Society slowly there are two depressing
things at the Industrial Revolution
which have negative social effects those
being scale and
standardization for a symbol of how
these operate let's use the example of
an old style Factory you know the kind
that Henry Ford made in which every
person had a job of attaching a little
bit to a car there was a French author
of the time who wrote imagine the life
of someone whose entire life is to put
the screw on that bolt in the
pre-industrial world you had a concept
of the pride of craftsmanship and you
literally knew the person you were
making the cart or the axe for certain
eras of history end up naturally
selecting for certain traits for the
Industrial Revolution it's those two
traits being scale and standardization
in that the societies which resulted in
standardizing a process or increasing
the size were able to crush those who
weren't for example Family Farms are no
longer the way most crops are grown in
America given giant agricultural Empires
using Industrial Level equipment and
owning thousands of Acres naturally
outcompete them this is a process which
we've seen play out over the last
lifetime in which in 1920 90% of
Americans were either self-employed or
worked at a small company meanwhile in
1990 90% of Americans were employees
today only 10% of Americans are
self-employed or employers while
one-third work in the gig economy so it
has gotten better one of the interesting
themes I've seen reading psychological
books and an idea kazinski put a lot of
thought into is that humans will
sacrifice wealth for freedom and
autonomy it feels weird to call medieval
peasants free given in many ways they
were significantly less free than we are
today and I I do really want to stress
that this pre-industrial social order is
not utopian and it feels silly to call
the pre-industrial world utopian but in
a lot of these societies your entire
life was dictated by your family shame
or by very stringent moral codes and
with all of this being said though in
critical ways pre-industrial societies
were more free than we are today there
wasn't a concept of having a boss who
would watch over you all day as you
worked a regulatory system rules of
conduct and all that stuff once you
study pre-industrial anthropology you
find that people just lived their lives
there wasn't a sharp separation between
work family religion Community
government or the nation no concept of
working a 9-to-5 in the pre-industrial
world there was no concept of being
employed a lord or Master Craftsman
would have servants or apprentices given
they lived with their boss there was
more of a concept for responsibility for
their lives as people not just employees
the thing is that they existed to
perform tasks the servants or
apprentices lived with the Lord and did
what needed to be done and then just
went back to living their lives work in
the pre-industrial world was largely
seasonal with a few months of heavy work
and then months of doing nothing whether
or not people worked more hours than
today in the pre-industrial world is
complicated and varies massively based
off time period and region as I
explained in this text wall furthermore
for the apprentices and servants that
wasn't expected to just be your life
those were things you did when you were
young which you then grew out of an
apprentice to a Craftsman would later
become a mastercraftsman often even
inheriting the business there was a huge
social crisis in early 19th century
England when you had this whole social
class of people who ended up working in
factories for their whole lives as
employees this was seen as unnatural
there was an attitude that an employee
wasn't a real man and thus had no real
right to get married a lot of the
discourse around leites and Marxism
during early industrialization was due
to the social turmoil the Industrial
Revolution did to the traditional
self-employed social structure the
modern school system was explicitly
designed to break people's will to make
them easier industrial employees we have
loads of historic records of how
difficult it was to get pre-industrial
Farmers to acclimate to Modern work they
would show up for work hours late
whenever they wanted take days off
randomly would refuse the work their
bosses gave them would talk back to
their boss and everything like that we
literally have records of the founders
of the American School system around the
turn of the 20th century literally
saying their goal was explicitly to do
this for more info watch my video on
this topic keep in mind we don't
remember anything we learn in school
past let's say age 12 and none of it is
used for adult life the reason we still
have school is that the skill they're
selecting for is ability to sit still to
work long hours compliance in the
ability to memorize or regurgitate
information make mechanical calculations
wake up early in skills like that
pre-industrial people would View school
as incredibly strange and even
tyrannical wait you have strangers raise
your kids you tell them what to do
without the parent knowing it's also
mandatory that you go to school a very
interesting book I read and in fact one
of the most interesting anthropological
books I've ever read is the history of
manners by Norbert Elias and it's about
how manners have changed over over
Western history from the Middle Ages
onwards and it shows a lot of really
interesting underlying points an example
of it is that people in the Middle Ages
would cut up animal carcasses in front
of their friends before eating them or
Knights would write poetry about how
much they loved the Act of Killing or
friends and family would have sex in
front of each other and it was a society
with no sense of privacy and things that
would be completely disgusting in our
society were seen as normal and the
reasoning he gives is that as Society
got more complicated with more
interconnected parts we don't want to
see people we don't know do very private
things and that makes sense being the
other side of kazin's thesis of overs
socialization it feels very strange to
me that I'm talking up the
pre-industrial world this much given
there are very very obvious negatives to
the pre-industrial world firstly on a
daily basis I try to be grateful for the
material Comforts which our era of
History gives us infinite food
incredible medicine rapid Transportation
great entertainment birth control
political Freedom Air Conditioning
infinite free learning there are so many
incredible benefits to our era that once
you mention all of them criticizing it
feels insane however at the same time
you look into the soul of our society
and you find something that's very very
sick if you don't see it it's difficult
to explain to you but for those who do
see it it's overwhelming we can talk all
day about how wealthy our society is but
it's also clear that something is very
very wrong what the lesson here is that
wealth is nowhere near the most
important thing for happiness once
you're out of poverty wealth and
happiness statistically have basically
nothing to do with each other I was
having a conversation with my manager we
were talking about people we knew who
were hyper woke and asked us if Texans
the state I live in feel guilt for using
air conditioning all year what I told
them is that air conditioning in Texas
is non-negotiable without it there would
be an immediate migration back to the
Rust Belt which is where I'm from then I
kept talking with my manager about the
silly things climate change people push
for like the de-industrialization of
Agriculture or ending gas guzzling cars
Europe is literally pushing for
de-industrialization and degrowth both
of which if pushed would literally be
mass extinction events to get rid of
modern agriculture today would be the
death of billions of people meanwhile
they won't look at real issues pushing
climate change for example being China
or India installing another 100 coal
power plants and the real solution which
is nuclear energy then my manager and I
reached the same conclusion the reason
they were pushing for this stuff is that
they wanted suicide I've said in so many
previous videos that the aim of the
modern left is explicitly suicide they
want the end of Western civilization
whiteness the Industrial Revolution
let's take them at face value which they
literally tell us to do the reality is
that the psychological pressures of the
Industrial Revolution are so great that
people can't bear them thus the
societies which have had
industrialization the longest like
Northwest Europe or the northeastern us
are the areas attempting to commit
suicide the most keep in mind we're the
exact same crazy monkeys as who were
living in tribal communities of a 100
people hunting mammoths 100,000 years
ago could we really expect them to make
the jump we did with the Industrial
Revolution without some issues I think
what's going on is the nihilism
dehumanization atomization of modernity
is a lot more damaging than anyone
realizes I think as a society we're in
denial since it hurts so badly I
frequently ask people I know let's say
you're dying in a ditch now what do you
have to live for I had a moment when I
was suicidal as a teenager and I had
that realization for me it was honor and
my own Pride as a man something that my
parents and culture had imprinted on me
at a young age I realized that was
something I could live for where if
everything else in my life went wrong I
would still have that let me explain it
this way our ruling class or the B
Coastal college educated globalist
managerial Elite constantly on the
victorians as being repressed and a cold
Society in general when someone or some
group isn't psychologically stable you
can look to their projections to figure
out what their own insecurities are I
know a lot about the victorians
repressed or cold is not the right word
for them if you look at Romanticism the
letters they would write to each other
or even their view of History it's very
emotional very dramatic and they were
very expressive yes for sex this is a
very prude Society but keep in mind
there is a lot of hypocrisy going on
where there was a tremendous amount of
prostitution and porn as well meanwhile
for our ruling class they are very
repressed repression is separation from
our natural human urges for example
being polyamorous and seeing your girl
get railed by another man is very
repressed and not liberating since you
are fighting your natural biological
urges of masculine protectiveness hating
your country is repressed since you are
biologically wired to love your own
people being a hyper rationalistic
reditor is repressed given we're
naturally wired to use magical and
religious thinking I'm not saying these
things are good or bad but merely what
our nature is our ruling class competes
over how malleable and compliant they
are they compete over how much they can
submit to Authority this is since in the
bureaucratic industrial system your
ability to submit to the machine
determines your social value this is why
we're such a feminine society in which
telling people know is Taboo in which we
accept absurdities like that men are
women that the nation shouldn't exist or
that we should print infinite money the
ruling class earn in competitive virtue
signaling contest to demonstrate how
survi to the machine they are kazinski
wrote one of the best criticisms of the
left that I have ever read his criticism
of leftism is so brilliant that it's
easily become one of the top 10 most
Paradigm building things I've ever seen
he said that the left is a resentful
reaction to the oversocialization of
modernity that the left is a power
fantasy of having total power over
absolutely everything in society that
the reason they don't have a plan for
what the dictatorship of the proletariat
would look like is that the end point is
to get a dictatorship itself I'm going
to talk about this more in the video on
the anthropology of the left which I
will write very soon however kazinski
repeatedly keeps on crapping on the left
in the most insightful ways I have ever
seen the great irony for the left is
that they simultaneously push for
contradictory psychological drives
firstly they seek to push overs
socialization even further in that they
want to break Human Nature the left
wants to remove all animal aspects of
humanity whether sexual or family bonds
ethnicity religion martial values honor
freedom and the like to be sublimination
into the state I have frequently said in
previous videos that a society in
collapse will push its worst trait even
further while at the same time the left
pushes for total Liberation from any
standards or responsibility they also
simultaneously want Total power with no
responsibility which in itself self is
an oxymoron they also push for the
collapse of modern civilization and
industrialization at the same time they
want a fully automated space communist
civilization the problem is that nothing
the left says makes sense as a coherent
strategy and it never has it's a
psychologically unhealthy person
rebelling against conditions which they
didn't evolve for what I think happened
is that through studies and ancient
wisdom women are more dependent upon
community and religion than men are thus
women with the removal of those
pre-industrial stabilizers rebelled
against the society through leftism
without actually understanding the
actual psychological drivers of what was
happening they could sense the cold
impersonality nihilism soullessness and
loneliness of mity and tried to solve it
in the female way of we should just love
each other and take care of everyone
when that didn't work They begged Toad
the system burned down due to racism or
climate change or whatever part three
yes and okay we've gotten this far I
think a lot of people including myself
could find themselves agreeing with
kazinski up to this point I think his
explanations for the flaws of industrial
civilization are brilliant and original
I frankly find few other authors who
have covered this in any kind of way
although it's clear that the unibomber
was drawing influence from Jac elul and
Lewis Mumford however the thing that I
myself and I would say most sane people
object to is what kazinski recommends Ed
after and in fact what he actually did
he says towards the end of his Manifesto
which is pretty short and it's free
online so I'd recommend you folks read
it after is that industrial civilization
will go in two separate directions on
its current trajectory he said that the
21st century would be the decision point
for this and that choices would be made
which would change said trajectory in
that time frame the first would be that
the psychological pressures of modernity
would be great enough that it would
collapse naturally he said this would be
promulgated by mental health issues
collapsing birth rates Rising crime
collapsing standards of conduct and that
sort of thing you could very easily see
wokeness or the collapsing birth rats as
a form of this a collective social just
giving up a sense that there's not
really a point anymore as longtime
viewers of the channel would know I
agree with him I have made so many
previous videos talking about the global
crisis that the planet will face in the
21st century you can call it so many
things between the population crash the
psychological Black Death Mouse Utopia
the secular cycle the crisis of the 21st
century the end of the Pax Americana all
of these add up to the realization that
there is an attempt to put into words
what is really an enormous historic
crisis which must occur like an
avalanche that's about to crash upon us
and which we will only understand after
it's happened however the unibomber
second scenario the one which terrified
both him himself and I is also on the
table with genetic engineering Ai and
other technologies that we are gradually
changing human nature in order to deal
with the compliance required by the
industrial system we effectively turn
into soulless Hive creatures like ants
or termites keep in mind we already use
genetic engineering on animals so the
Technology's already been used for
decades this is a lot like the
terrifying scenario youv all knowah
Harari lays out in mod deos something
kazinski brings up is that this might
not even be accomplished by a cruel top-
down authoritarian government which
people would expect instead let's say
with a Humane social democracy that
starts using genetic engineering to help
people with physical illness then they
start using it to remove mental
illnesses like depression but the
problem with that is that by doing this
you're removing the free thinkers or the
people with independent Spirits or who
are sick in a system which is designed
to naturally make people sick the
sensitive are those who are hurt the
most by modernity after a couple
Generations what would be left of the
human character you would after a small
amount of time hit either Brave New
World or 1984 or already seeing some of
the foreshadowing for this an example in
Canada being the assisted suicide even
for mental health issues it wouldn't
take much for them to say political
opposition or naturally mentally ill
much like what occurred in the the
Soviet Union and say that they need to
be put down for their own good
alternately with the world economic
Forum they talk about degrowth and
you've all know a Harari called half of
the population useless eaters what these
types of people publicly aim for is
using Automation and genetic engineering
to crush descent I mean construct a
Utopia I'm literally going to say this
is all stuff that they're publicly
saying that they're doing now I really
want to stress this the thing that makes
Humanity beautiful is our individuality
it's our inner soul our ability to sense
the world and feel pain when you remove
that we've lost the game of human
history say goodbye to literally
everything you care about it's the
equivalent to Mordor winning and Lord of
the Rings the world these kinds of
people would make would turn humans into
cogs or machines not even animals the
human Spirit buckles under tyranny which
is why evil must lose inevitably with
all this being said what happens when
you change the human character so it no
longer buckles like that it's it's in no
way a coincidence that all the great
artistic pieces of the industrial World
whether Star Wars Lord of the Rings
Fight Club American beauty princess
monoke The Matrix and so many more are
the fight against a giant
depersonalizing Force so that the human
soul can survive I hope you folks can
understand why I don't think the
unibomber was crazy the calculation he's
making from his perspective is
completely rational I frankly would have
done something similar if I was him but
different in one important way I would
have known in normal circumstances no
one would read this one of the great
points kazinski makes is that even
though we have a legal freedom of press
with the big news stations that control
everything and so the reality is that
there is mass control over information
dissemination in a way that didn't exist
200 years ago to be fair one of the
biggest things this channel does is
troll for obscure but brilliant 20th
century authors that were completely
forgotten by history if he wasn't a ter
I would probably have never heard of
kazinsky work even though my job is
looking for forgotten smart authors
since he wasn't operating in My Chosen
field of history or anthropology if I
were kazinski I would try to do
something crazy to get people's
attention I would probably start making
hyper controversial statements maybe
throw a huge raffle with all that being
said I'm not sure any of that would
actually work where I and I think most
other people differ from him is in his
acts of terrorism at the end of his
manifest he says that we should forcibly
try to destroy the manufacturing ability
of industrial civilization literally
fermenting hatred of Technology itself
and attacking those who work in the
field the thing though is that this is a
terrible strategy if he asked me I would
tell him that would only result in
invalidating his cause and turning the
entire ideals of the organization into a
social taboo it would work if the
general public disliked technology more
but the reality is that the average
person loves the conveniences of modern
tech technology and never wants to part
with them I think kazinski was in a
tremendous amount of pain
psychologically and needed an easy or
quick solution he was feeling powerless
and so tried to do the most direct route
I also get the sense he was a man who
reached a point where he didn't really
care much whether he lived or died I
don't approve of his terrorist
activities but I will point out that he
won he's gotten to the point where his
ideas are very widely circulated hell
we're currently talking about them on
this channel and most of you know know
who he is if the struggle of the 21st
century is as close as he believed it
would be he might actually have
indirectly changed the tide of the
conflict I don't think kazinski if he
saw the results of what his actions
would be would have been disappointed
with the result it's comparable to how
I've said before that Al-Qaeda won 911
there's a book called The Grace Of Kings
which is one of my favorite fiction
books ever about a fantasy version of
Chinese history the title of the book
relates to a faction betraying a treaty
with another faction in order to unify
the country the meaning of the grace of
Kings is that in the grand scheme of
things the character did the right thing
by breaking the treaty which then
allowed the unification of the continent
when all said and done are the three
lives kazinski killed worth changing
history for only time will tell but this
line of thinking eventually ends up with
Hitler and Stalin when pushed to its
natural conclusion in these sorts of
things I can see why traditional World
Rel religions tell people to stop
worrying and to trust God instead in
that right when kazis committed these
crimes a new technological Discovery
came out which completely changed the
calculus on this entire issue this is
one of the best and worst parts of
modernity in that changes occur so
rapidly that you have no idea what the
world will look like even 30 years from
now that Discovery one which radically
pushed disunity was the internet no one
really thinks through the geopolitical
ramifications of the internet
however it's going to become an absolute
GameChanger when the unibomber was
writing the world was at Peak Pro
centralization due to the Technologies
sheer scale was very efficient the
internet flips the entire calculus in
that rather than a single company making
products it's cheaper to get it off Etsy
or rather than working with a
traditional taxi company you use Uber
instead rather than Outsourcing to a
university you're learning through
YouTube the internet has potential if
used correctly to turn everything that
Unabomber said on its head the internet
could allow the ruralization of society
the breakdown of top- down government
authoritarianism organic social
operation and self-employment the rise
in the gig economy as well as digital
replacements for legacy institutions is
literally just proving all of this the
internet also has the potential to go
into other directions in which the
government can use it to monitor the
entire population for their whole lives
I'm going to do something I normally
don't and chill crypto if we don't want
the internet to devolve into
authoritarianism we have to develop an
encrypted secretive private
blockchainbased internet which doesn't
allow data oppression and the Next
Generation we need to have an active
decision to keep the internet in our
societies by extension free biology does
a lot of this stuff around this topic
and has built a movement around making
sure hierarchical authorities can't use
the internet to control people if you're
interested check it out we also need
make an active decision that we want to
be the sort of society which values the
human soul that we respect and love our
own Humanity even with its flaws that we
aren't willing to trade our souls for
money which will realistically
accumulate to the elites you know this
stuff used to depress me I went through
a fewe period of legitimate grieving of
realizing I didn't live in The Simpsons
or John Hughes America I thought I would
the thing is that politics at this level
affects everything in your life whether
work romantic options religion political
or social views then I realized I prefer
this since it allows me to go hard and
do cool stuff what's the point of living
if you're not going hard
