um China is set to flood Europe with
cheap microprocessors and electric
vehicles Israel is presently over seeing
a second NABA war crimes I think ethnic
cleansing the
EU was looking at trying to start a a
run on the Hungarian
currency uh the United States is
polarized and seemingly disoriented
potentially within years confronting a
state of collapse and a revolutionary
state in the Middle East has pretty
successfully blockaded a strategic choke
point for Global um
Logistics and it's only
February
it's only
February and what this tells us is we do
live in a moment of profound disruption
transformation change and I don't mean
that in the platitudinous cliche way
we've been told for the last 25 years
it's actually
happening um some of these changes are
once in a generation some once in a
century some once in several
centuries so big times and big events
call for Big Ideas and I can't think of
anyone better
to discuss Big Ideas then this evening's
guest Jan faracis he's a former Finance
Minister academic Economist author his
most recent book techn feudalism I
believe it's available to BU at the
front I saw him signing copies uh very
fastidiously earlier on it's a
outstanding book outstanding book uh I
really enjoyed it yanis thanks for
joining us on Downstream
IRL
good evening thank you so much for being
here it's so good to
be together with so many people after
the lockdown Years of Solitude and two-
dimensionals zooming and you know just
the the complete disconnection that we
all felt during that time thank you
Aaron for doing this thank you to Novara
media for uh
existing in world where the media are
complicit in
genocide so what are we what do you want
to talk about I want to talk about so
much I I want to talk about uh China
Russia obviously we'll talk about Israel
Europe the United States we've only got
an hour that's the problem um so we'll
talk about that stuff for an hour
firstly how are you how's life treating
yanis faracis you're had a very frenetic
few years look I am remarkably well to
the extent that I I feel guilty for
being well in a
world you know we that that is
constantly finding novel ways to depress
us uh it managed to get me really down
back in June because um are small but
vociferous and I think very Progressive
Party Mar 25 in Greece we had nine seats
in G gree's Parliament we managed to
lose them in June um and guess who won
them a fascist party called the Spartans
it's the in
Rebirth of the Golden Dawn Nazis so I
spent at least one month in serious
depression finding it very difficult to
get out of bed
but I overcame it and now I'm really
well but you know individually we can be
fine we have a duty to be well
individually but
collectively we are down in the dumps
aren't we this is a terrible world and
uh our political leadership especially
the leadership of the left is chiefly
responsible for the crimes against
humanity and against logic that are
taking place k
starma my
goodness my goodness ol of Schultz in
Germany the SPD
leader who is the leader of the left in
Austria I don't even know because nobody
cares they do have a communist mayor in
um Gratz yes indeed indeed and they
light the mood and they have and they
have an ultr right supported government
yeah in Vienna so you know we really
need to pull ourselves together and um
there is the vast majority of people out
there are good decent Progressive people
and yet our political sphere is
constantly jettisoning from from within
its ranks anyone who does not parrot the
inanities the serially insane inanities
of the establishment or supporting
policies like for instance genocide in
Gaza so I want to talk about lots of
stuff as I said Europe China the us but
given this is what you feel very
passionately about you've started with
this um you said that the center left is
is complicit in what's going on in Gaza
what's your view on that because of
course a lay person might be watching or
listening and thinking well look the
Tories are in power um a different story
of course of Joe Biden in the United
States a normally Progressive person
who's really given C blanch to Israel to
do war
crimes why is Labor responsible when
they're in
opposition because the if the opposition
leftwing Center left party is supporting
orchestrated genocide in
Israel that legitimizes the government
that is supporting the orchestrated
genocide of Palestinians in Israel and
it means that there is no hope for any
representation of the people who say
hang on a
second massacres and
the Insidious IDE ology of Zionism which
is essentially white
supremacism settler
colonialism coupled with prison camps
and massive extermination that's what
they are doing since
1948 and to have the left supporting
that means that there can be no
hope I mean if you're Rish
sunak Kama has done your work for you in
legitimizing your complicity in what's
going on in Gaza so on this point of um
of Israel what needs to be the um quote
unquote solution because he just made a
critique there of Zionism which it again
somebody might hear that feel an instant
emotional response to it but a lot of
the things you're talking about have
been well documented it's at the very
least a very vilant form of ultra
nationalism at the very least I don't
think that's in any way
deniable how does this then get resolved
if if that's the creature we're dealing
with or the world's dealing with and it
has the backing of the I think probably
the world's only military superpower
eron it's very important that we do not
pontificate to the people who live in
the land of Palestine in the land of
Israel what needs to be done it's not
our job to tell them what to
do our job is to
maintain the kind of narrative and
political Campaign which constantly
supports Universal human rights that is
our job as
Europeans I feel we have a duty to
accept 100% responsibility for all the
crimes that are being perpetrated in the
land of Israel Palestine today we
Europeans are to blame not Hamas not the
Israeli settlers not even
Netanyahu
and I will explain that please go on I
will explain that for centuries we've we
have been hounding Jews from one pgam to
the next Europeans not just the Nazis
the British the croats the Russians the
ukrainians the Greeks the Italians we
have been persecuting Jews for
centuries and then of course this C
series of pograms and persecutions ended
up with a
holocaust the German Nazis are chiefly
responsible for the Holocaust but it's
not just them the croat Nazis the Greek
Nazis the Italian Nazis the French Nazis
under the vishi government the Estonian
Nazis the Lithuanian Nazis the Polish
Nazis they were all complied in the
Holocaust and then when it no longer was
fashionable to be anti-semitic after 94
45 remember what King George said the
problem with Mr Hitler is that he made
the moderate kind of anti-Semitism
impossible remember that he said that in
1945 um okay then Europeans adopted
Zionism now what is Zionism it's not
just that it is ultra Nationalist and
rightwing and all that no Zionism from
where I'm standing is summarized in the
slogan that was invented in the early
part of the 20 Century which is a land
without a people for a people without a
land now that is white supremacism when
the British disembarked in New South
Wales in
Australia immediately they declared the
land of Australia to be Teran nullius an
empty land a land without a people so
the 5 and a half million
Aborigines were simply not people
that was a beginning of genocide because
when the moment you say 5 million people
are not
people that's Licensed to Kill it's
licensed to Massacre it's licensed to
genocide so that was you Zionism has
many
different currents within it there are
leftwing zionists they right-wing
zionists they're socialist
zionists but what they have in common is
they do not recognize that the
Palestinians existed or exist today
today they talk about them as Arabs that
you know they could have gone to some
other country the land
is people people
less so you have the
greatest the most toxic alliance between
anti-Semitism and white supremacism
that's
Zionism in the United States have you
seen those photographs of American Nazis
with sasas and flags of Israel it sound
it looks at first like a contradiction
how can you hold with one hand aasa and
with the other the Star of David not if
you are an American Ultra rightwing
Zionist because you believe that the
Jews should all go
there in the same way that the Europeans
went to the United States to kill off
all the
natives Native
Americans go there so we don't have you
in our midst
and if you are also a religious
fundamentalist you believe that the you
Jerusalem should be Jewish so that the
second coming can come and Christ can
then resurrect your dead in in Minnesota
all the sensible people who are you know
at the Forefront of us politics um yeah
so to just to conclude the point so you
know we it's perfectly point it's
perfectly compatible to be an
anti-semite and the Zionist you just
want the Jews to go to Palestine it's
really very simple you don't want them
in unich you don't want them in London
you don't want them here there this was
why truly anti-semitic European
political leaders were zionists they
sided with Zionism okay and since
1948 the Israeli apar heide
state is trying to create a kind of
Confluence to bring together together
the slogan of the
Zionist with a facts on the ground the
slogan of the the slogan of the Zionist
was still is a land without a people for
a people without a land and the facts of
the ground was that there were lots of
Palestinians there who whom we need now
to get rid of that's what the job of the
IDF is
so we are responsible for that we
Europeans are responsible for that
because our gu over the Holocaust which
is deserved we should feel guilty for
the Holocaust we are responsible for the
Holocaust is being used as a cover and
an excuse for the Israeli genocide of
the Palestinians do you think that
liberals particularly in Europe
understand that actually Israel could be
the future of European politics I think
it could be the future of the West which
is to say ethnically religiously
homogeneous uh culturally
homogeneous um highly
militarized uh you know I was speaking
recently to a a Palestinian instagrammer
um we'll be putting that that interview
on Downstream on our YouTube channel a
remarkable man you know he's got 800,000
people on his account he's a journalist
he's telling these stories he lost his
sister and has seven children in one go
and they're still in
rubble and I I was hearing his story the
youngest was one month old and then I go
on my Twitter feed and people are
complaining about feeling offended at a
University campus and I'm like well I'm
sorry to hear that I am I don't like you
to be offended I don't like you know
graffiti or whatever F that's bad this
is immeasurably worse uh but what's
interesting to me is that the center
people who claim to believe in the rule
of law human rights don't understand the
extent to which Israel is sabotaging
quote unquote the rules based
international law order or what exists
of it and we saw this decades ago with
nuclear nonproliferation it already
happened we weren't meant to have a
proliferation of nuclear weapons Israel
develops one guess what Saddam Hussein
says well I want them the Iranians say
well I want them and I think something
very similar could actually start to
happen with human rights the demise of a
believer in universalism because you've
got fascists right across Europe saying
this is this is exactly what we want we
want High birth rates we want to kick
the immigrants out uh and we want to
foster a sort of social political quite
and quite solidarity which which is
based on the opposite of
multiculturalism so so why are some
liberals who claim to believe in all
this stuff also backing a project which
is the complete anthesis of it look the
reason why I am a left
Winger is because I'm not prepare
prepared to subcontract the concept of
Liberty to the so-called liberals who
don't give a d damn about
liberalism look take the authors of the
American
Constitution and it's Prelude the Bill
of Rights which is an a Pian a beautiful
poem dedicated to Freedom
Jefferson well all these people had
slaves they were slaves owners and you
know Jefferson even when he died he did
not live he he he he did not put in his
will a clause that would liberate his
slaves so the
greatest
poems in honor of Liberty have been
written by people who were slave owners
I think that tells you all you need to
know about the hypocrisy of
liberals similarly you know take Nick
leg
where did I why do I remember this name
to Nick wow why do I remember this
name he was the leader of the liberal
party in
that frivolous and ridiculous Coalition
with the Tores um and one of the first
things he did was to put his signature
in legislation which severely restricted
the basic human rights of the people of
Britain against every principle of the
liberal party
they are not liberal these people they
claim they they use the term to deny the
substance but beyond
that and that connects with
Jefferson when Jefferson was talking
about the beauty of
Freedom he didn't mean it for
worms for
chickens or for
blacks he didn't mean it for for half
blacks like me from you know the
Mediterranean the so-called
wogs yeah yeah people who are deeply
tanned or lightly tanned so it all
depends on I mean David Hume had this
concept of centric
circles where you you are at at the
center of a series of concentric
circles and according to David Hume in
his um treaties of human
nature the people who are further and
further out of that series of concentric
circles you care less for so Liberals
are the people for
whom those conent there's one Circle
that matters you boura white men and
maybe some honorary men who happen to be
women like Thatcher for instance you
know or Georgia
Melone whoever you know does their
bidding for them in the European Union
or you know in the oecd or the
IMF uh and then immediately after that
there there there are the nonhumans for
whom there are no Universal rights and
that Circle of who you know the circle
that determines the
borderline separating and segregating
the ones that legitimately have
Universal human rights and the ones who
don't that's quite
malleable so Saddam Hussein used to
be you know they're friendly
bastard you know the joke as to how did
how did Blair and Cheney know that uh he
had chemical weapons they kept the
receips I remind you in 1983 there was
an exoit missile Iraqi exoit missile
bought by the F from the French
that um hit an American Navy ship and
quite a few Sailors of the US Navy were
killed they sent Cheney back
then to make friends with you know
effectively put him on the back he say
okay yeah there was friendly
fire so that
Circle expands and contracts depending
on the interests of the so-called
liberal establishment they are not
liberal they're just an establishment on
on the this point this is remarkable so
this was a couple I think it was a
couple of hundred US Marines I think in
the early ' 80s they were killed by the
Iraqis nothing happens and they were
immediately forgiven because Saddam
Hussein was their bastard I remember
when I I used to live in Britain then
and I
remember maybe Jeremy was Jeremy Corin
was with us then there was a group of us
demonstrating outside the Iraqi Embassy
against Saddam
Hussein right because he killed tens of
thousands of Kurds using chemical
weapons provided to him by Britain so we
were here in London demonstrating
outside the Iraqi Embassy and thatchers
Metropolitan
Police went for us as if we were the
worst enemies of the state with mountain
police they beat beat us up they
arrested US and all
that imagine my I have to use a Greek
word aporia which means the sense of
puzzlement when a few years later some
years later because uh people like me
and I'm sure you and definitely Jeremy
and Tony Ben back then we opposed the
notion that it was in the interest of
humanity massively to invade Iraq and
kill 1 million people we were described
as Saddam Hussein's
handmaidens by the same people who were
arming him back in 1983 and beating us
up for protesting against him you know
but that never ends in
2001 back in Athens at the University of
Athens I remember attending a senate
meeting meeting of the Athens University
Senate I was a professor I
was the government of Greece had just
sent to the Senate a
request that we bestow upon a s
Mr
Putin an honorary
doctorate and I was in a minor it of one
in the Senate calling him out as a war
criminal because he had just killed
250,000 Chens in order to solidify his
regime today I'm being called Putin's
handmaiden
again it is never ending back then Putin
in 2001 was the blue-eyed boy of the
western establishment not just the Greek
one the British one well everybody
thought that Putin was great so you know
where do how how did I start saying all
this I think you you said it never ends
and then you ENT that but quickly on
this oh yes the the hypocrisy of the
Liberals they don't give a damn about
Freedom we got that
yeah on Iraq we don't know the half of
it we really don't know the half of it
Saddam Hussein was using industrial
amounts of chemical weapons against Iran
from 1980 to 1988 not once not twice
hundreds of times I think we're talking
almost 20,000 projectiles with chemical
weapons the Americans gave them the
positions of Iranian forces knowing he
would use those weapons of of they
actually asked him to bomb them crazy
you see and they the good guys they
asked him to bomb them to bomb Iran
because Iran had just staged the
anti-American Islamic revolution you
remember the the the the the standoff
regarding the Americans diplomats in the
Teran US Embassy and so on and it Saddam
Hussein got his marging orders from
United States to invade Iran he didn't
invade Iran of his own accord it was and
he was financed by the Emirates and
particularly Kuwait well this is we not
detour that was the reason why then made
Kuwait because he wants them to forgive
the war debt anyway we've talked enough
about Iraq we've talked about about
Russia we've talked about Blair we've
talked about Nick c
um sorry about that I don't know what
what came over something feels a bit out
of kiled there they world's historical
figures and and um the head of
communications for meta anyway um uh
let's talk about the United States um
this is in the last several months
obviously we're seeing events in the Red
Sea the complete inability of Joe Biden
to Reign Netanyahu in is this just a
weak leader
a moment in history or or does this
point to something else which is really
the demise of an Empire which has been
coterminous with a global capitalist
economy over the last century I wish I
could agree with you that it's
em that it reflects the waning of the
power of the United States I don't think
it does at all uh and I don't see any
change at
all was that ever a US president that
opposed Israel's genocide of the
Palestinians the nakba the six- day war
the Americans were behind them you know
their satellites were guiding the
Israeli missiles in the 60s in the 70s
in the 80s
today every single piece of Weaponry
that the Israeli Army and Air Force and
navy have comes from the United States
as we speak they give those you know
10,000 lb bombs as we speak they're
being delivered through creit and
alexandris to Greek ports this this is
the the route not the Silk Road but the
you know the death road that American
armaments take to reach
Israel Biden is not weaker than Reagan
was or Obama was or Lyndon Johnson
before that there's been a consistent
policy of treating Israel as America's
bully in the Middle East but it's not
just Israel so you've obviously got and
I'm not suggesting this as a good thing
you've got an increasingly belligerent
assertive Russia you have an
increasingly prosperous technologically
advanced China are we moving I suppose
I'll rephrase the question from a
unipolar to a multi-polar world and what
does that mean because you sound
skeptical of the idea of us moving to
multipolarity oh there's certainly no
multipolarity there is what there is is
a new cold war between in the United
States and
China that's all that is Russia is
insignificant I mean it's significant if
you're a Ukrainian and you get bombed by
them there's no doubt about that but
then again if you're in South Sudan and
you are caught up in the Civil War in
South Sudan your life is not better than
it is if you are in khv or you know
parts of donbas but
um if you look if you want to look at
the con concentration of economic
Financial technological and military
power you have to focus on the United
States and on China the European Union
is the stupid continent it
is I was talking to the you know to um
to the president of Mexico that I and I
were visiting him some months ago in
Mexico City and you know he's he's a
comrade he's a friend and he's the
president of Mexico right um so he was
telling
me with pain in his heart that you know
he's very
pro-european uh he's he's culturally
very close to Europe
he's under the belly of the Beast the
United States and he trades with China
and he says he he was asking me for some
um sources of hope that Europe will stop
being irrelevant
and I couldn't provide him with any
because we are
deindustrializing we've missed the next
Industrial Revolution so Green Tech and
big Tech gone we have nothing by which
to compete with either United States or
China and increasingly we are stagnating
and
proving and reconfirming my allegation
that it is a stupid and irrelevant
continents
uh China
significant
Russia more significant than the
telegraph the times and the guardian
would like to present it as because you
know there is this tendency to say that
the Russian economy is only the size of
Spain well that's true if you measure it
in terms of dollars but the people in
Russia don't use dollars they use rubles
and so it's not a question of how many
dollars do they have by which to buy
bullets the question is how many rubles
they have with which to buy Russian
bullets and they have quite a few of
those um so but but there is no dynamism
it it is shrinking demographically there
is immigration from Russia not just now
because of this ever since the Soviet
Union collapsed um so but you know the
the main concern is um the new cold war
that Donald Trump started against China
and you know I we had this discussion
back in when when was it in October of
because it's part of part of the chapter
six of my book M I had I had a I was
puzzled by why would Trump start a cold
war against China you remember it
started when he banned a
telecommunications company Chinese one
Huawei from functioning in the United
States and and then he banned another
one z z t and then another one and then
he introduced serious uh TS on aluminium
exports and so on and of course May one
you know one could say Ah that's Trump
what do you expect he's a Madman but
then Joe Biden gets elected and instead
of reversing this cold war against China
he double charged it he went as the
Australians say ape
 full on he introduced a bill by
which he banned all sales of advanced
microchips to China this is like saying
to Beijing we will do whatever we can to
prevent you from becoming an advanced
technologically advanced country that's
an economic War Declaration of economic
War so the my I I was puzzled by that
and I was asking myself why would they
do that if you ask American diplomats
politicians media people they say oh
Taiwan come on pull another
one why is Taiwan significant oh because
they want to invade it yes they wanted
to invade it in 1950 in 1960 70 you know
when Bill Clinton was doing his utmost
to induct China into the World Trade
Organization and all the iPhones were
being produced in Shenzhen you know and
Shanghai and so
on they wanted to invade Taiwan back
then they claimed it to be their own so
that that can't be the reason that
didn't change that is and then you when
they tell me about but they are uh
spying on us what the Americans are
complaining that somebody's spying on
them the NSA is spying on all of us
every single one of us including
sunak they know what he says better than
he does because he forgets very
easily right so it can't be that and you
know what my explanation is I told you
last time but these people were not
there
um China is the only country that has
developed this new form of of capital
which I call Cloud Capital which is the
part of
capital
which when it accumulates bestows upon
its owner the most power it's the cap
capital that lives inside your your
phone the algorithmic AI driven Capital
which is not new it's been happening now
10 15 years if you think about it there
is no British or european competitor to
Google to Facebook to um
amazon.com to Uber
to Airbnb to any of these
platforms none no British no German no
French no Indian competitor to them
China has a bigger and better version of
each one of them in China and not only
that but there is an application called
WeChat that belongs to
stensen which imagine an application we
don't have it here in Europe or in
Britain if you don't want to be
considered European don't know why you
wouldn't but maybe you don't um you
don't have an an app that allows you to
watch movies like Netflix to call a car
a cab like uber to send tweets to do
that and on top of that to send money to
pay to make payments for free to anyone
in the world for free no fee no banking
fee attached that app doesn't exist in
the west the Chinese have it
so to the extent that the United States
remains
hegemonic
because they have the Monopoly of all
Payment Systems when you pay anybody
even within
Britain that
payment Finds Its way through to the
other person to the person to whom
you're making the payment through a
system totally controlled by the United
States not the by the bank of England
not by England or the European Union
totally by the United States this is why
explain that cuz people understand if
you're using Visa or PayPal people get
that well visa and PayPal are all
American but a bank a a bank transfer
how's that well
the it is possible for a payment to be
made within Britain um without going
through one of the filters that go
through Washington but Washington has
the means to press a button and stop you
from making a payment from Lloyd's Bank
to Norwest within London
after the second world
war Europe and Britain had no payment
system we were you know in ashes after
the second world war the continent of
Europe was in genuine ashes and Britain
was bankrupt so when Breton Woods
rebuilt the financial system through the
system of central
banks the bank of international
settlements and all that Swift you have
you seen the acronym Swift all this
system is in electronics payment system
a messaging system which messages One
Bank you know
10 35 p is going from here to there that
system is totally controlled by the
United States because it was the United
States that created it after Breon Woods
in 1944 and that remains to this day so
to go back to the question then of are
we seeing I don't say the end of
American Empire I completely agree with
you there but the demise of it retreat
potenti from certain parts of the world
maybe West Asia
um what we saw late last year that
Retreat taking place pardon when did
where did you see that Retreat taking
place okay so if anything they're
increasing their presence in West Asia I
think we'll know but this is the thing
so again I'm sure many people here of
everybody is you know Navara potentially
supporters I hope or Novara viewers or
listeners High information people but
lots of people don't know that you know
there have been over 100 attacks on us
armed uh forces in Syria Iraq you've had
the Iranians take boats on one side of
the Arabian Peninsula You' obviously got
the Red Sea on the other there is a
there is a region at War right now sure
and it's a war against the United States
I mean we're not it's not reported as
such anything by the way which happens
against the US Iran backed no it's
Iraqis in Iraq against Americans in Iraq
that's Iraqis but Iran backed
organizations apparently across the
across the region and it and it does
feel like it's um it's a pivotal moment
actually for us Empire and that part of
the world and look I'm not suggesting
it's going to retreat it's out but it
seems to be under greater pressure
militarily politically in West Asia is
The Cutting Edge of all of this than it
has been for a very long time and that
you could repeat the same argument with
regards to Taiwan of course they've been
saying it for a long time the point is
now China can execute something like
that in a way it couldn't have 30 40
years ago I would like
to go off at the at the tangent just for
one one minute and then come back to the
question about the United States in
China because you mentioned Iran I am
very
conflicted very conflicted because on
one on the one hand my heart and my mind
is committed and dedicated to the woman
life
Freedom Revolution within Iran against
the
theocracy these are our comrades woman
life
Freedom at the the same
time what the Americans want to do by
overthrowing the regime in Iran is
create another fragmented
destructive regime like the one they
inflicted upon
Iraq so how that's why I'm saying I'm
conflicted I do not want Iran to be
defeated by the United States and to see
the United States victorious in that
part of the world but at the same time I
do not want to see the regime in Iraq in
Iran maintain its authority over
particularly the women because we have
gender aparti in Iran okay so I just
wanted to State it for the record that
I'm confused and in
conflicted I close the parenthesis let's
go back now
um
unfortunately
this confrontation between the United
States on the one hand and Iran on the
other alongside with various you know
forces amongst the Kurds amongst the
Iraqis amongst the huies and so on who
may be backed by Iran it's not a bad
thing to be backed by Iran um they are
they have agency though the houis are
not being directed by Iran they may
receive weapons from Iran it's like
saying that you know the Vietnamese were
uh because they were backed by the
Soviet Union that they were directed by
the Soviet Union they were not they were
fighting a National Liberation struggle
and they would accept weapons from
whoever gave them um nevertheless I
don't
see if if I were in the Pentagon I would
not be worried about
the developments on the military terrain
what I would be worried about are the
developments on the fintech the
financial technology
um terrain because the Chinese with we
chat and in particular something I
haven't mentioned yet the digital
currency of the Central Bank of China
they are cre creating circumstances that
can easily undermine the Monopoly that
the dollar has on International
transactions because all the power of
the Americans of the United States this
whole panoply of force is based on the
US dollar the American economy is
becoming a smaller and smaller
percentage of the world economy the
American economy is highly in the red
they have a huge Trade Surplus H sorry
huge trade deficit since
1968 they have a huge budget deficit 6
and a half% every year Bud budget
deficit so they need other people's
money they are the only Empire in the
history of humanity who are growing
stronger the more they are in the headed
what allows them to do that is that they
print the world's currency the dollar so
if you are a capitalist a German
capitalist a Chinese capitalist to this
day right um You need to sell to the
Americans in order to make your own
profits
so you sell to the Americans the
Americans Buy in dollars they have a
deficit and you get dollars so you're a
Chinese capitalist in Shanghai or
in
Frankfurt and you have all these dollars
and what do you do with these dollars
you canot spend them in Germany or in
China so you take them to Wall Street
and you invest them in real estate in
shares primarily in American debt so
you're financing the American government
to build the armies and to have the
aircraft carriers in the East so that
that is the
Nexus around which American power
revolves the dollar the Chinese threaten
that because now if you are a capitalist
if you are a money bags if you're Saudi
Arabian with lots and lots of billions
you know somebody from Abu Dhabi an
Indonesian magnet a Malaysian
magnet you are really thinking twice
about putting all your eggs in the
dollar basket why
because you've seen that the Americans
just confiscated 400 billion of dollars
of Russian money I'm not going to pass
judgment on that this is not a
discussion of whether they should have
done it or not it's a fact they did it
so if you are a shake
from
Dubai or a stinking Rich usually bastard
from Indonesia right because to be
stinking rich in Indonesia you can't be
a good person
right or in Greece for that
matter and you have all these billions
you think well they got pissed off with
Putin's men and they took their money
what about me I'm not the best guy in
the world maybe they will get pissed off
with me tomorrow so you're not going to
put all your money in the Chinese
digital currency but you'll put some of
it in there just to me yeah Plan B in
case the Americans come and that is a
clear and present danger for American
hegemony that is why and here is my
explanation you have the new Cold War
the Americans are attacking the
technological evolution of Chinese
fintech the combination of big Tech and
the financial sector because they want
to kill this payment system from you
know before it grows up and challenges
the American dollar the American dollar
digital system so on the the
microprocesses thing which you mentioned
which was the this embargo last last
year we're not going to send
microprocessors to China smaller than a
certain size which is in all the lace
applications by the way I think last
year China spent more on importing maybe
not last year but the year before that
on microprocessors than on uh petrol the
amount of money it spends on this stuff
is absolutely extraordinary and by the
way that's the largest consumer of
petroleum in human history they're
spending more on importing
microprocessors um so this is obviously
a significant part of us strategy and I
think that's undeniable they want to
under mind their ability to create AI
applications you know 5G internet etc
etc for sure uh but on the on the point
of um uh infrastructure I want to sort
of dovetail us now with Europe because
you're saying Europe's over right but
you're saying there these two Powers
there's this play now between China and
the United States Europe clearly has to
make some kind of a choice now what or
maybe not maybe you won't say that what
I find really interesting here in
Britain at the front line of this whole
debate is Huawei gets kicked out a
couple of years ago now they got the
email from Washington kick them out and
they did as they were told yeah and they
were build building 5G U 5G
infrastructure at the time and I'm sure
people here know this we don't have 5G
in this country your phone might say 5G
it's no quicker than 4G it's a lie uh we
have Placebo
5G it's true because the Chinese aren't
building it anymore that's what and that
is a very material consequence of
throwing ourselves alongside the United
States uh we don't have a level of
technological innovation we should have
if we we keep on hearing from all the
politicians we want to be you know High
Tech High productivity our 5G doesn't
work the 5G that's built in Tajikistan
by Chinese Engineers is going to be
better so from a European perspective
when it comes to things like 5G or or
effective efficient payment systems and
so on is it a question of and this is
very relevant for Greece yenis cuz
you're geographically a lot closer right
will that new Silk Road go all the way
to airus and Athens what's your what's
your read on that on the question of um
the technological
backwardness of your telecommunication
system here in Britain I have some good
news for
you Germany is
worse
Rejoice they still use faxes in their
Ministries no seriously seriously German
Ministries are still run on faxes why
because of
austerity because of austerity because
for 15 years tighten belt tightening of
the German State means they didn't
invest in Technologies they have fallen
behind this is why now German is
deindustrializing allow me to to make
this point because I think it is really
crucial then I come back to Britain and
Silk Road and all
that take the electric car which is the
future you may not like I personally
don't like them because I'm oldfashioned
and I like to hear the petrol engine
don't tell my friends in the green
movement that
okay I'm an old motorcyclist what can I
do I I I did ride once an electric
motorcycle it was really very powerful
fantastic I hated
it didn't smell of anything anyway um
again close the bracket now the electric
car is
a is is
the um death of the German car
industry not that there will not be car
production in Germany they will be
producing as many cars as they were
before the electric car but that's not
where the comparative advantages of
German industry their comparative
advantage was in making very high
precision
gearboxes and reciprocating
reciprocating
engines electric cars have much lower
value added and what value is to be
extracted comes from what I said before
Cloud
Capital let me put it this way a Tesla
May cost quite a bit of
money to buy but Elon Musk is going to
be collecting monies from anyone who has
bought Tesla
forever not just at the point of sale
when you buy a Volkswagen Volkswagen
gets a certain W of money from you and
that's it after that maybe whatever
spare parts you purchase from them to
service the car but Tesla because you
know Tesla did you know that Elon Musk
can switch off your
Tesla you you you know you you drive out
of the car dealer you have your
beautiful all glaming all singing all
dancing Tesla Elon Musk can
decide Kate Smith your car is off
presses a button and through a satellite
it completely you know it's like apple
can switch off your your iPhone if it
wants that it won't do it but it already
in the United States I don't know
whether you know that if you buy a
secondhand Tesla and you not register it
with a Tesla dealer they switch it off
you can't
drive which also works the other way
around because Tesla knows ga
information as to what music you're
listening to when you're going to your
child's
school where did you go yesterday what
mood were you in because it simply it it
has a capacity to hear your
conversations in the car or the
conversations you're having with people
using your phone so it has all this data
from you Tesla sells this data on a
daily basis this is what I mean by the
power of cloud Capital Volkswagen
doesn't have that doesn't own the cloud
doesn't have anything like like that
Europe that's why Europe is behind China
has it have you heard of a company
called byd build your build your dream
it's almost as big as Tesla now I think
I think it was did it get bigger for one
day and then it went back or anyway yeah
it's huge it's big and it will be much
bigger okay they have all that so it is
America and it is China and we here have
missed the boat when after 2009 when the
bank of England was printing money the
European Central Bank was printing money
I mean the loss of the election in 2017
our loss you know when Jeremy didn't
win was pivotal because if in that labor
party Manifesto you'll see that there
was a policy I know because I worked on
it with John McDonald um for creating a
public Investment Bank the purpose of
which would be to issue
bonds like McDonald issues bonds right
to the tune of 200 billion remember the
28 billion that Rachel Reeves no that
would be the the point of that would be
to issue bonds of worth 200 billion
every year with a support of the bank of
England not to be repaid by the
taxpayers that would not be added to the
public debt because it would be a
separate bank and the whole point would
be that that would go into Green
Tech that if that had happened from
let's say 2018 onwards there would have
already been six years of these very
large investments in Green Technology in
Britain we could have done the same
thing in the European Union we didn't do
it so now we are
simply sitting on our dilapitated
couches and watching the Americans and
the Chinese go at it and invent the
future so to go back to my previous
question then who who who do we throw a
lot in with and on the question of 5G
this is probably quite Salient because
the Americans literally don't develop 5G
you've got Ericson swedes um and you've
got the Chinese and it is more tempting
for countries further east to be part of
what's been called you know the new Silk
Road um particularly someone like Greece
I mean the UK probably somewhat
different you know and I think this as
well with regards to um highspeed 2 you
know people saying cost overruns how can
we build it how can we save money you
know what would be really easy get the
Chinese to build it you do it you save a
lot of money but Aaron that's St that is
St for you she wanly destroyed the
capacity of the British industrial base
to build things she decided we don't
want to build things we're going to go
straight to the service sector we're
going to have the city of London
financialization gambling and you know
importing stuff to sell through Tescos
and that that that's the business model
that she
developed uh and Tony
Blair considered that to be brilliant so
he turbocharged it
further and then you had the financial
sector collapse in 2008 2009 and since
then governments in Britain have been
doing only one
thing because they are such class
Warriors and they are so loyal to the
bis of this country to the aristocracy
of this country they have been printing
trillions of
pounds to refloat the ruling class while
practicing harsh austerity against the
British people now this is not simply
misanthropic and unjust
and pretty disgusting but it is
also a sure recipe for St stagnating
British
capitalism so even if you are you know
an oldfashioned 19th century liberal who
believes in progress you know GDB growth
and all that um which is consistent of
course with climate catastrophe and all
that but nevertheless even if that is
your objective the policies that have
been pursued by governments since that
all governments every single one of them
uh have depleted the capacity of even
British capitalism to be dynamic so when
list trust was saying oh my God you know
we have wasted all this time and we need
we need to re refocus on growth what on
Earth are you talking about list you've
been part of a Tor party that has
depleted the capacity of British
capitalism to be capitalist you see the
problem with British capitalists is that
at some point I don't know exactly what
when that happened they no longer wanted
to be
capitalist they wanted to be renters
they want to sit in their mansions and
to collect they were not interested in
making things anymore the Chinese are
making things the Germans are making
things the problem with the Germans is
because they are so aeran they stopped
investing in making the next thing and
the and the Chinese came along and said
fine we will do it the Americans are
always on top of the game because they
either make other people make stuff for
them and then magnetize into Wall Street
their profits through this dollar
payment system
do you see what I why I'm saying that we
here in Europe and I include Britain in
Europe whether you like it or not that
you know we are everybody around the
world even very impecunious people in
Ghana in Zambia they are looking at us
and you know what what they see very
stupid
people um so we we've talked about
Europe we've talked about the United
States I want to talk about n uh
nordstream what n you know nordstream
nordre nordstream too yeah who did it
nordstream one you mean sorry nordstream
well the one that was blown up sorry who
who did it the United
States it's really very simple it's
really very
simple you know they've been they've
been saying it for years do you remember
miss nuland the deputy secretary of
state Victoria nuland yeah she actually
had announced it ages ago that if they
if the Germans don't stop importing
natural gas from Russia we will have to
take measures
what what more do you need and in in
case I remember when it first blew up
they immediate the BBC the BBC ITV they
all immediately blamed Putin now why
would Putin blow up the gas pipe with
which he's selling gas to his best
customers to find the war he's a war
criminal he's a
bastard he's a Neo Orthodox fool KGB you
can say all sorts of things about him
he's an awful awful poor excuse of a
human
person but he's not stupid he wouldn't
blow up his own gas
pipeline and now we already I can't
remember what you know but now there's
plenty of evidence that it was the
United States and the United States are
not even vfly denying it no yeah they
are they're sort of winking at us yeah
it was us but we're not going to say it
was right but there's two things here I
want to I want to get so that was one of
those stories
where and I I sound crazy when I say
that I sound crazy lots of the time but
you know the mainstream media was
scoping us on mass they were saying this
was Russia I think this they were
absolutely convinced the last people who
would be doing I mean it's not
implausible but that's absolutely crazy
assertion to make with so much weight
and so much gravity that was one thing
it was just one of those moments I
thought wow the media there's not even
an effort here at getting to facts
objectivity truth um serving your
audience at all at all all um but then
secondly politicians particularly German
politicians didn't say anything So at
the very moment your people are being
crushed by high energy prices at the
very moment your industrial class is
like you say facing de-industrialization
for a bunch of reasons increased
competition from China and whatnot you
just come out of covid uh stagnation of
the global economy obviously hit your
exports at that very moment you've lost
a really reliable cheap source of energy
and your own domestic political class
won't say who did it what does that say
about German polit Germany's politicians
but also Europe's political class I mean
when they try and stop people like uh
Jeremy Corbin I won't send Mr cuss in
Greece he doesn't count uh but these
sort of populist leaders from the left
when they try and Destroy them and they
give it so much uh well is it precisely
to stop people rising to the top in
German politics in British politics in
frenchs politics say no this was the CIA
is that is that the Crux of the matter
fundamentally the Crux of the matter is
this don't forget that the German
Constitution was written by
Americans don't forget
that the original deal between the
Allies in
1944 was that German would be Germany
would be
de-industrialized its factories will be
destroyed and indeed
1,750 German factories were destroyed by
the Allies in the process of turning
Germany into a pastoral land that is to
prevent it from ever rising up again it
was the Americans who sent their
Secretary of State in for 1946 to
deliver a speech of Hope in which
effectively they said to the Germans
okay we've changed our minds we
Americans have changed our minds uh and
we are going to reindustrialize you
you're going you're going you're coming
back in from the
cold the whole of German industry was
built as a result of the decision of the
United States to allow them to rebuild
they have a deep debt of gratitude to
the United States and a complete
dependence it was all done on the basis
of American Loans remember
1950 another little aside I remember I
was in the Euro group with you know the
German Finance Minister who the now late
Wan sh and others and he comes out and
he
starts delivering a a speech on the
sanctity of debt a debt is a debt is a
debt and you have to pay every last Euro
to the last cent and then when I took
the floor that's why I didn't like me I
said I'm sorry the only reason why you
are representing an industrialized
German is because a debt is not a debt
is not a debt in 1953 most of your debts
were written off by the Americans the
British and all the Allies including
debts you owed to my
country so if you're an American
industrialist you owe the
Americans and it's not just a past debt
it's also a future debt because I
mentioned that before uh Mercedes-Benz
would stop operating tomorrow if it
didn't sell mercedes-benzes to the
United
States and these mercedes-benzes are
being paid for with dollars that then
Mercedes-Benz takes to the United States
and invests in American
property so if you are Mercedes-Benz or
you know big shareholder of
Mercedes-Benz they are your God you do
nothing to disturb the sleep of the God
who lives in Washington maybe in
California as well right so that that
explain and German
politicians they have one thing in
common whether they're on the left or on
the right they are
cowards complete and utter cowards look
at what's going on now with with Gaza
even the left my comrades on the left
I'm not talking to them anymore you know
the Rosa Luxenberg Center named after
the Fantastic Rosa Luxenberg which is in
I used to have a good relationship with
these people that work my comrades you
know they banned the Palestinian author
from making a presentation in their
theater because he was Palestinian
recently that's why I'm saying all
German politicians every single one of
them are
cowards and they have this
thing the fear of the tall poppy
syndrome that if they you know are a
poppy that's a bit taller than the other
ones you know raises it hand his head
above the above the parapet they will be
Machin G machined down so they don't
speak so everybody knew that nordstream
1 was blown up by the west by the
Americans but everybody was looking at
everybody else will everybody will
anyone say
it and because you know nobody was
saying it nobody said
it coward this in
action we need a Navar Germany by the
sounds of it we about Michael yes we do
we about Michael Walker saying it was I
have to say there are there are
Independent Media in Germany and there's
extremely extremely courageous and they
do a very good job but
they they are struggling and they are
struggling because you know this in the
end Britain with all its faults remains
a better place to be a lefty than
Germany this is what why Marx is buried
here and he's not buried in
Germany you know your job as novada if
you were functioning in Germany would
have been impossible go on that's we are
going the n and I are going to to
Germany on Friday morning uh for dm25
the Democracy in Europe Movement we are
going to run in the European Parliament
elections as me Mara 25 our electoral
Wing in Germany as well as in Italy as
in um as in uh Greece and if you were
still in the European Union given K
would probably have to run here as well
um and I'm telling you our comrades now
in Germany are sending me frantic
messages full of angst that um uh the
theaters that we have booked for our
events are all threatening to keep the
their doors shuts their doors shut
because of U me being portrayed as um an
anti-semite simply because because you
see the thing in Germany now is you can
only talk about genocide if you support
it if you oppose genocide you cannot
speak the
word if you say Netanyahu yes go go go
take Gaza bomb them it's fine if you
want to talk about Israel from The River
To The Sea huh and apart hide from The
River To The Sea it's fine in German say
that but if you say look I'm against
apar and I'm against genocide and I want
Universal basic human rights from The
River To The Sea you're banned because
you're you're an
anti-semite so we'll have to face that
on Friday so you don't think Nara could
have existed in Germany that's a really
interesting point and it says I think
you would simply have very serious I
don't think you would be able to get
this theater to do what we're doing here
tonight in Berlin that's really
interesting because often you know on
the left we'll we'll criticize the UK
the British State Etc or the British
national character or whatever yeah but
that's you know you want to be
exceptional you know British
exceptionalism Cuts both
ways you know the British Empire used to
think that it was the best the brightest
and the biggest right and then the left
wanted to think that Britain was the
worst place we are so exceptional
because we were the worst you are
neither the best nor the worst I love it
but no I think there is something to it
and it's sounds sort like some Buran
conservative but I think there is
something to it which actually there is
Instinct in this country where most of
the time somebody who disagrees with you
will still say well you're allowed to
have that point of view fine as long as
you're not hurting anybody whereas
actually from from the outside looking
into someone like Germany over the last
six months of the last year that is
simply not the case there there is this
deep instinctive conformism to stop
people from saying things they disagree
with indeed uh you know this is a very
um sensitive issue for
instance I don't age agree with Banning
Nazis I know that doesn't sound very
popular but I'm a liberal I want to
defeat Nazis I want to beat them into a
pulp not physically you know in the in
the polling stations I want them to
disappear in the polling stations I want
to defeat them culturally I want to
defeat them in the in the struggle for
ideas Banning them you know effectively
say saying that you don't have the right
to run in elections what they doing to
Trump now in the United States where
they're trying to get him off the ballot
that is a catastrophy this is
legitimizing Trump it is legitimizing
the people who support Trump because
they think that he's being hounded by
The Establishment to which he belongs I
don't believe in banning opinions that
may make me feel uncomfortable you know
this idea about a safe space we need to
have a safe space where we don't get
triggered by things we don't like that's
crap but so you see in in in in Germany
now they have this alternative for deuts
it's a pretty vile part it's qu Nazi
fascistic horrible like the ones we have
in gree's Parliament the ones that beat
us and won our seats right I don't want
these people to be banned I I want to
win them back I want to defeat them I
don't want to see them in prison simply
because they are Nazis I want to see
them in prison If they raise their hand
and strike anyone as the Golden Dawn
murderers did but you know we should as
the left be because the Liberals are not
liberals as we were saying before we
need to preserve basic political rights
even for the people who are vile and who
say obnoxious things in Germany the
moment they started thinking of banning
the afd they have
20% what what's going to happen if you
ban a party of of 20% Then you
delegitimize democracy that is the
greatest gift to the Nazis because they
can then turn around and say look what
what does it mean to be a Democrat you
just ban anyone you disagree
with am I completely wrong no I couldn't
agree more we're going to have to end
there and go to questions and hopefully
some answers Yan faracis a very
Illuminating
hour
w
