greetings I've been traveling a lot so I
have not had time to record any of these
franklys uh and now I must because it's
late Wednesday and I've just learned of
some things and had some ideas uh so
this is going to come out Friday and
then I'm traveling again I'll be in New
York City uh for climate week next week
we'll see some of you there um I am also
an exculpatory Clause recording this uh
under the influence of zizol which is
antihistamine because I have terrible
ragweed
allergies um there was a Black Swan that
potentially happened in the last couple
days with respect to the Four Horsemen
of the 2020s which I often talk about
and this is the uh Israeli use of pagers
uh in the war against
Hezbollah uh in in the Middle East um
I'm going to couch that in a broader uh
um overview of seven things that are
very important to our lives that are
depleting uh or disappearing or in uh in
recede mode um and that's going to be
the topic of today's brief frankly the
first of many coming in coming months I
have like a list of 37 more that I
somehow need to find a time to record
okay so uh very quickly um viewers of
this program know that I don't look at
the future by extrapolating the current
situation forward in time because we can
look two or three steps ahead and infer
uh some of the challenges some of the
roadblocks uh some of the Dead ends that
we face so here are seven things that
are um declining
maybe out of our sight but they're
declining nonetheless and they're going
to have big implications for our future
the first one of course is
oil uh when we drill an oil field um we
get a lot of production out and then a
big tail that lasts sometimes for
decades uh We've drilled um you know so
many oil wells around the world we've
drilled more in the United States than
the rest of the world combined and these
decline if you average all the decline
of all the oil wells drilled in the
world it runs at around 15% a year this
is in contrast this is a new report out
by Exxon Mobile last week so we have to
drill faster and faster and have new
technology new Fields uh better
extraction uh percentages in order to
offset that 15% decline big story for uh
coming Generations number two which
should really be number one for all of
us is the decline of the stability of
the biosphere that we came used to uh in
the Hollow Scene this is not just
climate change climate is one of six uh
planetary thresholds that we are uh
exceeding including biosphere Integrity
uh novel entities like endocrine
disruptors and Plastics land system
change freshwater change and biog
geochemical flows like the phosphorus
and uh and nitrogen Cycles um the
stability of what the planet experienced
what our ancestors experienced uh during
the Pline and the Hollow Scene is
depleting the third uh is the value of
our money um at least in the United
States we're issuing a trillion dollars
worth of new debt every three months uh
our budget deficit is uh higher this
year than it was in covid which was like
a Rec SL depression so we keep printing
more money to pay for things today and
so the value of our money is
declining um fourth is trust the trust
that we have in institutions the trust
we have in each other uh the trust we
have in the rules and the Frameworks and
the ways that we interact with other is
is in Decline uh especially in the media
which is one reason I started uh this
channel
Fifth and related is uh civility um the
uh the kind of given take tolerance of
others uh we don't start from an
ambivalent state where we don't uh judge
uh increasingly we're not willing to
give the benefit of the doubt to our
fellow fellow countrymen and women in
conversations and so the Civil contract
the social contract which itself is one
of the four horsemen uh is in
Cline Sixth and these are really in no
particular order I just like to do the
number seven sometimes um is the
stability of our parasympathetic nervous
system we increasingly spend a lot of
time in sympathetic mode including even
watching these Frankl which I'm well
aware of and it bothers me a little bit
yet I still feel compelled from a
reasonably good nervous system state
today uh to share this information with
you all but as we head into these events
where there's going to be uh
International macroeconomic geopolitical
whack-a-mole every day um our nervous
systems become more and more activated
and as that happens we're less able to
think clearly to respond from uh a place
of
equinity um so our our nervous systems
are in uh
depletion number one which is the reason
for uh today's uh conversation is the
stability of Global Supply chains and
globalization one could argue that what
happened uh a couple days ago when these
pagers exploded um with u mostly uh
Hezbollah operatives in Lebanon but not
all uh there were doctors and other
people and I don't have all the
upto-date information on this it's still
unfolding there's rumors it's happen
with walkie-talkies and other
devices
um I think because of this globalization
itself has potentially become
weaponized Co called our attention to
the fragility of international just in
time Supply chains but that was an
external force it was a virus um now
these pagers uh and Beyond are something
that happened due to malice due to an
internal
decision um and so if you recall a
couple times on frankl's I've talked
about um The evolutionary Game Theory
Matrix the payoff grid where there's
cooperation you and I do something
together for the benefit of both of us
there's selfishness I do something for
me at a cost to you there's altruism
where we both do something uh that helps
the other person and then there's spite
which is doing something at a cost to
yourself but a greater cost to your
competitor and spite is only a valid
option when you have no other recourse
and I think Israel is is indicating um
that they're so desperate uh that they
would do this to have these explosives
inside of uh pagers and all of the
downstream implications of that this is
going to change many things in the world
I fear everyone's focused right now on
the casualties in Lebanon and some
children died and there's injuries and
what does this mean for the um the war
between Israel and and Hezbollah and I'm
not focused on that that's been going on
for a thousand years and it's horrible
and I could see arguments on both sides
and I don't even want to touch that but
I think this has a big implication for
trust in Global Supply chains who is
going to buy things technology from an
Israel
uh uh company in the global South and
who extending that who's going to buy
from the United Kingdom and the United
States uh supply chain company uh uh
collaborations with Israel companies
around the world um and beyond that who
I had people in my social media feeds
yesterday in New York City watching
events on their phones with their kids
and like do I want to even Beyond these
device devices when the possibility that
they might explode or something I think
that's a little far-fetched um but is it
I mean what are the um repercussions as
we Crest the carbon pulse and spite
becomes more and more of a a a viable
choice for Nations uh or
individuals um boy this really really
talks to the great simplification to
resilience to nearshoring to making sure
that you know the horizontals and
verticals of your own supply chain
there's very few countries that do that
Russia being one um what does this
portend for the Trust In global Supply
chains I think this is going to be a
developing uh feeling uh that's going to
unfold um I I might be wrong but that
was my initial reaction to seeing what's
going on in Lebanon
today uh lots more ahead please watch
Roman krisar podcast next week it's
excellent uh on learning from past
civilizations on what we can do in times
of of conflict creatively and and in
collaboration uh many more Frankl to
come I hope you're all well uh thanks
