hi everyone and welcome back to the
channel today I'm going to talk about
another Philip Kik novel called the
simulacra uh it was first published in
1964 and here's how I'll break it down
first I'll give you a peak into the plot
then I'll take a deeper look at three
big themes that stood out to me ideas
that are just important just as
important today as they were when he was
writing the novel um I will read you
when excerpt so you can get a feel for
the text and on our way out I will show
you again some drawings that the book
inspired me to make let's get
started the story is set in a future
United States under the rule of the
United States of Europe and America or
UIA a totalitarian superstate governed
by the mysterious first lady NI
tibo at the heart of this regime is the
White House but the whole government is
a fraud and the president is an Android
who is regularly being exchanged by a
new
version the first lady as well is not
real she's a series of actresses caed
one after the other to maintain the
illusion of continuity and stability and
it doesn't stop there the novel's world
is filled with so called simil aqua or
artificial beings um designed to keep
this carefully curated reality
intact against this backdrop Dr superb
um is the sole remaining
psychotherapist in a world where
psychiatric treatment is actually
outlawed thanks to the big Pharma
cartels some of the characters have
access to time travel devices um the
only possibility for escape from this
world is to immigrate to Mars there is a
sort of cost system in play um there are
the ones who are in on the secret of the
president being an Android and those who
aren't the lower social stratum refer to
as the jobless Nomads or bees uh
includes individuals who align
themselves with neon noty movement uh
and others immerse themselves in the
often televised house fantasy to escape
their personal struggles through a sort
of deluge of
nostalgia the novel tells a story of
maintaining control through sustaining
the status quo and government limiting
access to
information in the simul political power
relies iies heavily on technology not
just as a tool but as a foundation for
control the regime doesn't simply use
military force or police to maintain
order instead it's all about subtle
manipulation advanced communication
systems Androids and even psychotropic
interventions take Nicole deodo as an
example the first lady she's not just a
beloved character or leader she's a
product a perfectly engineered Persona
broadcast to the public everything about
her is choreographed from her
appearances to her public Persona to
ensure ideological
conformity in Dick's Vision artificial
leaders like Nicole work better than
flawed human ones because they're immune
to scandals and personal quirks they're
perfect by Design now fast forward to
today while we don't have Android
presidents yet or at least as far as we
know some of the politicians in power
publicly malfunction at times due to old
age or disease appearances of
politicians are either heavily televised
and
yet at critical Junctions leadership
seems strangely absent to the point of
seemingly neglecting governance
altogether
one of the most striking ideas in the
SRA is how fragile identity and
authenticity become in a world dominated
by artifice in this future Society the
lines between what's real and what's
fake are so blurred that even the
characters themselves often struggle to
feel real again let's take the first
lady as our example on the surface she's
the Eternal first lady a symbol of
stability and unity but in reality she's
just a role played by a series of
actresses each stepping seamlessly into
the part to keep the illusion alive it's
not about who Nicole is as a person
because she isn't one it's about the
performance of her character and this
isn't just limited to her the world is
full of simulacra artificial beings
designed to replace or enhance
reality today we are seeing um something
similar think about how we present
ourselves online our carefully curated
social media profiles and digital
personas rarely match who we are in real
life in Dick's world even history and
memory are constantly being revised to
fit the narrative just like how
misinformation and alternative facts
challenge our understand understanding
of reality today at its core the Sima
asks a big question what does it mean to
be real in a world where so much is fake
and how do we hold on to who we are when
everything around us seems designed to
confuse or manipulate us these are
challenges that we face just as much now
as the characters in Dick's imagined
future
in the simulakra the media isn't just a
background detail it's the primary tool
that the regime uses to maintain its
illusion of stability through public
broadcasts carefully curated news and
staged appearances the media presents a
seamless narrative any evidence to the
contrary is being suppressed or erased
there is this constant tension between
status quo and Truth
now think about today um the global
media landscape is very fragmented with
competing narratives flooding our
smartphones unlike the monolithic media
of dicks world we live in a chaotic
environment where algorithms and Echo
chamber social media channels shape how
we experience reality yet the effect is
the same a populous unsure of what's
real and reliant on curated feed or
trusted
influencers reading the simula C today
is a bit Eerie because so much of it
resonates with our current reality back
in 1964 di concerns were shaped by
television's growing influence the Cold
War propaganda and mid century
politics fast forward to 2024 and we're
dealing with drone in Nations block
politic propaganda crumbling
institutions and failing States but the
underlying issues remain the same while
dick imagined a world where one regime
controlled everything our reality is
even Messier with multiple actors
competing for control but the result is
no less troubling engineer realities
that influence our beliefs and decisions
the room had almost filled up and now
Patrick Doyle the current building Sky
pilot looking non too happy in his long
white robe raised his hands for
silence the opening prayer he called
huskily cleared his throat and brought
forth a small card everyone please shut
your eyes and bow your head he glanced
at tishman and the trustees and tishman
nodded for him to
continue Heavenly Father Doyle read we
the residents of the communal apartment
building Abraham Lincoln beseech you to
bless our assembly tonight we ask you
that in your mercy you enable us to
raise the funds for the roof repairs
which seem imperative we ask that our
sick be healed and that in processing
applicants wish wishing to live amongst
us we show wisdom in whom we admit and
whom we turn away we further ask that no
Outsiders get in and disrupt our law
abiding orderly lives and we ask in
particular that lastly if it be thy will
that Nicole tibo be free of her sinus
headaches which have caused her not to
appear before us on TV lately and that
those headaches not have anything to do
with that time two years ago which we
recall when the stage had allowed that
weight to fall and strike her on the
head sending her to the hospital for
several days anyhow
amen the audience agreed
amen rising from his chair tishman said
now before the business of the meeting
we'll have a few rewarding minutes of
our own Talent display for our enjoyment
first the three fetches mow girl girls
from apartment number
205 they will do a soft shoe dance to
the tune of I'll Build A Stairway To the
Stars he resed himself and on the stage
came the three little blond-haired
children fil familiar to the audience
from talent shows in the past as the
feter small girls in their striped pants
and glittery silver jackets shuffled
smilingly through the L the door of the
outside Corridor opened and the late
Comer Edgar Stone
appeared he was late this evening
because he had been gr grading test
papers of his next door neighbor and as
he stood in the doorway his mind was
still on the test and the poor showing
which Duncan his neighbor whom he barely
knew had
made it seemed to him that without even
having finished the grading of the test
he could see that Duncan had failed on
the stage the fetcher smaller girls sang
in their scratchy voices and stone
wondered why he had come perhaps for no
more reason than to a word a fine it
being mandatory for the residents to be
here tonight these amateur talent shows
put on so frequently meant nothing to
him he recalled the old days when the TV
set had carried entertainment good shows
put on by professionals now of course
all the professionals who were any good
were on the contract to the White House
and the TV had become educational not
Entertaining Mr Stone thought of the
Glorious old golden age long since gone
and great old movie Comics such as Jack
Lemon and Charlie mlan and then he
looked once more at the fetes M girls
and
groaned Vince strike rock ever on duty
hearing him glanced at him severely
at least he had missed the prayer he he
presented his identification to Vince's
expensive new machine and it allowed him
to pass Loy break down the aisle towards
a vacant
seat was Nicole watching this tonight
was a talent scout present somewhere in
the audience he saw no unfamiliar faces
the fetes mow girls were wasting their
time seating himself he closed his eyes
and listened unable to endure watching
they'll never make it he thought they'll
have to face it and so will their
ambitious parents they're untalented
like the rest of us the Abram Lincoln
has added little to the cultural store
of the usea despite its sweaty strenuous
determination and you are not going to
be able to alter that the hopelessness
of the fet small girl's position made
him remember once more the test papers
which Ian Duncan trembling and wax and
face had presented him um in his hands
early that
morning if Duncan failed he would be
even worse of than the fet M girls
because he would not even be living at
the ab Abram Lincoln he would drop out
of sight their sight anyhow and would
revert to a despised and ancient had us
he would in all probability unless
gifted with some special skills find
himself once more in a dorm working on a
manual gang as they all had done back in
their
teens of course he would also be
refunded the money which he had paid for
his apartment a large sum which
represented the man's sole major
investment in life from one standpoint
Stone envied him what would I do he
asked himself as he set eyes closed if I
had my Equity back right now in a lump
some perhaps he thought I'd immigrate
buy one of those cheap illegal jalopies
they pedal at the Lots which clapping
sounds roused him the girls had finished
and he too joined in the Applause on the
platform tishman wave waved for
silence okay folks I know you enjoyed
that but there's lots more in store
tonight and then there's the business
part of the meeting we mustn't forget
that he greened
them the simra is more than just a work
of speculative fiction it's almost like
a warning in a time capsule dick uses
his futuristic setting to reflect on the
challenges of his time but those
challenges are arguably even more
pronounced today whether it's technology
role in politics the fragility of
identity or the power of State
controlled media to manipulate
perception the novel's themes continue
to
resonate in 2024 as we navigate a world
of eminent geopolitical conflict are
crumbling
institutions and Relentless information
Warfare
Dick's message is as urgent as ever it's
a call to stay critical to question the
narratives you're being offered and to
remain Vigilant in protecting your
intuition your inner knowing because
that is your best guide your intuition
is a Wellspring of wisdom that no one
can take away from you trust in your
ability to see through illusion and to
find Clarity in any any situation to
reconnect with your intuition consider
turning to activities that lift your
spirit read books that inspire you keep
a Sketchbook to engage with your
thoughts and emotions develop some kind
of creative habit that nourishes your
being these practices will anchor you
and help you stay grounded in the
present and help you navigate the world
around
you I order a bunch of Philly K novels
because that is where I uh take
inspiration from these days uh on my way
out I will like I would like to share
some of the drawings that I was inspired
to make this time
around I hope you enjoyed this video
thank you for watching until next time
bye-bye
good
oh
now close your eyes and
sleep
sleep sleep
