how did our smartphones Go from
something amazingly cool to something
that everyone hates feeling that I get
sometimes when I use my phone
excessively and the only way I can
describe this feeling is is a feeling of
of guilt this is what my minimalistic
phone setup looks like this is the dumb
phone dumb phone sales are up my parents
2006 digital camera is now Peak coolness
the anti- smartphone movement is just
getting started and this movement is
going to change technology probably even
more than AI because it all starts from
one simple idea what will happen when
using a smartphone becomes uncool just
like smoking and we're going to see
exactly what happens but as I started to
dive deeper into this I realized that
this whole movement is based on an
entirely wrong idea because smartphones
aren't really the problem social media
also isn't really the problem this thing
is the problem but to understand it we
have to start here that's me in 1998 and
I know my outfit was fire and together
with hundreds of millions of people I
was getting my first taste of the
internet I grew up downloading music
from Emil chatting with friends on MSN I
bought Minecraft Alpha in 2009 I signed
up to Facebook cuz believe it or not it
was the cool thing to do at the time
technology was cool being on social
media was cool and when smartphones
arrived they were even cooler my first
smartphones in an HTC Sensation look at
that sweet animation it's so nice but in
2012 something happened these are the
charts that show anxiety levels and
feeling of not having a meaning in life
in teenagers and it's clear something
went wrong and guess what was
skyrocketing to the mainstream in 2012
yeah timelines match perfectly I spend 3
hours a day on my phone I feel addicted
that's it smartphones are evil except
they're not because something else was
discovered in 2012 something much more
hidden but also much more d dous think
about it when you feel bad for wasting
hours on your phone what are you doing
probably scrolling Tik Tok which is
Media or Instagram which is social media
or playing the latest dark pattern
playing to win game like Monopoly go
which in the end is Media this guys as a
game because all you doing this game is
press one button so probably vacuum
cleaner simulator is a better game than
this but still and surely you don't hate
your smartphone when it's guiding you
through a new city with Google Maps or
when it's taking picture of good
memories to your friends or when you're
drunk and you need to call an Uber we're
addicted to Media smartphones just serve
it best right now but the invasive and
addictive media of today has one key
difference with TV or Myspace or even
the Facebook I was using in 2010 and
it's this the loop this Loop is how Tech
products are built basically all
software products are built with this
from Big Tech to Tik Tok to a two people
startup in a moldy basement and this is
the key so get ready for a crash course
on on how digital products are actually
built in 40 seconds so you have your app
you have designers and Engineers but
what should your team work on we could
build a dark mode improve the algorithm
add a new AI chat bot we have an endless
list of ideas but how do you decide what
to build what we need is called a
Northstar an objective that's measurable
a number if we are say Google Maps we
can put here the number of kilometers
traveled maps and this is what we want
to grow so we take our ideas and we
start building the ones that we think
will increase this number the most so
for example let's build a new dark mode
so you don't get blinded by your phone
when you're driving at night then we can
immediately test it with millions of
people around the world and see whether
it actually improves the North Star if
it does we release it to everyone and on
to the next one now this is a big
simplification but this is how Tech
works this is what I do in my job as a
product manager and around 2012 social
media and media companies in general
including Netflix YouTube Spotify well
they have realized that here the best
best metric they can put was time and
engagement they discovered that if they
optimize for time they can basically
print money with ads or subscriptions
they found a direct correlation between
increasing time and increasing the
revenue and so the rise for optimizing
for your time was on and all the other
apps follow suit now this Loop is not
inherently evil it's just a really
really really effective way to build
Tech products and all it does is build
things that optimize for the Northstar
but with the Northstar is trying to take
over all of your users time well that's
where this whole mess starts this is
Chamas pipia he worked directly with
Markus Zuckerberg at Facebook during
those years and he basically pioneered
this time sucking Loop and this is what
he has to say about it I feel tremendous
skilt um I think in the back deep deep
recesses of our minds we we kind of
knew something bad could happen and I
probably shouldn't mention it but even
this very video is optimized for keeping
you here I'm using music and text and
images and hopefully an interesting
story so that you will watch it until
the end why well not because I like it
but because YouTube is also playing this
time game and if I want to tell this
story I need to create something that
people want to watch until the end so in
reality the best way to support your
favorite Creator is not actually liking
their video or subscribing to their
channel is actually to watch the video
until the end but after 15 years of this
Loop Building Products that take more
and more of your time people are
starting to have enough especially
younger people that have been exposed
much more to the effects of this are
saying you know what this is too much I
want my time back and even though it is
not a real problem there's only one
thing that people could do declare war
on the smartphone Dum phone sales are up
flip phones are cool again and no I'm
not talking about these flip phones I'm
talking about these flip phones in 2020
Global Dum phone sales reached 1 billion
units in growing while smartphone sales
were were 1.4 billion units but down 12%
from the year before interest for the
keyword Dum phone has only been growing
on Google there's a new market market
for Less lone is a company that makes
premium minimalist smartphones with e
Inc displays and they've been growing
year after year while tech companies
were Racing for more more megapixels
more cameras on the back more AI more
revolutionary features like a new button
people are starting to Crave for less
and it's not just the devices we are
seeing an explosion in apps and gadgets
that help reduce screen time and phone
usage apps that block other apps all the
way to phone cages or you put your phone
in and you can't take it out until the
timer is over even Apple and Google
couldn't ignore this trend and they
ended up building digital well-being and
Screen Time reduction apps built
directly into Android iOS and it's not
just phones in the age of computational
Photography 100x zooms and AI image
processing old digital point and shoot
cameras from the 2000s are back old iPod
seales are up young people are buying
typewriters to escape from having to use
their computers and iPads this is a
rebellion but what really matters here
is not this small bunch of people that
get an Nokia over this iPhone 15 Pro Max
what really matters is that this
movement can disrupt teack completely by
putting forward a very simple idea why
is smartphones become uncool this is the
marble Roman The Stereotype of the cool
guy smoking his cigarette with his
cowboy hat look at his coolness a marbor
of the company built this character with
one purpose only to make smoking seem
cool and well it worked you've seen
countless movies where the cool edgy
character smokes it was a cool thing to
do until it wasn't it took decades but
people realized the danger of smoking
and culture made smoking uncool and
while yes higher taxes on cigarettes and
more awareness of the dangers helped a
key factor in deciding whether a
14-year-old will start smoking or not is
just well how cool smoking is if
everyone around him thinks smoking is
lame then is way less likely to start
coolness is everything if culture
decides something is cool that thing
grows like crazy if culture decides
something is uncool like cigarettes then
it dies in the US we went from 42% of
people smoking in 1965 to 14% in 2019
but then there's another side companies
spend hundreds of billions of dollars
every single year just to make their
thing cool this is what keeps fashion
alive where baggy jeans are cool then
they are uncool then they're cool again
and so on and while we cannot make it
direct comparison there are studies that
show how smartphones and cigarettes are
two completely different types of
addition the same thing is what has been
going on with smartphones that companies
launched cooler and newer phones every
year and made sure that having the
latest smartphone is cool it's a status
symbol and this has been the trend for
the last 15 years but now something is
changing this time optimizing Loop that
media compan companies have been taken
to the extreme caused culture to fight
back and even though it's not the cause
the smartphone is the victim because
this new movement is all about making
smartphones uncool a few years ago if I
went to my friends and I said I'm in a
dopamine detox they would have looked at
me like a weirdo but today they would
reply oh I should do that too a few
years ago taking a break from social
media was weird why why why would you do
that now when you hear someone coming
back from a trip in some remote place
one of the first things they say is oh
it was so cool I was able to unplug from
everything a few years ago it was crazy
to even think about getting a dump phone
today it's happening more and more and
this new movement has also brought up
the big guns celebrities there's a
reason why company use celebrities to
sell you perfume in these cringy black
and white commercials because
celebrities have the power to change
culture in the 2010s celebrities mve to
social media in droves Gathering
hundreds of millions of followers but in
the 2020s we are to see celebrities go
in the opposite direction distancing
from social media distancing from their
smartphone taking a break I decided to
delete my Instagram because I just felt
like I was so addicted to this kind of
false version of my life that it was
just taking over and this simple idea is
going to be much more powerful in
changing Tech than AI or any other fancy
technology just like the ban on
cigarettes we might start to see phone
free zones bars restaurants clubs
starting to ban phones because that's
would make them cooler berim in Berlin
is probably the most secretive and hard
to get into club in the world and for
years no phones are allowed inside and
this makes it ouly cooler if a few years
ago the Stu symbol was having the latest
iPhone a few years from now the flex
could be being able to live on an old
Nokia flip phone 15 years ago you
weren't part of the cool kids if you
weren't on Facebook in the future
watching Dick Top might be seen as lame
I know these things might seem silly now
but don't underestimate the power of
changing culture but also don't think
that tech companies are just going to
sit and wait they're going to do
everything in their power to ride this
trend and it's already happening the
whole idea of this new wave of AI
devices like the rabbit R1 or the Humane
AI pin is that you don't need your
smartphone and all the addiction it
carries with it but you can still get
all its benefits thanks to AI That's the
idea at least the execution has been
what's the traffic to the Empire State
Building from here
finding directions use the voice command
feature of AI pin to ask for traffic
information to the Empire State Building
and it will provide you with the details
you
need I did and I'm willing to bet that
in two or 3 years the big smartphone
guys like Samsung Google or Apple will
start to build products around this as
well like phones with physical switches
and locks to use them less or even
devices that replace some of the things
your smartphone does like music so yeah
probably going to go back to iPods once
this idea of digital minimalism and
taking control of time becomes
mainstream in culture apps and media may
start to break free from this Loop of
maximizing time because just like today
saving that some food is organic makes
it more appealing in the future social
media site that's explicitly built to
not have time addiction is going to be
more appealing and this changing culture
is also going to massively influence the
next generation of devices to the
majority of people this is already
cringe and apple and any other company
can spend billions to make their Vision
Pro or whatever VR headset the highest
resolution with the best tracking but if
wearing it is seen as cringe or uncool
then it's already bound to lose and if
you ask me yeah even as a tech
Enthusiast this is pretty cringe but
this is also the perfect storm to make
augmented reality classes the next big
thing because people do want the
benefits of having a smartphone
capturing movs navigating the world what
they don't want is being sucked into
Doom scrolling into a rectangle and with
V being an overlay on the real world
with way more limitations on what you
can display you're not going to see a
Tik Tok feed projected over your fridge
and so this is what goes on behind the
scenes of every single video I make and
it took me years to learn all this stuff
now you can go literally behind the
scenes of my most successful videos the
ones that got millions of views and
learn exactly how they were made with
story behind there's no Theory no bullet
points no secret formula for success in
Lamborghinis this is not a YouTube
course each story behind is a practical
Hands-On behind the scenes of each one
of my most successful videos and how
they were actually made the storytelling
structure the little tricks the
packaging the editing and the wise
behind every single decision if you're a
Creator or you want to become a Creator
well this is an inside look at exactly
how a successful video is made so you
can check out story behind at the link
below and there's also a discount code
valid for the first 20 people to
purchase story behind at the lowest
price it will ever be oh and if after
this video you still want to keep your
smartphone do you even know all the
secrets that hide behind it well you can
learn all about them in this video right
here
