I'm speaking with Dr DC amen Hillman Dr
hman thank you so much for joining me
today Tim it's so nice to be invited
thank you for having me absolutely
you're one of my long-term uh Heroes I
love what you're doing I absolutely love
what you're doing you are one of those
people that I whenever I see one of your
videos pop up in my playlist I'm like
we're in for for a treat here and for a
ride I do want to mention real quick
before we do the bio uh there's about an
80 to 90% chance that something we talk
about here is going to be inappropriate
for small children so if you could if
you're a viewer please uh save this one
for another time when little ears aren't
around uh with that being said let's go
through a quick bio here Dr hman earned
a masters in bacteriology and he has his
Masters as well in classical philology
and a PhD in classical philology with an
expertise in ancient Medicine and
Pharmacy which I'm sure we'll get into
it some point which is fascinating part
of the the the Journey of understanding
Christianity uh his first book The
Chemical news was published after his
dissertation committee forced him to
delete references to recreational drugs
from his thesis well I I want to hear
that story when we get to that part of
the of your journey and it actually uh
inspired the production of a lengthy
History Channel documentary on the
history of drug use in the ancient world
and he writes about the use of drugs in
ancient mystery Cults and he tutors
ancient Greek online his website the
links for what I want to share here
beneath this video but his website is
ladyb babylon.com his YouTube channel is
also called lady Babylon his books again
are the chemical amuse drug use and the
roots of Western Civilization original
sin ritual child rape in the church and
hermaphrodites gynomorph and Jesus
sheale gods and the roots of
Christianity so with that being said if
you could Dr Helman tell us a little bit
more about
yourself yeah yeah it's um I'll just
tell you a quirky little story here I
was working on a dig in megido you know
the place or mageddon is supposed to
happen and all that kind of stuff and
when I was there I had two roommates on
two successive nights them sit up in
their beds and say the same thing to me
in this real deep gry voice the head of
the kibot where we were staying said you
know what's going on what are you doing
to these people turns out we were
sleeping in Jezebel's Vineyard Isn't
that cool they ran off um on both
successive nights they ran off police
got them both um
and they ended up in mental evaluation
that's what happens when you're when
you're deep into that you know that
ancient history you just stuck there
like we are as people you know we're
just stuck there in our history my thing
is
finding that evidence that gives us the
most authentic Antiquity that we've got
I don't care about ideas and theories
I'm not selling people merchandise
I'm here for those texts that's what I'm
here for and I love how so often in your
interviews you bring up uh just nuances
of of the origins of words and the ways
that uh you know the words evolved and
what they mean that you you really if
you're just going with English
translation we lose so much of the
richness of it and I think you've you've
pointed out well too that a lot of our
those of us that have deconverted from
Christianity like a lot of our our drive
at first is just to say this is a
 worldview it's not real but
then as we heal from that and get
reground and reclaim our identities as
it were you can kind of have that
freedom to go back to the Bible and say
okay now that I know this isn't a real
God but what is this book because it's
got some really cool stuff everything
from you know gatria numerology Astro
theology ancient epic stories it's like
this stuff is full of of of way of
little little Mysteries and you end up
having quite a respect for the people
that wrote it not because you think it's
reality but just because it's a really
amazing
book yeah and I think think it's got a
lot of dirty dirty sex and drugs and
it's got an under it's got an underbelly
that people don't people don't get to
see the what a lace days actually does
and that's what Jesus called himself
right he denied it when the cops showed
up at 400 am in Gethsemane and nobody
Tim nobody sees the naked kid that Jesus
was with when he was arrested nobody
knows what is doing there why he has a
medicated bandage on his private parts
right and Jesus is raising his hands to
Cops show up he's like ah not L that
word L that's a child trafficker Tim
Jesus is saying he's not a child
trafficker upon his arrest in the
company of a naked
minor why why did nobody why did none of
my pastors tell me that why did why did
the Dallas the ological Seminary not
explain that to me when I enrolled I had
to leave Dallas Theological Seminary
because their Greek program
stank I didn't know you went there my my
my parents went there that's
interesting I do want to get into the
Greek and all the stuff with the Garden
of Gethsemane and other things and the
you know Zeus pran dynast stuff but
could I ask just before we get into the
meat of your research which is itself
you know could take hours and hours just
to dig into the the surface level of
that but for this for the sake of my
channel one of the things that we love
to do is just really hear people's
stories so could you take a few minutes
I'm not I don't know your story so we'll
go as long as we we need to with this
part of it and then we'll jump into your
research but could you just tell us how
did you get exposed to Christianity and
what was your journey like sure so just
quickly I was a child listening to Dr J
Vernon McGee graduate of Dallas
Theological Seminary I was a child that
read Lewis Sperry's shape for um Dr
ironsight all these great commentators
and just some of the greatest
Baptist Christianity theology that you
could possibly imagine so you know by
the time I was in high school I went to
a special high school and by the time I
was um there you know I was teaching
Sunday school um because the youth
pastors you guys know how it is out
there you Baptist you know how it is
it's not always quality you know what I
mean it's not always you know people who
are you know come on we need some good
teaching so I taught Sunday school and I
went to Mission and volunteered at a
mission where I helped to convert a
bunch of people who needed
conversion mostly from alcohol mostly
from alcohol and we fed them and they
were hungry so they were kind of forced
captives right but I I worked within the
machine to create um men and women who
committed their lives to Christ who were
born again and who could have a personal
relationship with our Lord and savior um
I was there completely right completely
so can I ask can I ask real quick
question on what you just said knowing
that you did preach and save some people
and I did the same thing with church and
superans and street corners do you feel
guilty at this point about that like
almost as if you to make
amends no not at all I don't feel guilty
about any of my converts whatsoever um
because I gave them part of an
experience a psychological experience
that acted to
um submers submerge them really in a
reality that that um is quantum and I I
don't I don't look back on those
experiences as bad as a bad thing for
those people for any of them yeah yeah
um I was realize I was coming up too
when the politics had just started
permeating um and you too I'm sure this
is part of this is part of your
experience as well but um and that kind
of
indoctrination you know I was already
used to that and rejecting the politics
and the money because that
scheme that Christianity is built upon
of the exchange of this for that that
eternal life which is funny um that
doesn't exist by the way for all the
Christians out there right um eternal
life doesn't exist it's not a concept
right ionic life is the life that Jesus
says he can give you
ionic life and that's a term from the
ancient
Mysteries and that term was actually
examined by The
pythagoreans Who talked about the
different
degrees of the universe there's
360 and they talk about this within the
functioning of the mystery when you say
mystery you and I look at it as if it's
a fairy tale concept there's this thing
who mystery h I'm partaking of no no no
it's a religious operation in
Antiquity and when you read those texts
and suddenly realize oh they're not
talking like we are about a fairy tale
they're they're they're um talking about
people within history um to me that's
the real that's the real magnetism these
texts are so on there's so much Beauty
in this ancient Greek and that's why it
needs to be fiercely defended and given
to people um that was part of my break
Tim I was in Aristotle right in order to
train myself through the
university right I got my bachelor's in
Classics why so that I could go on to
Seminary and be able to function at a
high level of Competency with the text
that's all and when I got to the
Seminary what was going through my head
was a lot of Aristotle and a lot of the
class
classical philosophy and
history and tragedy drama it's all
religion right when you realize that
their tragedies were just religious
performances you realize oh shoot right
that put that together with the stuff
that um that that I started to see on
the medical side and there's cracks
there's cracks and I don't have to
disprove God exists I don't have to
disprove Jesus exists I don't I don't
care about an ism or any extremity I
want those texts and so I got to the
point that um I left D Theological
Seminary because the training was I went
to John wal who was the president at the
time I said
look this is not working it's not
working what happened you know I talked
to him about to his credit he said the
standards are not what they used to be
to his total credit right
and so I then went on and saidwell I got
to go get the tools that I need and
that's going to be on the side where
classical philologists are they're the
ones who instrument can I clarify with
that time though with in parallel with
your educational concerns were you at
through this period of of going to
church teaching a church doing missions
were you what we would call in a
personal relationship with Jesus where
you were praying and not just reading
the the text for the the sake of
learning and understanding the
backgrounds and the the cultural context
and the Linguistics but as it were a
love letter that Jesus wasn't just a a
character in this story but he was the
true God he was the lover of your soul
that bought you with the price of his
own blood like how deep were you in this
yeah no I was um I had a very very and I
still have a very very personal
relationship with Jesus Christ
completely you would say you still do if
you yes if you aren't born again um I'm
sorry um there's no admittance if you
don't walk into that Temple and see that
it says know
yourself right Jesus is just practicing
ancient religion right that's all he's
doing um so um if you can't have that
relationship um then there is no reality
I had and have a very personal
relationship now once I found out he was
arrested with a naked kid things went
kind of uh no I don't I'm not sure and
it was
downhill um as I increased my capacity
for reading and this is what I'm talking
about Tim there are people out there and
you're audience will be able to
appreciate this they will throw in your
face I do GRE or I do Hebrew they'll do
that and then all of a sudden you don't
know whether what they're talking about
is accurate or not somebody like me can
hear it on the classical side Greek and
Latin can hear it why because and I
train people now that's what I do it
wasn't I train people to be able to
access those original texts that's all I
do but in the process you can hear it
when somebody body's off and when
they're not on a text like they should
be that's the the that only comes from
reading everything and we have so so
much you know the popular stuff I have
seen a just a huge sea of stuff that I
can mention authors to you that you will
never have heard of but were ex
incredibly important in Antiquity and
quoted and and and uh have beautiful
beautiful stuff I mean amazing amazing
that's why that's why say some of that
stuff is woven into the New
Testament um it's not like it's woven
in it's a document the all those
individual letters and gospels are
documents from
Antiquity we treat those the same as you
would Homer as you would Virgil as you
would any of the Contemporary Roman
authors those are treated the same this
is not magic la la world I taught in
seminary this is not that
world right this is not we have these
texts they belong only to us no they're
just another set of texts from the
ancient world so in that context there's
nothing woven into them they are as
completely native as something written
in
helenistic um Alexandria like the septu
the thing that we call the Old Testament
its original is not
Hebrew that septu is a native Greek
work yeah it's a native Greek work
linguistically I'm saying
linguistically right and it's coming
from the 3D Century those terms that are
being used I can show you that those
terms are coming from helenistic
Alexandria
fantastic fantastic before we get into
some of that I do want to step back
because you you kind of threw me for a
loop when you said you still have a
personal relationship with Jesus I
wasn't sure if you were speaking tongue
and cheek there but I'd like to
understand what you mean by that um you
you don't actually believe that Jesus is
the real creator of the universe right
do I believe that Jesus is the real
Creator I don't believe
anything okay right I an
investigator I'm a worshipper of reason
the classics have defiled my brain they
have enabled me to reach up and it's a
stretch man coming from anglosaxon it's
a stretch to reach up to fill the
capacity that the Greek has that's who I
am so when you say you have a personal
relationship do I believe do I believe
in anything thing no no I don't I
believe that reason is what gives us the
human right to proceed forward into the
frontier that's it if it doesn't stand
with reason do I have a personal
relationship with
Jesus you you you better believe it
we've already been wrapped up together
into history so you better believe it so
you mean that in the sense of like
someone that loved Shakespeare's works
and was just a master of it would say
they have a personal relationship with
Shakespeare not that they're calling
Shakespeare a a God or Divine figure or
something it's just you're it's part of
your story at this
point there's a deeper there's a deeper
level than that you you and I both know
that um I was given a talk once and a
guy came up to me at the end of The Talk
this is in Gloucester um and it was a
gentleman who had been molested not not
just molested raped
raped full on by a priest and it was one
of the priests that first broke they
made a movie about this guy I didn't
know he just walked up to me and at that
it was Boston that old Boston breaking
of the child rape with the priest any
who he was crying he came up to me after
talking he was crying and I had been
giving a talk on ritual rape in the
early
church and he was tears in his eyes he
came up to me and he saidou don't know
what you've done and I said I'm I'm
sorry what is it and he said you have
tapped into the heart of what they do he
said I saw in my priest rapist's eyes
exactly what came out of your mouth and
all I was doing I wasn't giving him
ideas all or you know academic Foolery
all I was giving him were the text
on the ritual rape all I was doing was
bringing that out Reviving it for them
to see historically does that guy have a
personal relationship with Jesus you you
darn straight he does will he ever lose
that relationship no no will I no I've
been there other people have been there
Julian the
apostate right has been there although
he was kind of hiding the whole time
because they just killed all his family
never mind well I think you I think
you're using the the the the idea of a
personal relationship with Jesus in a
slightly different way that I mean but I
think I understand so um as long as
we're we're clear we're not we're not
telling our audience that there's
sinners in need of a savior and that
Jesus is Magic blood will save him um
but going back to your story could you
tell us when you were looking at
this and you began to see the texts more
and more what they were at what point
did you begin to question question the
the whole Narrative of whether or not uh
you know the Christian world view was
accurate that that there really was a
sin issue and that Jesus really was the
real actual savior of people's
Souls yeah you know I don't think there
is a particular time when that
congealed together um as I investigated
and just aged and investigated the text
themselves um there came a point that I
could no longer more
uphold what Christianity is um and if
you want to stay there's one similar
moment when I said I cannot go back um
is the boy moment as as soon as I saw
that in the original and look there's
also a text that's been the scholar who
discovered it and translated it got in
big trouble for doing it kind of got
repressed but we do have a text of
pseudo Clement
um that talks about Jesus doing things
with kids and he's doing sexual things
within the context of the mystery and
when people look you want a lightning
moment try this one um what happens when
you realize that the
apostles are teenage
boys they are not adults they're teenage
boys all of them and John the youngest
is probably about 10 10 to 12 um that
where do you get that right nobody ever
questions that your audience I'm sure
right now is looking around like what
right when you when you do this but um
yeah wake up wake up and look at the
text right they're those mathas they're
not grown men that's why they live so
long after he does the ones that make it
that's why they live so long because
they're just kids and now you understand
why he's walking around calling them his
little sheepies his children he doesn't
he doesn't address them as an equal he's
a 30-year-old man talking to
Children right taking them to an upper
room in a shady set of circumstances now
with the guy with this is going to
happen if you follow if you follow just
the mystery
terminology right you have to be led to
the conclusion that something is
actually going on that when he raises
his hand and he says I am not a child
trafficker um yeah I think that's it and
you know look I've been into the ancient
cult this is maybe an additional way of
answering your question I've seen the
ancient cult I've seen it I've worked
with the text I've worked with the magic
texts that nobody looks at nobody
studies these things and they all have
you know there's this German scholar
back in the 30s the German classicists
in the 30s were extraordinary just like
the Brits about two decades before them
extraordinary you know um this is a good
period when they're editing texts that
nobody
reads right and I go back to these texts
and begin reading into the cult that's
going on around the mystery and how the
mystery is
executed dude you can trace all that
stuff just through the drug if you want
and it all becomes sexual and that kid
that was with him there's one author
from Antiquity that says that kid is the
one that had that antidote originally
they said that antidote they tried to
give Jesus on the cross was for
dipass right and if you know anything
about the drugs in the ancient world in
Greco Roman culture you know straight up
man those things are the the dipass is
the one that they give you it makes you
super thirsty and you're like ah got to
have some water and you start losing it
you start losing it why because that's
what they're trying to put you into
prophets are mind altered people when
aiel stands up there I told you the
original is more interesting when
Ezekiel stands up there and he's has the
hand of God punch him into the Aron if
you don't know what that is it's because
you you don't know drugs in the ancient
world it punched him into the Aron and
what did he experience what did he see
he went through the wheels the wheels
and everybody's like oh the wheels of
Ezekiel oh it's this and it's a ring no
and if you've ever read any of the texts
around this you're like huh what right
they're drugs the tro in Greek are drugs
now all of that was translated from the
Greek back translated into Hebrew not
just any Hebrew but a dead Hebrew a
lurgical PE Hebrew in the 11 10 1, to
1100 onod Domin so the word there
because ancient Hebrew only has an 8,000
word capacity this is unique words 8,000
some people say 9,000 I don't think it's
I I don't know all that to the Semitic
Scholars I don't think it really matters
at that point um whether you get an
extra thousand what are we talking about
with the Greek your English modern
Hebrew 60,000 modern Hebrew is
flourishing Yay good job right languages
live and die right it's a struggle it's
nature it's a struggle oh love that
Tower of Babylon stuff anyway it's a
stri for survival how many unique words
are there in English oh probably upwards
of maybe
120,000 right maybe more how many are
there in ancient Greek we don't know for
certain but it looks like there's at
least 250 and I've seen people projected
as high as probably like more
500,000 you have to realize that this
language is developing over a long
period of time and it is sweeping every
body else people don't know it but the
Romans those Hut dwelling backwards
Knuckleheads the only in Antiquity the
only way that they progressed was a
Greek woman came to them and taught them
how to write an alphabet isn't that nice
that's the that's the way to go that's
the power structure in Antiquity you
didn't understand that about the oracles
you didn't know why Paul was being
chased around by
athia and why it is that she say this
dude he's doing the Christ thing why did
that upset him so much hisory in Acts
yeah yeah yeah well real quick before I
I want to dive into some of these
details but I just want to go back to
your story for just a moment and then go
right back to maybe um The Garden of
gemon story to kind of clarify some
things for viewers that maybe are new to
these ideas because I'm sure some of my
viewers have seen you before and and
would know where you're they're tracking
with you and others would not um but
just when you got to a point where you
said I can't believe this world view
anymore this is not Ultimate
Reality how difficult was that for you
to kind of reclaim your identity and how
did you deal with questions of the
afterlife for yourself at that point and
just like what
changed yeah I understand yeah what
really was different for me was I had a
buffer I didn't reach a point that I
said oh my God this stuff is garbage and
I'm going to jump off the cliff I didn't
have that point when I was about
11 when yeah I think I was 11 I got down
on my knees in my bedroom and asked for
wisdom right and opened up a book and
saw Sophia is crying in the streets and
she's being pursued by men who want to
kill her and she's knocking on your door
will you take her
in she said if you take her in she'll
stay with you the rest of your life
isn't that nice I was like yeah heck
yeah I want that that's what I want I
want Sophia because she was beautiful
man the text described her she was
beautiful right from the from the Book
of Proverbs you mean yeah is that is
that the one it is yeah some Wise Guy
wrote it I heard um but what happened
what happened um that buffer um followed
me so that by the time that I realized
as you're saying that
Christianity um was not what I thought
it was um I had already been introduced
to the Muse on the classical side and
that's exactly who Sophia is she is that
Musa right and um you know so I had a
very gentle buffer from the class
classical World from the pre-christian
classical World kind of inserted into my
operating system it wasn't as drastic oh
my God now I will say I had a drastic
moment when I found an a kid with Jesus
at that moment I said you must either
stand with this or against this and I
wasn't about to stand with a pedophile
I'll I'll I'll I'll just make that clear
to everyone as soon as I saw Jesus for
what was going on okay okay leace he's
working as a l and all of a sudden the
entire text makes complete and total
sense and it makes sense um um from a
historical standpoint I don't have to
introduce you to any ideas all I got to
do is show you Greek words and stuff
coming out of Jesus's mouth yeah that
was very similar with me for the
genocides of the Old Testament that was
exactly what started my deconversion
process we're singing a song remember
that song Joshua Fought the Battle of
Jericho and that was just that we just
I've got small children we're sitting
sitting around or I should say standing
around spinning as we do we I learned
quickly that kids like will do Bible
time a lot better in devotions if you're
having fun so we wouldn't sing our songs
we would sing and spin and we're
spinning around singing Joshua felt the
Battle of Jericho laughing ourselves
away getting dizzy and the for the first
time in my life it struck me I about to
teach my kids genocide theft slavery
child bride stoning and worse and I'm
going to have to defend it and it was
like oh my God what am I teaching my
kids and it took me three years from
that point to get out but it's amazing
the the ways that these you just you
realize you're more moral than the god
character you're you're more loving than
the psychopathic Yahweh um before I do
want to again go back to the Garden of G
second but last question though um how
did you deal with the
afterlife um could you be a little more
specific give me did you did you
conclude you've lo you lost it at that
point that you have just one life and
nothing else and was that a loss to you
oh I see what you're saying no by the
time I got there um ionic life was a
part of the equation I'd already seen
the original so the whole thing of
eternal life um it didn't impact me I
didn't think oh crap I'm now I'm gonna
go into hell what is ion mean right oh
no I'm going to hell right because I had
cracked the the weakness in our lens
that we look at the Bible with already
so I knew there was something going on
the ionic life didn't scare me but no no
no no definitely definitely but that
fear that you're talking about is
exactly what the ancient authors who
wrote about the dangers of
Christianity that's exactly what they
said is that that's that fear you
generate I I I truly do feel
terrible sympathy you know for
Christians evangelicals I'm not talking
about your average Catholic who's going
through the motions I'm not talking
about that I'm talking about people who
have been born again into eternal life I
feel bad for them because that fear is
as you know that fear is a is the
essential motivator of your religion you
love
Jesus because Jesus gives you eternal
life and if you don't love him you don't
have eternal life um think about that
it's the same quandry we see in job
right the devil knows right God's the
first liar right the devil knows that
and the devil says you can get this guy
um to curse you just by taking away his
stuff what happens he takes away his
stuff and then restores
it and job is sitting around watching
has anybody ever thought job is sitting
around with a new family all his other
family were
killed and for that he's a good follower
of
Yahoo right to me the logic of that is
so masterfully on the devil's side you
want to see who God is he's somebody who
will kill your fraking
family right to prove a
point and Christians Christians love
that oh they do because the Christian
operating system is one of the fear of
God it's the fear of God when you lose
that fear of God because people like
your situation watching somebody do a
genocide well how can we that's why my
first name's David and I never use it my
middle name is almond I never use David
because as soon as I figured out I was
reading I was like David slaughtered a
village of women and children to please
the Lord really you mean the stuff in
Gaza is pleasing to the Lord it is thank
about that for a minute oh my God and
you know what I've got lots of Israeli
friends people don't real because I
worked there for a year people don't
realize that your average Israeli thanks
Christianity and this religion of
Judaism or BS most of them most of them
90% And they mock the religion and they
get angry because it's destroying their
justice system people don't realize that
you think that there this stuff this
sacrifice this child sacrifice you
turned away from Christianity because
there's something in you that followed
that was this pole of DK pole of Justice
pole of
Nemesis right the eye of Justice this is
always honest you can't justify killing
a village of people I don't care if you
are
God right oh my God I love what does
ionic life
mean yeah um it is life within ion um
ion is that space that is outside of
time so what affects us within the time
stream come is a reflection This Is How
They looked at it is a
reflection of that ionic
existence so um they're look look at
they look at it physics wise is the
space outside of Kronos it's a space
outside of time yeah okay all right is
that the sort of like As Above So Below
concept um As Above So Below I don't
know is if that's particularly related I
can't make it Connection in my mind okay
but um um As Above So Below a standard
magic practice right me you you
mentioned like you you escaped because
you felt like you had already going on
to an ionic mindset you leaving
Christianity wasn't that painful to you
could you connect the do me what what
did it mean like where were you
emotionally and psychologically with
this iic mindset that realizing the
Christian worldview is not Ultimate
Reality that it didn't mean that much to
you like what was what was going on in
your
heart yeah see that that's the one
difficulty we have is I cannot I don't I
don't see it as non-reality there is a
Christian reality and it's very real and
it's shaping us those forces are shaping
us for example The Assault on Democracy
it will happen over and over and over
again a return to
classical thought is what brings
revivals of democracy it's what brought
the United States right that happens
throughout history um I don't have to
believe it or not Jesus is a reality
very much a reality um I mean like like
you know how sometimes you'll see maybe
in some big hall or some church building
where they've got dozens of different
light fixtures and you'll see this you
know the electrician put in like like an
electrical box with like 12 different
switches and you know you can flip flip
them all up them all down but there's
there's a whole bunch of them and if you
imagine that you know you're you're in
this big building and there's again a 12
12 gang electrical box and each one of
those represents some aspect of our life
and experience in our world so you flip
one off all the humans are gone you flip
another one off the Earth is gone you
flip another one off the solar you keep
flipping them off everything's
everything in the known universe is gone
when it's dark and there's there's
nothing that we can perceive is left is
God still there is Jesus still there you
would say no to that
correct no because I'm not an
atheist right okay no no of course not
um look when you turn off all the lights
you can still have love you can still
have that Aeros right but if no one's
there to have it how could there be love
if there's nothing left the founders oh
that's interesting let let me address
that the founders of orphism the ones
who created the mystery created it
around the Embrace of
Aeros um um these are real if you want
to call them forces you can they call
them
Dion right real power we we translate
that as demons right um these are real
forces so no I can't deny even um the
kingdom of Christ um when I can deny
that that has Authority and power I can
deny that I can't deny that it's a
relevant existing thing and I don't want
to because I've seen the other
divinities through classical philology
not just myth through classical
philology how their
mathematicians approach their divinities
right because everything in nature
everything in nature is this existence
that you and I are this great mother
this is her if you don't if you don't
believe in a great
mother it's probably because you didn't
have one you know so you would would you
say that in the same way that you would
say that you're a believer in Jesus of
sorts would you equally say you're a
believer in in Zeus and pranie and
dyus yeah yeah um Zeos just means god
right um am a believer in
Zeos um you know zus has his way right
my believer in yahoo yahoo has his way
he's liar
um you know what I really believe in now
when it comes down to it Eve I believe
in Eve and everybody gravitates toward
those divinities that they um recognize
that they recognize and I recognize Eve
that's what I there's a voice throughout
history there is a an oracle an oracular
power a prophetic power throughout
history and it is housed Within
These
female
Divine sources of
inspiration right um people say there
aren't really polytheists anymore
walking around the real achievement of
Christianity is that it was able to kill
polytheism it was able to kill it all of
the Judaism Islam Christianity the stuff
they were doing in Egypt under what's
his name when he made
the yeah aan is that who it was yeah
fantastic those movements to destroy
polytheism you think it's the mythology
it's not it's the concept that there are
ruling powers in nature that you and I
are subject to certain powers for
example the most important one that they
had to set up before they could get
democracy was
justice justice justice is your temple
it's your Holy Temple now you say oh I
believe in Justice
right you only say you believe in
Justice because you're a Christian
you're a product of a Christian
culture there's no justice to believe in
I worship
Justice right I worship do you worship
Justice does he or she worship Justice
that's how that's how we create a
society that can be a
democra that can be a place where the
neighborhood
rules right when we are just and how do
we get to those places
purgations through the theater we bring
into the theater the corruption and we
purge it and when we see that Purge we
understand as Citizens how to uplift
those diones those gods of things like
democracy and Justice if you don't live
by the rule of Justice um you're um it's
only because you're an
atheist this this is how they're looking
at it in Antiquity the people who are
struggling against the Christians this
is how they're arguing with them they
the Christian the first title the
Christians got was The Atheist imagine
human civilization set up set up
pts set up places of Justice
Christianity said that's not a God we
don't want that we are
Servants of a god We Fear period that's
it well can can I throw in this question
then and I'm sorry keep keep on taking
us away from the Gethsemane story but uh
you've opened up a can of worms as it
were and I I I love that though because
it's good to go down these different
rabbit Trails there's a lot of talk
about you know people get asked sometime
in these surveys are you a Christian and
we see the numbers are appearing to go
down where Society is saying more and
more no I'm not a Christian and and some
people are even brave enough to start
saying yes I definitely just don't
believe in anything or I'm just I'm I'm
a nun n o and we're seeing the church
basically starting to slowly empty out
and it sounds
like well let me just ask you this way
what what do you do do you think
Christianity is dying number one and do
you think that's a good thing or a bad
thing that's the best question I've ever
and I don't want to speculate at all but
since you asked me um I think
Christianity is exactly where it should
be with in the prophetic
oracular um pronouncements of where it
would be they are perfectly
fulfilling exactly what the prophet said
would be fulfilled so in a in in a sense
they're more powerful now than ever if
the light of justice is squashed from
America if it's if the light of our own
self-control if our Republic Falls it
will only be at the hands of those
Christians who are those movers of
tyranny it'll be them it'll be them that
causes it Thomas Jefferson said um the
greatest risk to the fledgling he called
it the fledgling
democracy is the Christ Christian church
and when he I have his private letters
it's a book that I stole from a
professor I never gave it back to him um
um I just forgot it's in my collection
I'm sure he didn't care but um it's a
it's a letter letters and you know what
Thomas Jefferson is doing he composes
ancient Greek he's been there to that
place that he understands the Christians
right now the evangelicals right now are
trying to rewrite the history to tell
you I'm scheduled for a debate with one
of them right they're trying to they're
trying to say that you know our society
democracy this is all inventions only
made possible by people who follow Jesus
right no historically what's the
actuality Christianity is a constant and
eternal opponent of
democracy right because they are
atheists they do not believe Justice
they do not believe that the Muse
inspires people they do not believe that
life is something that is beautiful
right it's a hellacious it's a it's a
hellacious
Recreation of an event from the third
Century BC when somebody and I don't
have to say BCE for all of you out there
you academics BC take your e and stick
it it was always BC right I know Domin
too get shout out to the shout out to
the church idiots who preserve the
Latin well can I ask this you you've um
you made me think of another topic
another conversation I had recently
where somebody was saying we struggle
with as atheists a little bit with the
question of nihilism and you know is
there really a meaning to it all is
there a purpose knowing that you know
say say an asteroid 5,000 years and
we're say we're still still not a a
planet that has um evolved to a Star
Trek level where we're exploring the
stars but it's just us on this planet
we're still stuck here relatively an
asteroid comes and destroys it and it's
just like world history effectively
meant nothing and so you look at these
things from a nihilistic perspective and
think if there's no afterlife does it
really matter Yad y but this this other
person I was speaking with was saying in
a sense the Christians are are even more
nihilistic because what they're saying
is this life really doesn't matter the
only life that really matters is the one
to come like in other words yeah it
matters here because you need to make a
decision for Christ you need to get that
transaction done but apart from that and
you need to of course do good deeds so
you can have a crown in heaven but apart
from that like the real life the and
especially even just comparing the time
frames like this life is like a little
blink of an eye and that life is just
forever and ever and ever and ever and
ever in a way that we can't even fathom
it's going to seem contrastingly with
the time issue alone as well as things
like the glory of it all as if this life
met next to nothing and and and in a
sense they're the greater nihilists
because they're they're literally
throwing away their one true life you
know how does that strike you that
discussion and do you think Christians
are nihilistic in in the sense that just
like they're not truly worshiping
Justice and they're truly you know in
the apocalyptic sense they truly want to
bring on the end times like Gang Busters
they want the darkness to fall because
they think Jes that's going to bring on
Jesus's return do you see them as in a
sense nihilistic as
well yeah nihilistic and
sadistically nihilistic as if the pain
is a whole part of the process of the
nothing yeah right all of that I love
your comment all of that history what
did it mean right right that's exactly
what Greeks are doing is just sitting
back and saying what is the sense of all
of this
right um I'm totally I'm totally in
there to say yeah it is it is
nihilistic and celsus recognized that
that um you are giving everything you're
giving your existence up they readily
would agree yes for Christ take up your
cross you know put down your rights you
don't need your rights take off your
your money and everything that you know
um by the way the love of money is root
of all evil that's not original Jesus
right he's taking that from somebody
else that's okay that's okay um you can
take their money you can take everything
away from no you can't this is the
beauty modern evangelicals you can't do
that with right this is the gorgeousness
and gorgios of the whole uh um
Armageddon This is the End right this is
the beauty of it is they are very much a
part of the material and they're very
much part of the power and the surging
for power right remember it's that
movement that enables In classical
Antiquity that Ena abls what's called
onethird time or bakic time um
Mania it's all about Mania baby right
that control of that person when I'm
sitting there when I'm sitting in the
pulpit and I have a congregation in
front of me and somebody can come
forward and I can lead them to
Christ that operation that mystery
operation is a binding on the magic they
said that's a
binding right this person is
bound the Greeks
understood this binding capacity and use
the bakic rights who remember he's the
vine he is that first he's saying all
the so he's saying everything about
everything you associate with Jesus is
ultimately bakic right and when I say
Baka for your audience I'm talking about
1100 BC
okay this is late Bronze Age religion
evolving and the Mysteries emerge in
this Bic ecstasy right where you are
taking the blood you you you have to
people wonder why is Jesus the eating
the Flesh and the drinking of blood
because those are the vehicles for the
mystery right if you don't understand
that you don't why are you sitting there
what are you doing you realize when you
take communion today that is nothing
even remotely of what the original
mystery was it is nothing it is not the
operation of a mystery I could show you
the operation but you would be so
flabbergasted that you'd probably Outlaw
any sort of video or audio of what I was
doing I have tried to do this Tim I have
tried to walk interviewers through what
happens in the mystery one person just
hit the eject button halfway through and
never heard from didn't publish the
interview right you have to you you want
to do it you don't you don't realize I'm
sorry I what you wantan you want to do
it you want to walk through it sure sure
are we gonna get are we gonna get in
trouble for for what we're about to hear
we may I don't I don't know you have
editing power so well let's let's let's
give it a wh we'll get back to the sem
in a few minutes tell tell us about the
mystery Cults it turns out it turns out
and somebody right now is trying to make
a short film but this for the European
film festival right just to capture this
very um setting um and uh this very act
so what is the mystery initiation how
what's the process okay it's you're okay
don't get queasy but this is a practice
that involves the use of communion this
is a practice that involves somebody's
body producing a substance through the
flesh that you and I can use that
substance will bring us to
death and back to
life we go into the pit and we come out
and what do they call us when we come
out in late Bronze Age speak they say
we're born
again that experience causes you to be
kicked out of the time stream and an
ionic way so that you can perceive what
your existence actually is so that when
you're brought
back you can then live your life
knowing how the outside the ion affects
time it allows you and you say people
are people are doing this they're doing
it to the extent that guys like ciso are
saying if you haven't been through it
you can't live live you don't know what
life really is so but here's the here's
the part it's going to it's going to be
stickler right the drugs that they're
using are derived from people they are
actually Milking for example there is a
milk from a
priestess that produces the the antidote
to the burning purple when you have the
burning purple and what do they do with
the burning purple this is a
mollusk this is a mollusk in the
Mediterranean and you can make a d from
it they also make a drug from it right
the dye is the drug and they use the
drug in a way to induce this death right
they bring you to death but as they're
loading you up with this and by the way
they administer it
re re do you know why Mary Magdalene has
an
alabastron right she's got the expensive
drugs that you can rub onto the
medicated dildo as an applicator and you
can insert it reti or vaginally and in
the member this is not odd because at
the time when you worship bonad DEA
you've got 20,000
women all engaging in a communal sexual
exercise
with their medicated wands so it's not
it's you know um somebody big in Rome
gets in trouble for trying to infiltrate
it but um it's a process the There's no
distinction in Antiquity between the
religion the the um medicine and the
cult practice the actual mystery
performance it's a healing they're
they're looked at is these you know it
to bring yourself out of life into what
you and I look at as death and then to
yank the person back into the time
stream that's a medical procedure so
they what the Priestess does is she
gives you the medicated dildo now before
she's done this they have loaded you
with psychosis inducing drugs and these
are the ones that we're finding on the
hair of the offerings and the Monarca
for example this is real Bronze Age
pharmacological Tech High high tech here
and what they do is they induce the
death state but as they're doing it you
have
sarasus sasis and you think what is
sataras sataras is um induced by the
drug cyrion and what is cyon do it not
only has Scopolamine and atropine to
make you nutty to induce
psychosis right but it also has a drug
that they call afro
dics that cause you to have an erection
that is
unremitting after six days they say by
the seventh day you kill someone right
doing this whatever it's doing
physiologically to them maybe it's the
blood pressures to mess up I don't know
but it can cause death so when the
person is being put under the Priestess
is masturbating them to the point of the
Orgasmo that Peak that so you have to
understand they're entering death and
what are you you're also bound you're
also bound why do they have to bind you
because they're giving you psychosis
inducing drugs something happens to you
in the state of orgasm when you are
dying and they say the effects of the
thimone the thimone are the drug are the
drugs that induce
death right they have this whole class
of drugs that induce death and there's
overlap with what you and I would call
their
anesthesiology I had to pass a series of
exams to go on to dissertate and in
those are my qualifying exams and my
specialist John Scarboro had to give me
an exam and the exam was a series of
question questions one of which is what
is it in ancient
anesthesiology that is used most
standard to induce a state that you can
perform surgery on is it the Opium is it
the mandre what is it so um all of those
drugs that are being used um are kind of
pioneered through this religion they
have witches right who are able to
perform these acts on you for example in
Antiquity if you lose your erection if
it's a problem with you right where do
you go you go to the Priestess what
happens she ends up giving you all sorts
of drugs and whipping your genitalia
with stinging nettles um you know it's a
process whereby you can bring
Resurrection so you've got your patient
now remember these are generally
youths okay generally youths so the
sexual activity that's going on here we
would today consider it you know um
underage
underage yeah there's a reason they
refer the priestesses a certain way and
there's a reason they refer the
initiates when that
Priestess has um engaged in the process
of stimulating that boy she
feeds that boy her own breast milk which
Galen says is an exate that is not it's
not milky looking why be and he says
those breasts that they get it from
they're underdeveloped they're in the
budding
stage right what's happening to these
priestesses they're on their own drug
regimen how do they how do they apply
you know what they're using they're
using serpent Venom W devil right
they're using Venoms combos ofen Venoms
and you can't swallow Venoms everybody
knows that they break down right what
are they how are they applying them
they're applying them through incisions
they're making themselves that they
cover with medicated bandages within the
medicine that's impregnated in the
linen um are these Venoms that slowly
leech into your system as you're using
it to treat a wound right they also use
them you I've seen them applied to the
eyes and I've seen priestesses urinate
and what looks like from this Latin text
actually ejaculate rather than urinate
it's unclear but he um it says the
person's face smells like a broel
afterwards so I'm assuming it's not just
urine um yeah but um so she's got you're
talking about your Priestess in your
right right I'm still talking about the
mystery and what's happening you're
talking about your Priestess and your
right she's using the alabaster on you
you've entered a state of forced arousal
and you're you're dying you're that
thimone is taking over but as you're
dying your respiration rate drops she is
inducing orgasm and they say the most
important part remember you're
psychotic right at this point you're
psychotic she is
singing right they say it was the most
important part of the ritual is the song
apparently what she can do with that
song in the process of you going under
and coming back and the only reason
you're coming back is because you drank
her breast milk that's all it's the only
reason by the way the breast milk girls
who have the grapelike breasts those
girls are on um those um Viper Venoms
that we know for a fact are prolactin
inducers they interact with um they they
activate excuse me the pathways that
prolactin activates it kind of makes
sense if they're going to produce the
milk they have to be able to um to have
these hormones on board something in it
I talked to a doctor once in
Australia um a
toxinologists but a toxinologists snakes
and they they do research on Parkinson's
and Venoms anyway he said it's probably
the closest you know closest we can
speculate was probably antibody um
mediated responses that they're that are
coming through the breast milk quote
unquote to the child now you think about
it and remember that gods are fed gods
are fed on this milk right this is how
you get
Gods right you know why your eyes will
be open and you'll be just like him when
your eyes
opened right the facade falls down and
you understand your place in the
universe and you cannot serve a God Like
Yahoo you can't serve him right it's a
lunacy it's a it's a you um you create
Madness in order to
instill reality and they call that
breast milk Galan it's the storm they
describe it as this the calm after the
storm so apparently when the patients
come out of this and they go through a
period of where they they um say they
look dead for all intents and purposes
they look dead right ultimately they
come out of
it they're revived how do they revive
them they ago them they resurrect them
they bring them from a state of sleep or
toror to a state of life right and so
um afterwards you're changed because you
have a different perspective it's these
people that have the ears to hear right
it's these people that very expression
ears to hear is an oric expression so um
and when I say oric I'm predating
Christianity by thousand years yeah so
um you are you as well able to connect
that to the Garden of Gethsemane because
because that's sounds like that's this
relates very much to that story is that
correct yeah and when Jesus I Think
Jesus gives it away when he says um some
people are made Unix you know um for the
kingdom of heaven right um if you look
at that um as a practice in Antiquity
just not just outside of anything you
know about Jesus if you just look at
Unix and why they're making Unix and
what Unix do remember the lace days that
child trafficker is the unic maker right
I read an account once and people don't
people don't do this but I read an
account of a thran pirate right and you
call them Pirate La is you know you can
call them pirate only because they
traffic on um in the aan right they
traffic in the sea in the Black Sea
right it's a it's just the way that you
ship your product around but he talks
about in this text he talks about making
this beautiful um new Angelic creation
this hermetic
creation um that can be within that
Kingdom and it's a kid that he adoped
and then he castrates him puts him to
sleep with the drugs that they've got
and castrates him when the kid wakes up
he's a new um he's a kind of a a new
entity when Jesus says look you can get
castrated for the Kingdom of Heaven
that's not like it's un unusual none of
us apply that today the last person who
applied that was origin who cut off his
own testicles for the sake of the
kingdom of God he within that context
understood we don't the charismatics
today you know they'll only go so far
with the original right so they won't do
the drugs and they won't do the sex and
they won't do which makes a lot of
people people just unsatisfied but and
they won't go through with the
castration um remember Jesus said I'll
teach you how to drink
thimon thimon are those death
inducers right people look at that and
they think Jesus is weird right talking
and talking he's talking figuratively
and what exactly did he mean here no
he's saying I'll show you how to use
those death and D producing drugs right
remember Paul gets bitten by the Viper
and it doesn't do anything to him that's
not a miracle that's
science right he's the biggest junkie on
the planet and he uses junkie
terminology just like the rest though
right when Jesus gives that bread to
Judas before he betrays him he's like
look watch this he gives it to him
changes his mood right and then all of a
sudden he runs off and that's the thing
and Jesus is like yeah yeah read that
from the perspective of somebody in
Antiquity like nonas who's writing about
it saying that thing was the drugged
element right okay cool so he's in an
upper room with a bunch of teenage boys
and by the way he's
naked he takes off his clothes and when
he washes their feet he dries them with
the towel that he wrapped around his
waist after he took all his clothes off
right and you say wait a minute okay
that's could be construed as
inappropriate I mean I would if I went
to you didn't have any of that and as a
youth pastor did you did somebody come
into you and take off their clothes in
front of you when you're in a room with
12 underage
kids no we didn't but in Antiquity it
makes perfect sense within the right
that naked kid that is with Jesus right
he's got that bandage on his private
parts right that confusion that remember
what mental state Jesus is in in the
garden too he can't take the cop and
it's causing him to stumble and fall
down his three Apostles over there Peter
James and John that you always think
have a beard that didn't and they're
sitting there and they can't stay awake
he has to come shake them and revive
them bring them how come you keep
falling asleep and we all look at it as
oh it's fairy tale it's Jesus the guy
with the beard he's kind of blue eyes
and white skin and he's walking
he's right no this is a dude who is
tripping who in five minutes is going to
be raising his hand to the cops saying
what' you come out with me with a swap
for I'm not a lace and this naked kid
with a bandage on his private parts fall
and by the way they went to grab the kid
and he ran away and the bandage fell
off right now I have watched Christians
try to explain this I have written to
the heads of um seminaries to uh at
least the biblical um the Greek side of
it to try to get a response to this you
know the best I've gotten the best I've
gotten is that Jesus's Glory they were
in a cemetery and Jesus's Glory
resurrected some naked dead kid a kid
crawl out of the ground like a
zombie it was I think he called it a
glory bomb he let off a glory bomb do
you hear fundamentalists out there do
you hear how
ridiculous you are this is
ridiculous um what's he doing with the
naked kid that's what I want to know
probably a castration the stuff that's
on his face that um is described as that
thick anded um dark
material like haa ah you know that haa
is also how they describe what comes out
of a prepubescent kid's
ejaculation because everybody knows on
the medical side that prepubescent kids
don't ejaculate like
adults right they don't ejac it's not
the same composition what's going on
look what's right and gayen describes
again um just like they're describing
the Min not menes the um
exate um they call the white I forget
it's the white something of the um young
prepubescent girl and what is that used
for right what does that mean they had
to explain how these things are working
within the body and whatnot and gayen
was huge on that all right so you know
when your patient comes into you in
Antiquity and they've got a problem the
first thing you do is you ask them to
pee in a cup and what do you do after
they pee in the cup you taste it you
smell it first before you taste it you
smell it and then you taste it do you
know tasting somebody's urine will give
you an idea of what kind of illness they
have that's what they said okay I'm not
personally I'm not g to be doing that
anytime soon right forget about that
but um that's the environment you're
working in so when that new baby is born
in Antiquity you have to get that young
girl to come pee in a container that you
can then submerge the baby's head in up
to his eyes and you got to open his eyes
Under the pee why because everybody
knows you got you got that stuff on the
vagina that we call chyia and you can
blind your kid
if you're not you know if you don't
properly clean them off once they get
out so look this is the world they're in
this is the New Testament and this is
why it's gorgeous and why we should say
Christianity has done us such a
disservice by taking these texts and
turning them into a fairy tale You'
never known that about Jesus right you
never you'd have never known his drug
connections you'd never know Mary M
makes no sense otherwise you know mdal
in
cyan means according to a 16th 17th
century scar means um um Maga he said
it's translated in Greek is Maga it is
that witch it is that one with the power
of the drugs to be able to take your
mind to outside of what is our time
stream right it's her that's able to do
that and she's got why do you think
they're saying Jesus is always hanging
around with what hamaro right he's
hanging around with prostitutes he's
hanging around with those people who
have connections to what a la would be
doing there's even Financial connections
so what when when you look at the upper
room that you mentioned why do you think
it was so important for them to do this
ritual where Jesus says you need to
drink my blood and eat my flesh me I
know it's related to the old Testament
uh you know rituals but why do you think
that they they rephrased it that way and
was that possibly related to things like
mithraism where they were doing some
similar rituals like how why do you
think they made that such a big deal for
Christianity yeah what's the difference
between a Roman
officer urinating into the mouth of
another in order to induce a state of
communion with divinity what's the
difference between that met and Jesus
with his 12 boys in the upper room who
ends up in a garden with a naked one and
he's younger he's a nanco so they put a
diminutive on the end that kid's kid's
definitely
prepubertal right how do you how does
Jesus get from there he gets the same
way it's the performance of ritual it's
the performance of medicine it's why
he's the great Shepherd it's why he is
the great physician right because of
that process that he's doing right he
doesn't want to take the cup in the end
he doesn't want to take it in the end
because it's a painful process it's a
terrible process but if you want to burn
off somebody's mortality that's what you
got to do so when there's that crowd
there and see this is rubbing against
the culture at the time that is saying
no no this is not good to be
profiteering right off of of this
basically slave trade um why do you need
to give them that flesh and and blood
ingredient you can't make people
pliable unless you overcome them with a
substance right how do you think they
made those boys pliable what do you
think they do with Unix people think oh
Unix can't get erections that's not true
that's not true they get erections they
can do whatever they want with that
erection they just can't get you
pregnant right now depending on how soon
you make them Unix you're going to
change their sex drive right but they
can still be functional what do you
think all those Roman matrons do with
their Unix right that's accepted when
your husband's a senator and he's 40
years older than you he married you when
you were 15 what do you think you do
when it's 25 and he's 75 what do you
think you do that's what Unix are for
right it's part of a soul it's it's a
there's such a demand for this in
Antiquity they're meeting this demand
and by the way people talk about you
know we put in prison teachers that have
relations with students for a very good
reason we do that that
phenomenon is sacred in Antiquity right
there's entire Cults built around the
mother bringing the Addis to maturation
and in the process he gets castrated
they had a whole group of Baptists right
who what did they do they would get
involved in ceremonies that use drugs
and they would cut off their they would
cut off their testicles and they they
had a um Customs not really laws but
Customs that you can take your testicles
and throw them right this is a big party
by the way this is not this is not in a
church setting right this is a big party
and you take your testicles and you
throw them into a house and whatever
house you throw them into that house is
obliged by custom to provide you with a
woman's wardrobe that you will then
wear yeah yeah do you know why we take
up the cross because we're
Baptists do you understand that in the
Mysteries there is
sadism if you don't understand that um
something you're not seeing it Antiquity
you're seeing the fairy tale right that
came from it um but that's all you're
seeing you're not seeing genuine and
stuff that Jesus said um won't make
sense until you understand the actual
words the actual flavors that he's
producing right you w to understand
nobody here I guarantee your audience
nobody knew that Jesus raised his hand
unless they've listened to me that Jesus
raised his hands and said I am not a
child trafficker right I can show you
that word and I can track it through all
of Greek literature around it and show
you that it means exactly that so it's
not odd that Jesus was there it's not
odd that they send a they send a SWAT
unit after him right you think why this
is Jesus it's no big deal look he's a
nice guy he's been preaching oh he's
been healing and he's got right because
you are following the fairy tale Romans
don't send the crack troops out there
when Temple authorities can do it theel
themselves they're doing it for the sake
of the force and he specifically
mentions their use of heavy weapons
Jesus says why'd you send the group out
with heavy weapons I'm not a lace Stace
right because guess what child
trafficking they use agents to protect
themselves Peter is an
agent tried to cut off the dude's ear
right took a swing in his head and took
off his ear right oh you mean they
actually used these boys
remember it was a child prostitute that
recognized
Peter a child prostitute recognized
Peter okay all right the Boys From
Galilee I'm beginning to see what the
Boys From Galilee do and why they spend
time on the boat with Jesus I totally
get that people are remember the scene
when you and I were in Bible School you
remember the scene when Jesus is on the
boat and the the kids are there with him
and he's they're like oh it's terrible
we're having a terrible storm gez gez
and he gets up and it says he's pissed
and he says why' you do this he stands
up rebukes the sea everything goes calm
right now if that's a group of
30-year-old
men it's kind of odd
it's a little bit odd but because
they're methes because they're just this
children um it begins to make a lot more
sense Jesus's power begins to make a lot
more sense Jesus didn't just come and
when he spoke the power was there you
read the gospels and you find out he's
shepherding around a group of children
he's got total control and when it comes
to the government taking him down that's
he loses all his power he loses all his
power his own people didn't buy his junk
right prophets without honor in his own
country right so what does he do he goes
out in his ministry Jesus's Ministry is
about a man grooming
children we I'm telling you this the
actual gospel is way more interesting
than the fairy tale that we've been
given
it's amazing as you describe these
things and I know you're probably in
some ways just scratching the the
surface of the surface but it's amazing
when you look at this to think
Christians number one like you said they
don't really know this they're looking
at the fairy tale but if they if they
really knew even a portion of what was
really going on like if we could
theoretically have had a camera back
there send it back through time on a
drone or something and actually watch
what was
happening you would look at that and
think I'm beyond horrified like oh my
god what have I been who have I been
following this guy is a psychopath he is
a criminal and there's just there's no
way that you would do anything other
than send this guy to prison and yet
people today are just in love with him
in love with his character praying to
him calling him the lover of their souls
and seeing no weirdness to it all you
know even even if to me I like even if
you don't know all this stuff it's like
you're even just the communion the
Eucharist as it's given you're still
being told to go pretend you know I know
if you're a Catholic it's it's actually
the transubstantiation but if you're
Protestant you know you're you're G to
pretend to eat a dead man's body and
drink a dead man's blood like do you not
see how weird this is like this is
really freaking weird and yet we all
just because we're like we it's it's a
testament as I like to say to Childhood
indoctrination if you get someone in
this young enough you just think it's
all normal and it's like no why is it
weird we're just we're just
commemorating the Lord's death and
Resurrection but you know when you look
at this stuff it it's it's shocks me and
I I think it's it's horrible because I
think about the people in it and I think
to myself if you only knew what you were
really doing you would be horrified and
you would not only be horrified you
would be doing what a lot of us atheists
are doing which is trying to free other
Minds it's like feel like a bit like
Morpheus you know like we're freeing
people's minds not because we're angry
atheists not because we hate
Christianity you can't hate Santa Claus
you can't hate the Easter Bunny they're
not real but you can hate the fact that
this is
psychological child abuse and in many
ways of course physical abuse but it's
psychological child abuse and it is
really really nasty stuff and they just
can't see it it's it breaks your heart
that they can't see it and that they're
they're not only willing to accept it
but defend it as if as if it's their all
in all there's a there's a power to the
naked boy that was with Jesus I had a
Street Preacher I've got my two kids
with me right and I'm in New Jersey and
i' I'm walking home after having just
fed him dinner and we're GNA go walk
back to our place and there's a Street
Preacher there in the Middle Street and
he is yelling just being loud as he can
be and he loves the world and I'm like
okay I'm I'm just going to keep walking
and he reached out to me and he said
brother would you like to talk about the
Bible and I said 'l you know okay fine
so I said yeah I have a question for you
and he said what's your question brother
he kept calling me brother I wasn't his
brother he said hey um what's your
question about the Bible and I
said what was Jesus doing in a public
park at 400 a with a naked
boy and he said he looked at me and the
look in his eyes
was like total
contempt and he laughed he got a smile
on his face he laughed and he said
brother which I hated him doing again he
said brother it was disingenuous brother
that's not in the Bible That's not in my
Bible and I said do you have a Bible and
he said hold it out of his hands a
little red one little King James Steely
right Gideon pulled it out I said look
at Mark 1451 52 okay both my kids were
standing with me looking at him right
you could see in his face as he read the
verses to himself you could see in his
face a
transformation for a brief moment he
came to the realization that Jesus was a
creep and that he's been pushing his
entire um uh um motivation and life is
all about this creep you can see it for
just a minute and he just he went for
laor looking his countenance dropped he
kind of kind of went empty on the inside
right and I'm trying not to smile
because I can see the I can see a Soul's
death do you know what it's like it's
one thing to convert somebody and to
bring somebody to Christ you know it's
way
more
fulfilling giving somebody that dose of
reality and bringing him back back
that's way more facilitating that guy
was never going to be the same never
going to be the same um we walked away
from it with him saying you're a
pervert and I was like look bro it's
your
Bible your lord and savior the Pervert
wow oh my gosh that's crazy and there's
again I know the part of this too is
like we're just scratching the surface
that's one story of dozens if not
hundreds we could look at where there's
issues on issues upon issues and then
you're you know going into issues with
Paul and endless issues there but it's I
think that's one of the biggest
takeaways from this that I love is just
when you and I know we talked before the
recording about how other people do this
for me but I love how there's this sense
of a scope for the imagination to say
like you know we're not we're not saying
here that we understand every little
thing of how this text was created
originally or how it evolved we don't
know who all had it we don't know some
of the changes that could have occurred
and I would argue it's probably likely
that there's some pretty significant
coverups that have occurred but knowing
what we do have knowing what we do know
people like you bring bring us the
viewers to a point of just saying look
there's more to this than you know
there's a context you don't know the
context but arguably you should have
been told the context you didn't have it
and when you get it it doesn't make you
into some kind of Genius where you know
everything and you're not necessarily
ready to make conclusions it just makes
you say huh there's a lot more to this
story than I ever imagined and it I love
that because that's in many ways that's
part of my deconversion process was just
saying what if these stories are
something different you know when I
realize for example that from Dr Dennis
McDonald's work that the gospels in acts
are in many ways copying Homer and Ides
it's like wait a second and it's not
like you can necessarily draw
conclusions yet you're just saying
there's more to this story why is he
quoting Plato and all these other people
in the Gospels it doesn't it just you
realize it's different from the party
line and the narrative that you've been
given and it it does it helps you wake
up I mean it really is it's funny you
painted all those pictures of like the
the drug inducing experience but in many
ways this is a similar death to life
experience without the drugs arguably or
the you know the drugs that that are in
your brain but saying it's the drug of
of reality and the drug of saying I am
absolutely stinking sick of being lied
to of having you know one onth of the
information I should have been given and
if I'm going to you know if you Mr
preacher are going to tell me that I
need to effectively swing out on to
Eternity on this rope swing of the the
death and resurrection of Jesus and
that's what's going to get me over the
pit of Hell to the you know Banks of
Jordan to Heaven if that's what's going
to save me then you need to tell me
where did this thing come from what is
what is actually happening here and it's
it's just it comes down down to almost
like a fairness issue like it's not fair
to tell millions and billions of people
for 2,000 years these stories and you
have no idea where it came from and I I
say that to my own shame too like I did
it I preached a lot and I didn't know
where it was from but you come to a
point where you have to say I need to
take responsibility for this until I say
one more word about the gospel I need to
know what is this thing where did it
come from who wrote it if I can know how
did it evolve and what's actually in
that text like you're so good at and I
just I love it it's it's such a
beautiful thing to to kind of wake
up don't you see as a pastor um there's
a recklessness I feel the same I think
that's probably why you asked me do you
feel guilty because there's a
recklessness with you not knowing you
say I didn't know and of course I didn't
know either I wasn't born with this
right I didn't know either and I was
converting people right do I feel a
little bit bad about that conversion I
understand why you're saying that cuz it
is reckless and I think that's the
spirit that celsus is talking about too
when he's condemning Christianity you
are taking somebody and you are putting
them into a state where you will affect
their mental development you will cut
off nature and you will cut off
everything that is beautiful like reason
you'll cut it off from them right oh God
and Paul is walking around this is why
you worship the creature and the
creation don't worship the creation
right it's control were were you and I
involved in that did I kind of feel like
I was just a cog in that mechanism
should I feel bad about it now because
you asked me maybe I'm gonna feel maybe
I'm GNA feel a little bit that way but
you and I both worked in the circles of
that actual mystery that thing that is
there buried underneath
Christianity we were part of that
history and yeah we were on the wrong
side right we were on the ugly side but
and you know both of us figured out a
way to come out of it right to maybe
maybe we owe that do we owe that Tim to
the people that we converted do you owe
them some kind of you know we need to go
back and talk to these people is that
what you're doing with your show are you
kind of expunging that culpability of
perpetuating that brain virus yeah I I
mean abely am I I did go back to as many
people as I could uh I knew some of them
would not be in any way interested in in
hearing from me so those people that I
was crystal clear and like anything I
say to you will truly be bouncing off of
you but I knew there were some people
that were searching and I did go back to
some people and I I literally had some
people say yeah like one guy for example
was really gracious um I'm from
Philadelphia and he he'd moved to a
different state at that point but um I'd
heard through the grapevine that he had
kind of
question the narrative he heard some
things about you know which version of
the Old Testament Jesus was quoting from
with septu and it let him down some
rabbit trails that kind of made him
question it and how the septan doesn't
match up with certain of the old Old
Testament texts and he's like wait a
second and it it eventually led him to
deconstruct heavily I don't know if he'
call himself an atheist but by the time
I spoke with him and and apologized to
him he he was very gracious he said look
number one you were doing the best you
could at the time with what you knew
it's like you don't have anything to
apologize for in a sense was like I
understand why you're calling me and I
forgive you and that was awesome that
was awesome to hear that but in in the
in the bigger picture of this channel I
like to phrase it this way if I put a
thousand people in the Kingdom I want to
take a 100,000 back out like and I want
to save the Next Generation or or maybe
a better way to put it that I say a lot
I want to leave this this planet better
than I found it like I found it steeped
in mythology and I want to help end it
and I I know my my waves will be small
in the big picture but if there's enough
of us Making Waves it could become a
tsunami and especially when I think
about the politics stuff and the
Christian nationalism that the insanity
that the people with their fingers on
the buttons of the most powerful weapons
on this planet believe in in the Trinity
and in the Eucharist and it's like
really like you you are mytholog you you
your whole worldview is steeped in
mythology and you have the nuclear codes
are you kidding me like that doesn't
make sense and I feel like for the sake
of our future we at least have to try
and um I I do feel like it's been an
amazing journey to help people to who
maybe a lot of them probably by the time
they come to my channel they're already
halfway out the door but a few people
have come to me and said like you you it
was actually you that got me out like me
directly I I've had at least two or
three people say that where they said I
wasn't really deconverting until I heard
your channel and you took me all the way
out I'm like you know praise the Lord
I'm like oh that's awesome exactly
praise the Lord right yeah that's it
you're a man of justice and Nemesis
that's what I would say from Antiquity
if those guys were resurrected and
looking at you they'd say this look at
this man naturally follows DK right we
understand who he is come be a part of
the civilization right bring this bring
this defense of reason and Beauty love
it love it I maybe I should be a little
bit more that way I'm more just the rer
in the in the underbelly you know what I
mean I love the dark and de dir stuff
and when Ezekiel gets dirty and he gets
oh God some of the stuff they're saying
you don't understand it unless you get
the sexual rights that they're doing
yeah right it's amazing um but yeah
maybe we owe Tim you've made me you've
given me you've given me a reason to
stop and to think maybe we owe um the
world for every convert we made maybe we
owe 10 I don't know 100 how many do we
owe um I don't know it's worth opening
the eyes and if you you the the great
thing that I feel about you is you can
tell that you came to that point that um
you wanted others to be woken up you
wanted them you know you really are in
the service of the devil you know what I
mean you really are I want you to
consider that you may actually be in the
service of the devil because what is he
doing he's the one who's saying God's a
liar um this stuff is not going to kill
you right it's gonna open it's G to open
your eyes and you're gonna see and he
doesn't like that remember he said he
didn't want their eyes open right why
because they would be like us right I
love it baby let's start it you start on
your end with the the movement that
you're pushing forward that you've you
know you got a ton of momentum on and
I'll start on the satanic end somewhere
will'll make a Renaissance and people
you know people be free from this
garbage you know what I mean yeah we'll
meet in the middle I I was just going to
say too with what you were just saying
um it makes me think it takes us back to
Plato's Cave like it's time it's it's
time to walk out it's time to walk out
of the shadows and get into the light
and one of the things that happens a lot
on this channel I I ask quite often at
least I used to uh is can you please now
that we're done your whole story can you
please compare and contrast your sense
of Peace when you were a Christian
versus your sense of of peace now and by
and large the the vast majority uh would
say oh the the peace that I have now
that I've escaped is so much greater
I've got a few people that have said
something a little different where
they're like I just really wanted you
know I wanted to see my loved ones in
the after life I wanted Heaven most
people are like I I feel so much Freedom
just just the sense that's like you win
the lottery like I could have gone I
could have easily seen that if the chips
had fallen differently I could have
easily stayed stuck in this till the day
I died and and and literally in a sense
never lived a day of my life for real
and I've at least got some time left I
think that's that's kind of where I
personally am with it and I just I love
the chance to hopefully help some other
people feel like there's some freedom to
this but I know I've kept it for a while
I do want to ask real quick before we
wrap up could you do just a quick plug
for your YouTube channel lady Babylon
and then maybe after that just any uh
thing you want to say about your books
and any other projects any books that
might be coming out in the next year or
two or big projects on your horiz just
so we can kind of know how we can
connect with you from
here yeah if anybody wants to connect
with me you're going to have to do it in
a way that you don't spend any money
because I am right now not monetized I
could be but I'm not monetized and I
won't monetize on YouTube I want you I
have a channel called lady Babylon 666
and on that channel I all I do is I
bring the Greek sources to the people
I've got 150 people that sit there and
love it it's scrumptious we just throw
out the Greek and we bring the reality
and it's so shocking and I of course you
know me I have to pick the most shocking
and the most oh those texts that just
they bring that reality back to life
that's lady Babylon
666 on YouTube you can buy don't buy my
work don't if you want to read the
chemical Muse get a pirated copy of it
it's like $600
and you you don't need that people we're
all poor right okay so check me out on
lady Babylon leave a comment especially
if you think that um I'm going to hell
because those are that's delicious I
love that stuff and I love it when you
people step in and pretend to be able to
do the Greek because I love there's
something about it there's something
about with that freedom once we are out
of the fear of the religion all of those
fruits of Life become that much more
delicious I love it I couldn't
appreciate Tim I couldn't appreciate
womankind until I
deconverted yeah definitely and then I
was like oh this is wonderful right love
it love it so lady Babylon pirate
chemical Muse if you need to awesome
well thank you so much I just wanted to
uh I want to say a joke and then I want
to wrap up um you know how they would
people would often say in church at the
end and all people
said amen I was love I love how your
name is so close we could say and all
the atheists said Amon I love it um well
thank you so much thank you for what
you're doing for the community it's
Priceless we love you we love what
you're doing we love your energy we love
your your your questions you're you're
the way that you bring bring us to a
point of saying huh so much you're just
like wow we I love the amazed Factor you
have a mind that is just beautiful and I
I hope you will not stop anytime soon we
love what you're doing please keep at it
and I'm definitely going to be getting
the books that I can afford before too
long and trying to pick up uh just you
know gleaning from the the beautiful
things you've done for us I love it and
I mean to me like you you wo into the
interview so much of this is is now that
you've deconverted and gotten past your
angry atheist phase like go back this
book has layers and nuances that you've
never seen there and it's actually more
amazing than you ever thought it's just
not you know your doesn't have to be
your worldview but it's an amazing thing
to study and and learn from so thank you
for what you're doing um really
appreciate it everyone out the links
beneath this interview for for uh for Dr
Hillman's videos and his website do you
have any final things you want to add
before we wrap up I just want to say
thank you and thank you for the
Integrity that you bleed um it's an
honor to be able to do this with you so
thank you Tim absolutely absolutely well
uh privilege is mine as well everyone
we've been speaking with Dr amen did I
say it right yes no you got it you got
it just call me almond baby everyone
we've been speaking with Ammond uh Dr
amen hman Dr hman thank you so much
great to hear your story great to get to
know you I would definitely like to do
it again sometime I I'll get some of
your books and I get some better
questions for next time but thank you so
much for today awesome to get to know
you I got a lot of respect for you Tim I
got a lot of respect for you and that's
uh that's that's gold in the real world
that that Integrity that you've got is
gold the very fact that you and I have
been to that place and come out of it I
think that builds character and I i'
love it I'd love to hear that in a in a
person I'd love it thank you for letting
me be here thank you so much we'll do it
again sometime okay sounds good anytime
have a good
day again that I see
you
oh might be
lost
but I'm not going out without a
fight
