what's going on with celebrities is
literally everyone you've ever heard of
going to commit sexual assault or sign
their name on a bomb or drag their
partner through a hideous court case or
commit sexual assault or start a cult or
go in an anti-semitic rant or an
islamophobic rant or a transphobic rant
or commit sexual assault should we just
give up on having Heroes celebrities
seem and this is just me uh testing the
air and feeling the vibe to have moved
past their Fame being contingent on a
good Persona there seems to be an
audience for Monsters and a system which
does not discriminate against Monsters
and sometimes this even happens with
someone you really love sometimes you're
witnessing the falling from grace of an
artist you really respect we all know
that feeling of seeing on the news oh
that guy I love that guy he did what to
how many women and you go through a
whole process of maybe being dubious and
then sad and then angry and then I don't
know quite what we do I'm not sure that
anyone else does either it's tempting to
say that after the anger comes
acceptance of this person's wrongdoing
but acceptance sounds an awful lot like
complacency and I don't want to be
complacent about the wrongdoing of these
rich and famous abusers but does that
mean that I have a moral responsibility
to stay angry forever when one of our
beloved celebrities turns out to be a
piece of surely we can imagine better
tools for dealing with that than just
canceling them or saying oh well there
goes another one or pretending to have
never liked them in the first place so
yeah we're going to talk about Neil
Gaiman I'm very sad about Neil Gaiman
and he didn't even do anything to me I'd
like to go on a bit of a journey with my
heavily pregnant co-creator where I
figure out what to do when a hero turns
out to be a monster what to do with all
of the love and respect I had for Neil
giman what to do with all of the anger
and grief I have over Neil Gaiman what
to do with Neil Gaiman if you want the
short Journey just skip to 1 hour 19
minutes 14 seconds I sum it up in like a
few sentences for the more Scenic
Journey well this is clearly bigger than
Neil G and it's bigger than any of these
individual monsters there's something
weird going on with our entire
disfunctional celebrity ecosystem our
entire parasocial culture all of which
are words that it might be helpful to
know what they mean because we don't
know what those words mean so Neil Gan
and they'll be plenty of Neil giman
to come and it seems like Neil giman is
really the order of the day something
people need to hear right now did you
hear about Neil gaim yeah Neil gim
you'll see but also hi I'm Neil and I
love Neil Gaiman
so
yeah for those who don't know Neil
Gaiman is a British author and cultural
icon whose parents were professional
scientologists but also Jewish and he
wrote a lot of books and screenplays and
comics and things look at all these
adaptations you've probably seen a bunch
of these
adaptations and he's been on The
Simpsons twice and he's got floppy hair
and he's friends with Alan Moore and
Terry pratchet and his ex-wife is singer
songwriter Amanda Palmer and I don't
know he's Neil Gaiman he's a British wit
who's so accessible that even Americans
like him he wrote the now legendary
Sandman series for DC vertigo as well as
the comics whatever happened to the cape
Crusader and Coraline he also co-wrote
good Omens with sir Terry in addition to
his own popular contemporary novels
American Gods and Nancy boys and others
adopting a blend of Gothic horror low
fantasy and wit resulting in a unique
yet hyper commmercial Pros that sounds
like this fat Charlie was thirsty fat
Charlie was thirsty and his head hurt
fat Charlie was thirsty and his head
hurt and his mouth tasted evil and his
eyes were too tight in his head and all
his teeth twinged and his stomach burned
and his back was aching in a way that
started around his knees and went up to
his forehead and his brains had been
removed and replaced with cotton balls
and Needles and Pins which was why it
hurt to try and think and his eyes were
not just too tight in his head but they
must have rolled out in the night and
been reattached with roofing nails and
now he noticed that anything louder than
the gentle brownie in motion of air
molecules drifting softly past each
other was above his pain threshold also
he wished he were dead which is how
British people say fat Charlie was hung
over Neil Gaiman is my favorite living
living author in July 2024 an
investigation by toris media reported
allegations by two women of sexual
misconduct against Gaiman including
sexual abuse and coercive behavior
following initial investigation in July
three more women come forward including
one who signed NDA following her
experience with author five women have
accused the Sandman writer Neil Gaiman
of sexual assault the podcast Master the
allegations against Neil giman shares
the stories of four women who alleged
she sexually assaulted them in 1986 and
2022 respectively another woman appeared
on a separate podcast with an allegation
relating to 2012 one woman alleged that
Gaiman performed sexual acts on her
without her consent when she was working
as a nanny for the author's family in
New Zealand Caroline walner who alleged
that Gaiman pressured her to have sex
with him in return for letting her live
at his property in Upstate New York and
made her sign a non-disclosure agreement
in return for a 27 $5,000 payment K told
toris media that she had rough and
painful sex with Gaiman that she neither
wanted nor enjoyed she also claimed that
Gaiman had sex with her while she had an
infection despite her asking him not to
Scarlet's account is that after they eat
the pizza together outside Gaiman offers
to run her a bath according to Scarlet
Gaiman runs the bath and he comes down
to the bath naked and gets in Scarlet
remembers his nonchalance is disarming
that she is shocked and bewildered and
makes her wonder if it's normal she
knows Palmer has a liberal attitude
towards nudity so has that as a framing
context Scarlet doesn't get out of the
bath when gimon gets in but draws up her
legs she remembers being scared what
follows is account of assault Scarlet
says that giman pressured her to put
down her legs that he digitally
penetrated her Ang without consent she
tells the podcast that is the last thing
on the planet she'd ever want to do she
also says that g Jered off on her and
said filthy things and ordered her to
call him Master said that before the
event she told Mr Gaiman that she did
not want to have sex with him he
reassured me that I didn't have to worry
and that I was under no obligation to do
anything I didn't want to do CLA said
after the event Mr Gaiman took Claire to
a room on a tour bus and began to kiss
and grope her without her consent
consent is not what happened between me
and Neil CLA told the times about that
encounter the victim alleged to tortoise
that while the author was on a book tour
in the US in July 2013 he took her to a
room in his tour bus with a bed closed
the door gone on top of her kissed her
and groped her under her dress and over
her breasts Claire said that nearly a
decade later in June 2022 she wrote a
letter to Mr Gaiman to confront him
after she wrote him the letter they had
two phone calls she said during the
second call Mr Gaiman offered Claire
$60,000 to be paid over 4 years she said
in the recording of the phone call the
man is heard telling Claire I'm feeling
that I got the wrong end of the stick I
was heartbroken seeing you that I had
given you
nightmares I'm really sorry I'm trying
to make up for some of the damage would
you like me to send you some money in
August 2022 Claire said she woke up one
morning and saw that $60,000 had been
deposited into her bank account I
recognize now that the money was Hush
money she said has strongly denied any
unlawful conduct according to Claire the
author said that she kissed him first
but but she refuted his claim I said no
that's not actually true you kissed me
first 10 minutes after meeting me and
then he brought his autism diagnosis
into it as something of an explanation
for why he wasn't able to read my body
language G's position is that he
strongly denies any allegations of
non-consensual sex with the women and
adds newal police did not take up his
offer of assistance over one woman's
complaint in
2022 which he says reflects its lack of
substance however New Zealand Police
said it made a number of attempts to
speak to key people as part of this
investigation and those efforts remain
ongoing in response to Scarlet's
allegations Gaiman told tortois media
that he believes her claims stem from a
medical condition related to false
memories tauris understands that he
believes Kay's allegations are motivated
by her regret over their relationship
and that Scarlet was suffering from a
condition associated with false memories
at the time of her relationship with him
a claim was which is not supported by
her medical records and medical
history it's horrible oh and it's you
that guy I've seen you in our comments
before coming over to say these are just
accusations or can a guy sexually
assault someone in a bus without getting
cancelled these days why are you here so
many things are made especially for you
there are so many podcasts you could be
listening to with big loud men loudly
talking over one another go watch a
we're in Hell video
so Neil Gaiman sexually assaulted
multiple women over decades and when the
excuse that no I didn't didn't work he
tried I misread the situation I have
autism oooo and when that didn't work he
tried well here have tens of thousands
of pounds and when that didn't work
since he can't beat the classic he tried
well she is kind of crazy and honestly
it makes me feel gross having just said
3 minutes ago Neil G is my favorite
living author which is a thing I did and
I won't be denying but what am I going
to do yell at Neil D's face in the
clouds so you can all get a sense of
secondhand catharsis my therapist says I
shouldn't do that anymore it's not doing
anything I mean on the one hand it's not
doing anything for me for emotionally
processing that a celebrity I love turns
out to be a monster and on the other
hand it's not doing anything to change
the world either which still produces
these people with their elevated status
and the power to abuse that goes along
with it an ecosystem has emerged off the
back of getting angry at Celebrities and
getting angry at people getting angry at
Celebrities and indeed becoming
celebrities by getting angry at people
getting angry at Celebrities there are
some who call this cancel culture but
the people who call it that are probably
the last ones you should listen to about
it now there are answerable questions
there have been good studies and there
has even been good analysis and yet
there's still a lot missing from this
conversation not least because the idea
that an audience consumes and worships a
celebrity figure is kind of outdated
increasingly these relationships are not
one-sided a growing number of people
find themselves in the middle or
networked in some other
in some complicated figure fandom
Dynamic most of us living now have some
kind of online existence with personas
and all that that entails what's your
six degrees of separation from your
nearest celebrity one time Mike Scott
from the water boys yelled at me on
Twitter in a in a loving way like a do
better way and then you followed me like
we've definitely developed some norms
and some Instinct and and certainly some
anxieties around how to navigate this
digital world but it tends to be things
like subscribers saying I don't want to
be parasocial or anything which is sort
of the digital equivalent of saying no
offense like you are being parasocial
that's how this works so so creators are
just as bad they'll they'll say things
like I don't want to create a parasocial
dynamic with my audience to which I'm
like okay how how does that work are you
going to be like Thomas Pinchin it seems
that the norms and the instincts and the
anxieties are the things governing how
we react when we learn something awful
that a public figure has done and that
could be dangerous because if we
identify with that fandom for example it
might not matter what we learn about ex
celebrity we'll defend them as if we're
defending ourselves what I'm saying is
that at the heart of this is some issue
with how we understand social dynamics
parasocial or otherwise and that's what
I actually need to figure out if I want
to have a healthier relationship with
the Neil giman books on my shelf because
bearing in mind that without parasocial
Dynamics Neil Gaiman would not have been
able to do or get away with so much harm
well we kind of need to understand those
Dynamics don't
we I hate celebrity culture and no
that's not because I'm more interesting
or enlightened it's because I have face
blindness and I don't know who anyone is
so I really only hear about celebrities
in two contexts one is a friend doing
their best to explain to me who someone
is and who they played and who they
performed alongside and I completely
zone out while dark star from the
Grateful Dead plays in my head or I hear
about the latest terrible scandal from
someone like Neil Gaiman and then I wish
I still didn't know who that person was
and look I do understand intellectually
how celebrity culture is supposed to
work let's say you're in an office and
you only vaguely know your co-workers
and you're waiting for the capsule
coffee machine to finish making your sad
watery missal chai when a coworker that
you don't know comes up to cue for the
machine and I know some people like
silence but some people don't some
people like me think the phrase
comfortable silence is an oxymoron so
people like me need something to talk
about and yeah you can talk about the
weather twice maybe three times but if
you've talked to the same coworker a few
times already endlessly discussing the
weather will mean that now you are the
reason that it sucks to queue for coffee
so you can't have a real conversation
but you do need to go a bit deeper so
did you see that thing Chapel ran did
last week oh my gosh can you even
believe it whether I like it or not
celebrities serve a social function as
topics of conversation go politics might
be explosive or own special interest
might be too Niche or boring but most
people do know the current discourse
around a celebrity celebrity knowledge
becomes a sort of Social Capital that we
can trade to get out of otherwise
awkward scenarios or as a proxy to
discuss more divisive issues without
speaking about real people because while
the person playing Chapel rone exists we
actually aren't really talking about her
we don't know her it's kind of gross to
gossip about the misfortunes of real
people but as a symbol she becomes a
conduit to discuss bigger issues it may
be through a conversation about a
celebrity that you learn the person
you're talking to has similar life
philosophies to you it may be the way
through which you begin to form a
friendship but for a lot of people a lot
of times celebrity culture goes even
deeper they can go beyond just social
lubrication celebrities become someone
we see ourselves in people we look up to
and want to emulate people who seem to
struggle the way we struggle people who
put words to things we feel but can't
discuss they become comforting beacons
as we navigate reality and in that way
they become a part of our identity I am
in this celebrity fandom this is a part
of who I am some academics have begun
researching these parasocial
relationships in one study participants
were asked to imagine that their
favorite Creator had committed a moral
violation like abusing a puppy and then
they were asked about the impact on
their Creator's career and on their
feelings towards the Creator and the
results were really interesting even in
this hypothetical scenario some
participants just refused to believe
their favorite celebrity would commit
harm saying things like well people
would know didn't do it on purpose other
participants argued that maybe there
would be some initial blowback but that
the public opinion would move on quickly
I would assume that a lot of people
would react poorly and call the Creator
out on their actions and start to
unfollow them there will be some people
who defend them no matter what and
continue to follow them the Creator will
come out with an apology video that will
probably fan the Flames for a while
after about two weeks everyone will
probably forget and never talk about it
again ultimately the Creator will come
out of the Scandal relatively unscathed
which feels depressingly accurate to me
but others vowed to go hard on their
creator to have what the literature
calls a parasocial breakup because it
turns out that ending a parasocial
relationship causes us emotional
distress and many people in the study
did vow to break up with their
influencer canceling patreon pledges
unfollowing them no longer watching or
engaging with their content but
interestingly the study found that even
for those committed to a breakup the
strength of their parasocial
relationship or their emotional
connection to their influencer that
didn't decrease significantly they could
imagine themselves being angry they
could imagine themselves never engaging
with the celebrity again but their
feelings of identification and
investment and connection with their
creator those didn't decrease which is
kind of like what happens with a real
breakup the point where you've recovered
is not the point where you're sitting in
your bedroom sewing and thinking about
all the bad things that you want to
happen to your ex the point at which
you've recovered is the point where
you're not thinking about them anymore
but this is where celebrity
relationships differ from personal ones
ending a relationship in your personal
life usually means severing any power
dynamics celebrities though they
continue to exist in the periphery most
of them are uncan and most of them still
have the power to continue to hurt hurt
and abuse others while we just sit and
watch the situation it mirrors most in
our personal lives isn't a normal
breakup but an abusive one where you are
unable to fully sever ties and protect
yourself from being hurt even if that
hurt is in just watching the celebrity
continue to hurt
others so Neil gim and I have decided to
break up well actually as a fan I
decided to break up with him because as
a person he decided to be a complete
piece of didn't he hey
editing Neil
here hi and like me you've probably
broken up with one or two of your Heroes
before and we shouldn't let that bring
us down okay we should just spend a
little time in our safe place eating our
safe chocolate and find a new hero or we
can just give up on people entirely
as I imagine some of you have
experienced before it is quite difficult
to only give up on famous people like
who is that should we include everyone
who's ever written a book every
historical figure every YouTuber
everyone in politics Len Penny the guy
from hot ones The Lads from King gizzard
and the lizard Wizards do we give up on
fictional people I mean I thought arago
was pretty cool but I think he genocided
the Orcs And I know it's old news but
like who the are these people these
weird bulked up sociopaths delivering
bad Jud appow dialogue to each other in
front of a green screen clearly serving
as propaganda for an Empire that has no
idea what it's even supposed to
represent anymore I used to be kind of
attached to one or two of them what was
I thinking but I also don't know anyone
that doesn't have some Pantheon of
characters in their head real or
fictional that represents to them
admirable cool heroic imitable traits I
don't know anyone that doesn't have
Heroes sure I know people who are
disconnected from like modern culture
but that's just a taste thing that's
doesn't correlate with them being a good
person or having strong ethics people
who are obsessed with 1970s musicians or
early 20th century political thinkers
are just as capable of willfully
blinding themselves to the dark side of
those Heroes fandom corrupts but this is
not a clear picture these terms fandom
celebrity hero we can't throw these
around willy-nilly if I'm going to get
back on the horse and find new Heroes
I'm going to need a fashion montage
okay the
Madonna see when I say celebrity culture
I'm talking about the Contemporary
Western phenomenon where there is
constant coverage and
voyerism smiley strong jawed Hollywood
types and also the phenomenon in which
marketing companies weaponize our
fascination with these people to sell us
coffee from that guy and perfume from
that woman and cat food from the guy
that used to be in take that the
American fascination with the socialite
scene how the elites are dressed and
what parties they're going to and who
they're is as old as America
itself but 80s pop sensation Madonna is
credited by many scholars as changing
the nature of popular culture from one
where Paparazzi and gossip columnists
were in a predatory relationship with
actors singers artists and Elites to one
of symbiosis in which the celebrity
invites scrutiny and exposure and
voyerism Madonna was so balls out honest
about every gritty detail of her
personal life that her celebrity
overtook her music the
vlogger in the digital age which
followed in the wake of this celebrity
culture where celebrity was an action
one could do the lifestyle vlogger
emerged as someone dealing entirely in
the action of authenticity part voyerism
part entertainment part wish fulfillment
homemade content chronicling middleclass
lives became a phenomenon not just of
its own but one which bled into reality
TV the modern celebrity interview and as
a collective audience our general
expectations about what authenticity
looks like the concept of a celebrity in
such an ecosystem became very abstract
very post modern such that now we have
to be careful about how we interpret
this word celebrity we can interpret it
in a classic iCal way where it's people
who act in films or who have Billboard
top 100 song albums or whatever it's
people who are wealthy and who work in
glamour Industries but also we can
interpret celebrity as an impossibly
complicated fractal network of people
who compose fandoms and we could quibble
about who counts and who doesn't but
that won't get you a definition the
defining Factor here is not how well
known it is how the network of fans
orbit the cultural object the nerd I've
got my sociology hat on for this one
this hat
I look bad in hats when we refer to
literal fandoms subcultures that emerge
around a common interest that common
interest might be a person and it might
not regardless it is a cultural object a
very obvious example is the cultural
object of Star Trek and the fandom of
trees a less obvious example is the
cultural object of Zoe be and the fandom
of BU buzy buzbees
bu bees fandom is a broad social
phenomenon people when they share a
common interest organize themselves
around something and to give a circular
definition behave like fans even if that
common interest doesn't necessarily
resemble nerd culture so for example
stanning
politicians I will not be defining
stanning I do not possess the
appropriate hat I'm just trying to lay
the groundwork for an argument that we
as a society seem to be interacting with
multiple spheres as if they are fandoms
after all there has to be some reason
why we've decided that we need the term
stanning better reason than just the
existence of a song that Eminem released
24 years ago this paper out of Finland
characterizes three different ways that
we engage with fandoms one other
directed that's your popular thing maybe
it's a fad or fashion your engagement is
an attempt to connect with others to
have something to talk about these are
still things that we can get really into
engage with at the level of fan but
they're other directed Two self-directed
this fandom interaction is likely to be
with something more subcultural and
specific it's a personal kind of
Engagement that's Sarah being a dead
head that's me being really into the
Sandman Comics that's you and your dirty
filthy little cartoons that you like to
dress up as or whatever what this paper
shows is that the skills people learn by
engaging in an other directed popular
Fantom can be decontextualized and
recontextualized in a self-directed
personal fandom kind of like how if you
learn piano it's easier to learn other
instruments even if those instruments
have strings instead of keys so if you
as a kid for example memorized all 151
first generation Pokemon who would do
such a thing then you can't really
transfer that skill directly into other
fandoms I've tried but you can transfer
the methodology the principle of it and
the confidence that you can memorize
stuff like that the paper presents this
as the Third Way of engaging with with
fandom transcending fandom we can not
only apply our new skills to a more
personal fandom Beyond Pokémon or Star
Trek or whatever but beyond the field of
fandom itself and into the broader World
Michael had been able through his Harry
Potter fandom to construct an identity
that was more creative and confident
than his former or real one he
eventually began asserting that
creativity and confidence and aspects of
his everyday life he took up new hobbies
such as dancing and Theater which he
finds to be extremely cool but which had
previously been too shy to engage in
eventually he was able to manifest a
creative identity in his more
generalized life context building
friendships and asserting himself
through his new identity by finding in
his everyday life similar types of
sources of creativity he had within
fandom in fact he had decontextualized
the more creative and confident identity
with its self-representation and
Associated behaviors from Harry Potter
and recontextualized it within the
Realms of dance and theater where fandom
was not a prerequisite for acceptance or
status and maybe you've had something
like Michael's experience I know I have
I definitely find that the field
specific skills I've acred as a nerd
whether that's getting into comic books
or music or video essays have all
applied in a surprising variety of areas
that allow me to feel more fulfilled and
in a sense bigger more like me in my
identity to quote the paper again we
show how individuals can learn to deal
with the simultaneously debilitating and
empowering freedom of contemporary
Culture by learning how to maneuver
within it individuals thus Embrace a
malleable identity by learning how to
adapt within their everchanging cultural
context okay but we can't really do
justice to any of this without
understanding the actual social forces
that are being measured so and I'm so
sorry for this the angry
Marxist you can't talk about ACR
cultural skills transcending field
specific limitations or whatever and
have it make any sense without talking
about well actually it's worse than just
talking about Marxism we're going to
talk about cultural capital is it is it
bougie to do a fashion Montage to
explain like Marxist theory none of my
clothes are new by the way the guy who
first came up with this term cultural
capital was Pierre bourier you probably
know him from better video essays he's
actually a great thinker to turn to for
those sorts of ridiculous worries like
is this bougie genuinely if you're
sincerely asking is this pretentious am
I doing a class treachery right now and
so on because to really paraphrase
Pierre bourier he wanted to know why it
come some is fancy why is Opera
generally considered an art form for the
wealthy why do Tom wamsgans and cousin
Greg eat the tiny bird with napkins on
their heads and you know why do experts
in global politics always look like this
what's the deal with certain kinds of
authority having certain Aesthetics and
Vibes or to paraphrase him less half
acidly how are social hierarchies
reproduced when they're not just
emerging from literal material
accumulation of capital so he came up
with this idea of cultural capital and
through that idea he ends up with this
whole conceptual framework that Scholars
have been using since to understand the
role of cultural resources in
reproducing hierarchy how wealth culture
working class culture social strata all
compose the capitalist hierarchy we all
know and love and hate in his own words
the the notion of cultural C Capital
initially presented itself to me in the
course of research as a theoretical
hypothesis which made it possible to
explain the unequal Scholastic
achievement of children originating from
the different social classes by relating
academic success basically he asked how
did Rich Kids actually have an advantage
when you can't literally buy better
grades at least you couldn't in France
in the 80s very Progressive Place bouru
broke down cultural Capital into three
states that it can exist in the
institutionalized state which is when an
institution recognizes a person as
having some Authority or qualification
or some institutional honor of some
other kind which can then be transferred
into an economic asset so yeah doctors
lawyers academics but also like in
Britain they're super transparent about
this it's its own Silly abstract they
get all excited when the local Baron
comes to give a speech and turn on the
Christmas lights and kick the poor in
the head or whatever oh this person is
very important we'd better give him a
car Castle why is he so important well
because he he he lives in a castle but
it is Manifest in American culture also
through amongst other things celebrity
stand on the sideline of the red carpet
and say to yourself oh my God I can't
believe I might get a picture of someone
so important then there's the
objectified state of cultural capital
which is what it sounds like it's
Capital transformed into powerful
objects what are the sort of objects we
get power from well they are our tool
tools our instruments our computers and
our guns and even our books or our opera
tickets a person who has the knowledge
to use such objects can transfer that
use and knowledge value into literal
Cash Gold but of course none of this
would make any sense without that Third
Kind the embodied state of cultural
capital which is embodying stuff having
a certain accent and a certain demeanor
and a certain handshake and knowing
stuff knowing how stuff works running
the gamut from the quite obvious like
being educated in science or law to the
less obvious stuff like knowing how a
rich person spends money how a rich
person doesn't spend money knowing how
to speak a foreign language knowing the
secret nicknames of the people in the
Garrick club like Billy big balls or
Benny dick brain right well that's all
very interesting just a quick Vibe check
though how many of you are like why
aren't you talking about Neil Gaiman
talk about Neil gaimon restate the
crimes the endless list of things
remember you can always skip 1 hour 19
minutes 14 seconds for the rest of us
B's post-marxist analysis helps in
understanding where the power that can
be abused actually comes from because
while Gaiman did have the literal cash
money to pay off certain of the women he
hurt he also had this more abstract
power over them the scholars that came
after Marx were trying to understand an
economy composed of more than just steel
mills and Pierre Boro in particular was
trying to understand that an economics
composed of more than just
the economy so he had this pretty solid
idea that rich people accumulate capital
and therefore power in their very
culture and then what happened what
happened is this thing called the
2000s the 2000s so on the one hand
thinkers could expand borgio Theory and
understand whiteness for example as an
embodied form of cultural capital or
information technology as an objectified
form of cultural capital or even having
a big Twitter following as an
institutionalized form of cultural
capital but at that point some of the
confusing complexity of modern culture
has entered the picture the simplest and
shortest way to put it is that in the
modern cultural Arena we have made the
rules of class nearly indecipherable and
there's no way to give you a full
overview of that but I can give you bits
people value purchasing nice things like
handcrafted leatherbound pencil
sharpeners without that necessarily
reflecting class or they become like
self-proclaimed experts on cinema by
watching a 24 films without that
necessarily reflecting class or they get
R into beer or they spend longer in the
museum than you might expect given the
income level of their parents as the
middle class shrinks in the global North
and generations become materially poorer
than their parents oddly commensurately
the signifiers of class become more
cryptic and turn into empty references
for the lws people are generally messing
around with the signifiers of class
quite freely and haphazardly and who
could blame them none of us are climbing
the social ladder any other way now you
could imagine that this might complicate
the concept of fandom because on the one
hand we have really disrupted the old
way of evaluating what it means to have
good taste and on the other hand fandom
itself is this process of arranging
ourselves around a cultural object
fandom is collecting leatherbound pencil
sharpers and getting into all of the a24
films right fandom transcends classical
social arrangements so let me quote from
the conclusion of the paper from earlier
through examining identity construction
and resolution of identity ambiguity
among serial fans of various consumption
phenomena this study finds that the
acral of cultural capital is a skill
that can be learned in a field specific
context and then decontextualize to be
employed more generally it would seem
that sometimes modern people learn from
fandoms how to be people how to navigate
the world how to ACR cultural value and
you might react to that by saying oh
 that's bad is that bad is that why
everything's so and I might ask
you to just quiet that concern just for
a moment yes it is hard to uncouple
fandom from consumer culture yes a lot
of the democratization of wealth
signifiers such that you can buy them
from teu is dystopian and yes it is hard
to uncouple celebrity culture from
American Supremacy and normative liberal
politics which include but are not
limited to supporting an ongoing
genocide in Gaza and putting Mexican
children in cages but if as I am arguing
we're already decades deep in this
phenomenon of people formulating their
identity through fundom more so than
historical identity markers like parents
religion or nationality or even class if
that is an ongoing process then we're
not going to escape it by broadcasting
our disgust and running away we should
try to understand it by recognizing that
it makes up part of who we are right now
and that it may contain Clues and hacks
as to how to organize ourselves and
Consciousness Ray outside of and Beyond
an imprisoning consumer and class
structure at which point I can admit to
just being in love with parts of fandom
culture I like parts of this I am
touched by Michael's story and I relate
to other stories from the finished study
discovering aspects of yourself in your
heroes or in the art of your Heroes
building a cocoon out of that and then
emerging like a butterfly less shy more
vibrant more interested in things with
more to say and saying things that feel
more like you that's gorgeous I don't
know who I'd be without Eddie isard or
Jim Henson or Terry pret or
yeah Neil Gaiman so now I can give you
my definition of hero it is someone who
when you trip over them out there in the
world they feel like you but better
they're important in a good way powerful
in a good way superhumanly good at
things you value and then they either
die a hero or live long enough to be
disappointingly human so often
especially in the case of famous men
they've been indulging in The Spoils of
power traveling across the colonies
living in expens Ive buildings eating
nice food taking good drugs and sexually
assaulting people it just takes a
breaking story like a podcast or some
other Brave whistleblowing to reveal how
their power was spent and then those of
us with a conscience who thought we had
picked a good hero Scrabble around
trying to separate the art from the
artist trying to separate the artist
from ourselves so that there's something
left of what they taught us about
ourselves that we can still stand behind
hello I'm death and would you like to
play not gon's death and neither
bergman's game it's Scrabble see the
letters spell my name NE i l which
shares and author shame Neil gaman puts
a lot of literary references into his
work from Shakespeare to Sophocles to HP
Lovecraft to Scher to the the Old
Testament to the Norse Eda and so on and
behind all of that literary
craftsmanship and edifice it can be hard
to see Neil himself the way I like to
put it is that he has his art blender
level set very high so that the parts
that are made of him get very finely
chopped and ground and lost in the
overall blend I picked up that
particular Turner phrase from an essay
by gaimon's ex-wife Amanda Palmer
someone who admits to having her own art
blender set very low so that huge chunks
of her appear in almost everything she
makes and Sarah and I are very similar
there's very that we make that doesn't
have big chunks of us in it except of
course I am not Neil I'm death and Neil
himself is dead to me at heart I'm sick
of wasting time and words and breath on
gaming so instead here's Roland bar
Roland bar is a philosopher and literary
theorist who wrote the now famous essay
the death of the author see I'm death
I'm just as death because this is an old
dead point that nobody wants to talk
about anymore did you know that there's
a way to interpret a text that
completely disregards authorial intent
yes but there's something of particular
note that's happened to death of the
author as a concept and it makes it
worth revisiting the meaning of this
term seems to have drifted a little from
the original essay people seem to
interpret death of the author as a
distinction between an author's work and
an author's personality so it becomes a
means by which we intellectualize and
explain away the guilt of engaging with
the work of people like JK Rowling or
Graham linan or whatever other bastard
the author is dead to you you're not
promoting them or celebrating them
you're promoting or celebrating the the
worlds they created you are claiming
those worlds in fact for you and the
fandom and the author now that's
not a wrong way to think about Fiction
it's not even necessarily a wrong way to
think about death of the author but as I
say it shows some significant Drift from
the original essay I mean Roland bar
would have to be a real hypocrite to be
like that wasn't what I meant so what
did he mean I don't know but he
arranged the words in a way that I can
interpret as being a response to the era
of literary criticism that came before
which focused almost entirely on the
author and his mind and his life and his
intent death of the author is concerned
with the possibility of words and poetry
it praises the sublime subjective dance
between reader and text text Unity lies
not in its origin but in its destination
to give a text an author is to impose a
limit on that text to furnish it with a
final signified to close the
writing you guys ever listened to Animal
Collective this essay sees the author as
this overshadowing dimension of a work
which collapses all other artistic
possibility so when Neil Gaiman says for
example mave Livingston rode the lift up
to the fifth floor alone the slow jerky
Journey giving her plenty of time to
rehearse in her head what she would say
to gram coats when she got there she was
carrying a slim Brown briefcase which
had belonged to moris a peculiarly
masculine
object who thinks the briefcase is
peculiarly masculine is it mave
Livingston is it Neil Gaiman is it an
objective fact from the view of the
universe this essay doesn't think that
there's an answer to that question and
not only that but if there were an
answer then this book and all books
would be less good the view of Neil
Gaiman should disappear his voice should
become mine he should die in committing
his art to my experience in precisely
this way literature by refusing to
assign a secret and ultimate meaning to
the text liberates what may be called an
anti- theological activity an activity
that is truly revolutionary since to
refuse to fix meaning is in the end to
refuse God in his hypostases reason
science law boy I hope it's pronounced
hypothesis so should we argue that gon's
work would be better without the game in
part well we definitely could argue that
interpretation is an activity there
should be no shoulds what we can say is
that the removal of the author
transforms that activity maybe it could
be useful for you as a creator get rid
of your ego surprise yourself use more
automatic processes disregard your
intentions and become the art and then
as an audience our response to all these
weird modern commercial artistic
Enterprises could be transformed by
shedding the burden of author because
Modern Art and media Mak such cynical
components of authorship this is a
Steven Spielberg film this is a Stephen
King novel and this is a Duffer Brothers
stepen King Steven Spielberg Steven
sandwich as audience we have our ability
to assess crowded out by this emphasis
on brand and Neil Gaiman is nothing if
not a brand quite apart from all this
evil that he did Gaiman was already
on his way to outliving his pristine
artist status by virtue of becoming like
so many before him a parody of himself
disappointing adaptations oversaturation
annoying ads on YouTube for Neil Gan
masterclass the back of this copy of a
Nancy boys is not a blurb it's not even
praise for the book it's praise for the
world of Neil Gaiman its endorsement of
a brand Gaiman was already dangerously
close to becoming the thinking man's Tim
Burton not that that process is peculiar
to Neil Gaiman part of the process
alienating me from my artistic Heroes is
their being cheapened commodified made
into Brands the focus on their celebrity
and status as author all of which is the
exact opposite of the pure Vibes of my
interaction with their art and quite
antithetical to the direction that
Roland bar thought it was important for
society and art to move in Alan Moore
who I'm bringing up not because he
appeared in his own annoying masterclass
ads nor because he is a personal friend
of Neil Gaiman but actually because this
guy is still capable of shaking up our
ideas of all this nonsense he's a
renowned innovator in the medium of
comic books and graphic novels he wrote
Watchmen and from hell and the League of
Extraordinary Gentlemen all of which he
tried to guard against disappointing
adaptations with little success and he
spoke about this phenomenon of celebrity
eclipsing art and how it relates to the
deterioration of fandom scenes in
general I detected the beginnings of a
tendency to fetishize a work's Creator
rather than simply appreciate the work
itself as if artists and writers were
themselves part of the costumed
entertainment never having sought a pop
celebrity relationship with readers I
withdrew by stages from the social side
of comics acquiring my standing as a
furious unfathomable hermit in the
process Moore describes comic book
fandom as becoming gentrified where once
there was a thriving community of
workingclass Outsiders in obscure
basements now there is a fandom industry
of middle-aged and middleclass folks
those who can afford to participate in
the Hobby and whose dominating
domineering tactics have an adverse
effect on the perception of the fandom
and of course there are those who would
argue the exact opposite that nerd
culture has been disproportionately
perhaps in a nefarious and underhanded
way pushed towards identity Politics the
queer and radicalized minorities that
seem to have colonized fandom as if
overnight and those people are a very
good example of a toxic fandom the thing
that Alan Moore is talking about I
believe that fandom is a wonderful and
vital organ of contemporary culture
without which that culture ultimately
stagnates atrophies and dies at the same
time I'm sure that fandom is sometimes a
grotesque blight that poisons the
society surrounding it with its means
spirited obsessions and ridiculous
unearned sense of entitlement fandom
corrupts you see as much as it can be
framed as quite lovely to have these
parallel worlds for us Outsiders where
we can learn how to people these fandom
worlds are Rife with problems through
the mythologies and rules and methods of
ACR social capital in a fandom these
communities can inherit some of the
worst ugly fictions from out here in the
real world and then not only repeat them
but amplify them obsess over them and
socially police them in don't mess with
my happy place understanding misogyny in
fandom communities author gwendel and S
Nisbet examined misogyny from the fan
perspective by collecting qualitative
interview responses from fans at
ComicCon God helper the results were
pretty much exactly what you'd expect
men reporting sexist attitudes towards
women women reporting bullying and
harassment the conclusion States this
group of geek men who are often
marginalized themselves are trying to
hold on to and perpetuate their form of
hyper masculinity by belittling and
marginalizing female fans well each
fandom is different with some being more
offensive the notion of women not
fitting into the fandom because of a
lack of fandom knowledge was the
strongest and most persistent theme and
that's just one of the many studies
demonstrating pretty unambiguously the
regressive and often hostile
environments in fandoms for marginalized
participants often women now am I trying
to conclude that Neil Gaiman in
particular developed his sexist violent
attitudes towards women in the Seedy
basements of 1970s comic fandom London
and that's why he's such an abusive
prick no no who cares I'm not interested
in what lies in Neil gaiman's heart and
I really don't think you should be
either I'm not interested in finding the
real Neil in his work or in interviews
or in his public statements defending
himself and I don't think you should be
either speaking for myself as the
anthropomorphic personification of death
I don't think we should be going on
social media or YouTube and either
wondering or loudly declaring the kinds
of personality disorders or moral
shortcomings we think this particular
person has I don't think we should be
finding patterns in his past
relationships or his choice of wording
or speculating on the Tells in his books
and the way he writes women or whatever
I don't think you need Roland bar to
tell you that that's getting it exactly
backwards so let's cut to the chase
welcome back everyone only Matt has made
it through to the final Chase death of
the author is just one way to do it it's
misunderstood and I think something gets
lost in that misunderstanding just how
antithetical it is to our contemporary
way of thinking about works of media
just how nosy and obsessed with people's
personal lives and mistaken about genius
we are there's a reason I've chosen to
refer to the essay the death of the
author and to use its pronouns of it
slit rather than referring to its author
Roland bar and his pronouns of he/ his
this is a kind of hack to get your brain
to associate a text with its own meaning
rather than associating it with a
relational meaning between your
interpretation of the text and your
interpretation of the author and so
instead of thinking what influence has
Neil Gaiman had on me I can think what
influence have the Sandman Comics had on
me or what influence has American Gods
had on me more importantly instead of
thinking what sort of a soul could
create such a piece of literature I can
think what is the soul of this piece of
literature because at this point I don't
want to know anything more about Neil
Gaiman and his ugly business I
frankly don't want to bump into him in
his books and I can't bring myself to
care about his blender level
setting or whatever I think because I'm
uncomfortable giving him that
power if we really wanted to like help
women if we really wanted to prevent the
future abuse of vulnerable fans or the
future sexual assault of vulnerable
young
employees then we should focus on the
social forces and measurable phenomena
underlying that abuse not the
particulars of gaimon's character but
Focus instead on making as Mary Piper
said rape as Unthinkable to young men as
cannibalism in that endeavor we can look
to academic Works another kind of author
list text for some measurable direction
towards the goal of doing away with rape
healing this species of sexual violence
that could be the way that we Orient
when Revelations about Neil Gaiman or
whoever come to light an academic text
good epidemiology or a good psych paper
or a respectable feminist text does not
rely on the Persona of its author to be
true or good and will only be informed
by the author's personal life in as much
as it might create bias which is an
interesting way to think about death of
the author perhaps authors can fail to
die in their efforts to really right
just like an academic text can fail to
capture objective reality art can fail
to adequately capture subjective reality
and author can inherit some of the worst
ugly fictions from out here in the
broader world and then not only repeat
them but amplify them an author can be
little more than an interruption to the
things that they wanted to say I think
that's a fascinating and open-ended way
to think about books and things but if I
were going to talk about all of that I'd
want to do it with a different author
because I'm sick to death of Neil Gaiman
it's a massive part of why this essay is
so distracted by the broader picture a
picture of Fame and power that
inevitably creates hierarchy and
particularly corrupts masculinity one
which isn't helped by picking apart the
carcass of Neil gaiman's shortcomings
and this is what I think success is
fundamentally tied to sexual power over
women by remembering this immutable
reality I may have strangely enough
found a means by which I can break this
bloody parasocial bond that I have with
Neil g a way to swap one kind of
heartbreak for
another um because uh basically Neil
Gaiman is not special not as a writer
not as a man and not as a monster Neil
Gaiman is at best a weak spirited fellow
in the face of forces that make sexual
assault so
normal and that's the problem
did you study Greek tragedy in school
like Reed Antony or Media or edus Rex if
so you might have gone over some of
Aristotle and his analysis with the
tragic hero this is the protagonist of
the story who is supposed to have
certain characteristics like they have
to be in a position of power or status
because then they have something to lose
and they have to have some sort of
tragic flaw they're Achilles heel a
tragedy often invokes a strong message
about fate and inevitability edus hears
he's going to kill his father and marry
his mother so he runs away never to see
them again killing a random man and
marrying a queen only to find out later
that he was in fact adopted and by
attempting to run from his fate he
sealed it Aristotle believed that
watching plays is good for us it helps
us experience feelings of pity and fear
and purging those feelings fulfills a
social function sometimes I wonder if
we're doing something similar when we
collectively process a celebrity's
downfall so there are two concepts here
that I find useful the first is
effective disposition Theory the second
is moral Capital effective disposition
theory is one of those psych theories
that you may be just tempted to call
common sense but a lot of our Common
Sense beliefs aren't actually true so
it's always good to have a tested Theory
to point to this one says that when we
engage with a TV show for example we
make moral judgments of the characters
involved and we like when good things
happen to the good guys and we like when
bad things happen to the bad guys it
gets more complicated obviously the
amount of empathy we have for a
character's circumstances plays a role
in whether we see them as good or bad
and our perception of characters change
as we learn more information but in this
case it's basically an explanation for
shod and fra it's nice seeing bad people
get punished moral capital is slightly
more complicated expanding on Bo's
cultural capital moral Capital describes
how our social standing our clout our
Wasa can change based on how moral we
appear to other people that's not our
actual morality morality is a personal
system of rules that other people can't
really see we're following this is
explicitly the morality that we signal
it's virtue signaling as a real academic
concept rather than just a racist dog
whistle so if we see a celebrity as a
commodity or a character which is how
many of us interact with them then these
two two forces might come into play when
this celebrity commits a transgression
obviously some people are going to be
genuinely upset hurt and invested but
other people have an opportunity to
improve their moral Capital by loudly
calling out you know apologize about
angel Buck already by loudly condemning
an influencer we're saying we're not on
team I don't know infidelity or buying
an expensive house or team sexual
assault I'm not saying this is done
cynically it can feel destabilized to
see someone you admire committing a
moral transgression and if you're saying
something about it even just on your own
Blue Sky feed then it can give you some
amount of relief but it's also good to
look at why Twitter mobs develop to
recognize that it can be fun to join in
on condemning an influencer even if you
didn't know who they were before hearing
that they'd done something wrong it
scratches the itch we feel in wanting
villains to suffer and it raises our
social status with like-minded people
this is why so many of these
cancellations are actually nothing like
Greek tragedies because the catharsis we
feel in watching a villain get their du
that's not what Aristotle coined the
term catharsis for the Greek tragic hero
is moral deontologically and rigidly so
it's their principles that get them into
trouble and their inability to morally
compromise that seals their Fall From
Grace Aristotle's catharsis relies on us
having empathy and experiencing pity and
that's not what happened with Neil
Gaiman
you know he read me a poem once Neil
giman I mean uh he read a lot of people
the poem it was a big room with a lot of
people in the room and he was on the
stage part of the room but still you
know look at me name dropping Neil gam
and theist so that was at an Amanda
Palmer gig which was this formative
experience for me I was on a date there
and a fervent queer relationship not
long out of the closet and Amanda Palmer
had come to Dublin to sing for everybody
the same week that Ireland legalized
abortion it was the famous repealing of
the eth amendment week Irish feminists
will remember where they were and Neil
Gaiman who was married to Palmer at the
time was also in Dublin for the launch
of a new book or something I believe and
there were Whispers that perhaps he
might make an appearance at this gig he
did he came out and he read a poem about
how the first scientists in our species
were women who tested which mushrooms
needed to be cooked and who made slings
for their babies to keep their armsfree
it's actually a pretty good poem but I'm
done quoting gimon when he finished
Palmer leaned playfully into her
microphone so that her voice was
comically loud and she said good
feminist that was his image wasn't it
not just a guy not just a nice guy but a
feminist a proper Champion for women and
for marginalized people he famously
defended the inclusion of a transwoman
character in The Sandman novels he's had
public spats with turfs he identifies as
a feminist he walked out on that stage
and as silly as it is I got excited
chills and a heart pounding feeling of
something cool happening yes it was in
large part because of an exciting
chapter in my life and a righteous part
of arland's history and a genuinely very
good gig but it was also because he came
to join us in that moment like important
things were happening and an important
person was joining us and conferring
importance on this moment he was someone
with an apparent Fortune in moral
capital and in order for someone to fall
from grace they have to be in possession
of Grace in the first place there has to
be at least some morality and dignity
for them to lose people like Andrew Tate
or Matt Walsh don't have that standard
that they're held to even edgy comedians
like Ricky Jes or Bill Maher start out
much more morally ambivalent and so they
can say I get cancelled all the time
because they never really get cancelled
occasionally like with Tate or his
brother or with Conor McGregor they
might get prosecuted Ed to whatever
extent but few if any of their fandom
will break up with them their Persona is
consistent with their wrongdoing they're
famous because they're monsters this is
summed up in something called expectancy
violations Theory relationships are
damaged when someone violates a moral
expectation see whether or not a
relationship is parasocial it's always
based on your expectation of someone I
thought Neil Gan was a good feminist his
wife said so these expectations we have
may offer some explanation for our
disbelief when a celebrity does
something bad our expectations of the
character of someone we know and love
may even be part of why we sometimes
Mount premature defenses of them they
would never do that this must be a cash
grab false accusation or fake news or a
scop you see unlike a Greek tragedy or
most forms of narrative that we actually
enjoy the Fall From Grace of a celebrity
can never be that of a tragic hero
they're not a hero they're not fated to
exemplify some absolute moral trait or
some absolute character trait they're
not so very much themselves that they
face destruction because of it no the
only way a celebrity can fall from grace
is if they fail to be who we think they
are unfortunately we all thought Neil
Gaiman was unbelievably cool and quite
moral and generally very sound and a
good guy part of the reason this hurts
so much is that yet another good guy
turned out to be anything but and
there's no catharsis in that it's not
good storytelling so we Scrabble around
trying to find a pattern on some higher
order of things maybe they're madeup
allegations or maybe Neil Gaiman must
have actually been a all along
or maybe I never even really liked those
books as much as I thought I did maybe
maybe maybe narrative narrative
narrative dissonance dissonance
dissonance it's appealing to think that
we're smarter than the other people
around us that were more likely to sniff
out the fakes and Pretenders we you see
this every time there's a cancellation
all of the people coming out of the
woodwork saying I knew all along that
Joe Jon Stein was toxic and hey I get it
I've always hated JK Rowling I wrote an
editorial for my high school newspaper
where I called her a bad writer I didn't
spot that she'd become a prominent
anti-feminist hate mongerer but the bad
writing I did and it felt a little
perversely validating when someone who I
hated turned out to have been a bad
person so I'm no better here I have
participated in this phenomenal on but
stick with me a lot of that feeling of I
knew it is probably based on coincidence
as humans are actually really bad at
sussing out Liars this is a bug bear of
mine because it's clearly something we
want to be good at it's a staple of
daytime TV shows for a reason the body
language expert the micro Expressions
expert the whatever pseudo science is
popular at the moment expert but none of
them are any good at it either we all
know by now that polygraph machines are
 and it seems like fmri methods
of catching deception are Laden with the
same sorts of problems in studies of
deception differences between liars and
Truth tellers are inconsistent and very
faint so a finding that for example
someone lying might make slightly fewer
hand movements than someone telling the
truth well that only gets you somewhere
if you're incredibly aware of the
average amount of hand movements that
people make to be able to tell if
somebody's lying based on hand gestures
you You' have to be like counting their
hand gestures like you were in a lab in
normal conditions and then they'd have
to murder somebody and then that's when
you'd have to be like let's see if when
you're trying to defend yourself you use
fewer or more hand gestures in John
grisham's the
gesturer this is the example an article
I read used when making the case that
police guidelines on catching Liars are
actually really misleading and factor
into this that Liars might take counter
measures to make themselves seem more
believable or that we find people
experiencing anxiety less believable and
it all kind of falls apart we can't see
if someone is lying to us by looking at
their voices faces bodies or brains in
fact when we trust our intuition we're
actually setting ourselves up to fall a
foul of social biases like racism or
sexism or classism or ableism besides
thinking we're good at reading Vibes is
kind of victim blamy sure the guy who
punches holes and walls at parties is
probably not a great guy guy but the
really Charming one who tells
interesting stories and is a good
listener that guy isn't necessarily safe
ask people leaving abusive Partners if
they saw any red flags early on some
obviously did but a ton of others didn't
and it's not because they're
particularly bad judges of character but
because a lot of abusive people are
really good at impression management at
being Charming at being really in
control of themselves in situations
where that's socially advantageous a lot
of people leaving abusive part partners
are going to be met with disbelief
because often the most abusive people
seem really great that's kind of the way
they're able to do what they do abusive
people are essentially really good liars
but knowing that isn't satisfying if
you've been hurt by someone if you've
been deceived it's not very cathartic to
hear well this could happen to anyone
none of us is very good at this so you
might start trying to come up with your
own way of sussing out who the bad guys
are ahead of time I see this a lot on
Twitter or in the comment sections of my
own or my friend's videos people saying
things like is that thumbnail AI art
because that would mean you're lying
about the whole anti- capitalist thing
or so and so pronounce that word
incorrectly that might be a tell that
they're being paid off or I don't know
calling things Sops I see a lot of
people calling things scops or one
YouTuber is getting cancelled for
legitimate reasons and a bunch of people
start listing other unconnected
YouTubers by being like I can't wait for
this to happen to X next and it's like
you can't wait to find out there's
someone else who got assaulted by a
different YouTuber like what I found
these comments gross but I'm trying to
tell myself that what I'm seeing isn't
people necessarily delighting in other
people's downfall but a kind of paranoia
that develops in this environment where
we've been made to feel as if we're
responsible for preventing ourselves
from being victimized finding out that a
Creator we love has done something bad
doesn't just hurt but because we're
identified with the Creator we start to
feel like it's an indictment of
ourselves and that really hurts I think
the urge to sus out the phonies is a way
of trying to protect ourselves I just
don't think it's very effective the
people who are good liars are usually
really aware of how to Market themselves
as safe and wholesome all the looking
for tells does is create an unpleasant
environment it doesn't mean you're going
to avoid loving another abusive Creator
Bad actors are the ones at fault for
their actions it's not the fault of
people who trusted them or who loved
them or were engaged with their work and
it's not an indictment of your judgment
being bad if you've been hurt by one of
them that's just human if they've taken
advantage of your trust to hurt you or
to hurt others then hey that's just one
more way that they've been
awful all right do I get to go back to
bed now go bed go to bed
okay I I do not know how pregnancy
doesn't radicalize more
people I actually have mixed feelings
about parasocial relationships like I
said towards the start we all have some
manner of online existence and as a
result a Persona a lot of us are
networked like not in a cynical
business-like way but in a social way
with people who make the culture by
sharing in its interests and people who
make the culture by making things when
you put your hands up because you put
them in front of you they suddenly were
like really in the FR like kind of scary
but okay I'll pick up that thread in a
second uh first I want to start pulling
together some of these other threads
because NE gam but now in the sense
that all of this is much bigger than him
all the research on fandom communities
and theorizing about cultural social
moral capital and so on is just the tip
of the iceberg in terms of understanding
how modern culture organizes itself this
phenomenon of learning how to be people
from Star Trek from comic books from
Hollywood from comedians from fantasy
novels and now from YouTube is
Generations deep you are on social media
following a bunch of your Heroes and or
you're in a Discord Community for a
thing you're interested in and or you're
interacting with various cultural
objects that make up your taste and
therefore your identity and definitely
you are the target of algorithms that
have already concluded your
relationships to those cultural objects
anyway you are a fan whether you know it
or not not that is the way Society is
organized now of course it is fans are
consumers consumers are fans and like
misogyny and fandom the connection
between fandom and consumerism is really
well established in the academic
literature on the subject but there's
something more that I'd like to add to
that this fandom normativity if you want
to call it that composes our
understanding of ourselves much more so
than some other ideas that get more
press like neoliberalism or
postmodernism or whatever like the
prevailing image of the modern Western
hegemonic person is one who's alienated
by capitalism in the internet age right
who thinks that individualism and
rational ideals from the enlightenment
are just like normal things who was born
long after n declared God is dead and we
have killed him who inherits
postmodernity and the surveillance State
and all of that bollocks right but my
suspicion is that we can't perceive
those things about ourselves very well
what we can perceive about ourselves is
our taste our self- image is arrived at
by way of what we like and what we don't
like and what we think liking and not
liking certain things says about us all
of that what we like and what we don't
like and what we think it says about us
is how we understand our relationship to
this dystopia that we live in too it is
both Illuminating and more than a little
horrifying because yeah that last
vestage of Freedom that you think you
have to read a book or listen to some
music or even like the way that someone
tweets forms the strongest bond between
you and this capitalist construct you
are attached to the continued output of
Neil Gaiman or the MCU or the leftist
 Cooks it is telling that the
thing they threaten you with in anti-
USSR propaganda is a gry homogeneous
unentertaining colorless culturist doll
or in anti-north Korean propaganda the
threat is State control of a wildly
uncool and impossible to interpret media
landscape like they're just shy of
saying without capitalism there'd be no
fun there'd be no Hollywood there
there'd be no book signings there'd be
no hot ones there'd be no Saturday
morning cartoons or Saturday Night Live
or Saturdays and the only celebrities
would be politicians with big mustaches
who slowly disappear from photographs is
that what you want Communists of course
this is not a threat I want to replicate
it's not my idea of Utopia quite apart
from debunking its complete falseness
it's also not a way I want to think
about celebrity I think there is at
least one very unnecessary and tenuous
connection being made there between
these disgustingly wealthy and powerful
and culturally ubiquitous creators of
fun the stars and the color and art and
fandom and community and fervor we want
to have in our lives and that we have a
right to have in our lives just uh just
testing those vibes again here but uh
Yep they're just and um you know Vibes
there definitely seems to be something
in the air calling us back to those
basements in 1970s London to smaller and
more personal fandoms where tens of avid
comic book readers might gather to tell
one baffled pencel that his art is very
important I don't mean literally a call
to Annie basement in particular but
rather a shared genre fluid rejection of
ubiquitous consumer fandom and a return
to community arranged around creativity
and shared weirdness I would include in
this the call to return to web 1.5
sensibilities that I've seen from CJ the
X Chris waves and others
which I think is our generation's
Nostalgia for basement fandom all of
this reminds me of smallscale Music
scenes from my own experience and from
stories of dubstep at its creative Peak
or Punk back when it was punk from my
perspective playing music and going to
gigs and working with different
musicians and getting to know heads from
the scene was the joyful part and the
part that sucked was the Neurosis of
trying to succeed the conflicting needs
of creativity and commerciality I could
talk about small scale comedy gigs in
Dublin I could talk about poetry nights
in Lim and what's cool is I'm sure many
of you could talk about your own weird
scenes in your own weird little cities
as fans and as creatives or as both so
when I say I have mixed feelings about
parasocial relationships specifically
it's because I find this scene the video
essay scene the most cool and exciting
artistic medium happening right now and
I believe that part of the reason it's
so cool and exciting has to do with how
much of a response it is to all of the
things we've spoken about in this video
it's a development of nerd culture look
at all the video essays about comic book
movies and Anime and video games and
books it's a basement culture you still
have to explain to people what a video
essay even is it is a parallel culture
concerned at its core with not repeating
the prejudices of mainstream Society so
it's an interesting scene in which to
learn to be a person it's massively
creative and that most authentic and
exciting of ways in the sense that none
of us have any idea how video essays
work and we're still making up how they
even go and most important of all the
audience is right here right up in our
business speaking back to us the
audience has more power than in almost
any other media and there's data on this
a consensus is growing that there are
unique components to parasocial
relationships with YouTubers and
streamers specifically one study I found
shows how parasocial relationships with
twitch streamers and relationships with
their community can be both beneficial
and potentially harmful when it comes to
navigating difficult parts of our Lives
specifically on the one side streams
offer distraction pleasure relatedness
to others and online anonymity can help
people to open up but on the other side
the study showed that trolling and memes
can also stop people from opening up
several people due to their depression
or anxiety stated it was impossible for
them to build and maintain these real
world relationships for these people
twitch was a way to have at least some
form of social Connection in addition
the participants in our study seemed
well aware of the difference between the
virtual and the real world and the
one-sided nature of the relationship
between themselves and the streamer but
another study went even further and
framed parasocial relationships with
streamers in particular as one and a
half cited that is characterized by the
potential for reciprocal communication
strong Community affiliation fan om
cultures Wishful identification High
emotional engagement and increased
presence the fact that something they
say can send the streamer off to go look
something up and better themselves all
leads to a dissolving of the boundaries
between parasocial and social in this
medium and media like it I'll
reemphasize when I say that there's more
accountability in this scene I don't
mean to promote the sort of atmosphere
where we Patrol YouTubers and streamers
apologize about angel Buck already on
the lookout for the secretly abusive or
the secretly fasy or the secretly
transmedicalist or the secretly working
for the Kremlin I mean the YouTubers
getting paid by Russia aren't exactly
doing a great job of hiding it but in
fact checking and bouncing back in Forth
ideas and sharing academic resources and
participating in mutual Aid and by
positively encouraging the better part
of ethical living saying hey your work
has helped me to be a better person
audiences of streamers and political
YouTubers have adopted an interesting
role one which might have baffled Roland
bar they are part of the art part of a
symphony of voices in which the streamer
or the YouTuber is no longer the sole
author they also die in committing their
voices to the creation and by the way I
do think that live streaming on Twitch
is Art I I don't get this whole that's
not real art argument for everything art
is cheap art is abundant art is
everywhere I think lots of online media
gets unfairly maligned as content but it
is Art and we're allowed to say that be
proud of your basement culture I've
noticed that when Sarah tells me she's
seen something on Tik Tok she'll be like
I heard from an antal clinician on Tik
Tok and I'm like don't be ashamed don't
say on Tik Tok like she's a qualified
OBGYN and I know you watch Tik Tok don't
worry I love you another important
structural difference between this kind
of parasocial relationship and the kind
of parasocial relationship that I used
to have with Neil Gaiman before we broke
up is where the money comes from
basically bottom up Revenue versus
revenue from a media Outlet now I know
that on the one hand Neil gim's fans pay
his bills they buy his books and they
watch his adaptations I also know that
streamers and YouTubers come in all
kinds of sizes and they make money from
ad revenue from ads hosted on sites like
YouTube which is owned by Google and
twitch which is owned by Amazon but
there is a top- down component to gaming
he has a very well-paid agent he
publishes with the biggest Publishers
the money all goes to a big pot and he
gets paid very handsomely Gaiman has
readers he has subjects in a way he is
elevated above them in the capitalist
system and they purchase entertainment
from him this is why I actually don't
think the answer lies as Alan Moore
hints in creators becoming recluses in
their respective Mansions whereas in the
small to medium Creator economy we're
completely immersed we're all fans
together the audience is right here and
our community is the thing that actually
supports us financially the thing that
we focus on Sarah and I is patreon and
with something like patreon you have a
bottomup source of Revenue we are
concerned with the fan base in the
basement getting excited about the
latest video and speaking to us quite
directly on our patreon or in our
Discord or in the comments and mostly
people don't use that as a way to force
us to do anything very few people if
anyone has ever used patreon or money to
force a parasocial interaction with us
mostly people just care about art and
about truth and about video essays
getting the chance to exist they're true
fans of a medium of an idea and if
you're like oh well this is a pretty
good video then you owe a debt of
gratitude to the people who support us
on patreon you could be one of them if
you like but if you can't afford to
don't worry because some very cool
people some video essay nerds have got
your back so yeah the ability of someone
like Neil Gaiman to abuse use their
power is intrinsically related to that
top down relationship with the rest of
us it it's just not the same thing as
Lumi Ru for example having a community
of people and genuinely in good faith
trying to be a good influence on them oh
my gosh thank you with the greatest
respect who's even heard of Lumi
Ru well they're not a celebrity but they
are nevertheless a cultural object for a
community and their Intentions by way of
their Community would seem to be very
sincere it is my opinion that we
shouldn't run away from or be disgusted
by this idea of parasocial relationships
but instead we need to disentangle that
idea from rising in the hierarchy of
society if we take social attachments to
people we don't actually know as some
inevitable part of a world where books
and the internet exist then we should be
very smart about what we run away from
and try to abolish perhaps the only
socially acceptable par social
relationships should be one and a half
sided and if we examine power as opposed
to fame the poison of patriarchy the
poison of wealth the poison of authority
the poison of being bigger and more
important than other people we find that
its evil is fundamentally tied to owning
women sexually the whole way that
Society is structured is that the
elevated prestigious positions are
defined by sexual entitlement to people
who are less important than you it's not
by jewels and cars and mansions there
are many ways to perform wealth and newv
re people get laughed at by old money
for the go ways that they dress
themselves in riches and it's not
defined by Fame there are lots of very
important people who are very powerful
that you've never heard of and they like
it that way but the sort of power that
Neil Gaiman took advantage of to use
hurt eulate on and silence women is
baked in to power as we understand it
here in this dystopia it just is
it is always dangerous when we make men
powerful oh that's the that's the time
stamp that's the time so the people who
just skipped the entire essay they just
joined us like 30 seconds ago uh yeah so
that's it Neil Gaiman is not special
he's not even interesting sexually
assaulting people is one of the most
foundational ways of demonstrating that
you've won capitalism people do it when
they're at the top because they can and
people ulate it when they're not at the
top because they want to feel like they
are at the top uh we need to deconstruct
the whole celebrity Fame power structure
thing if you'd seen the rest of the
video you'd have a better idea of how I
would propose to do that or at least
you'd have a better idea of what we
could like do instead but whatever you
know time's a waste and you've got to
watch some videos about that new big
prime number they found and and some
Simpsons retrospectives or whatever so
uh let's get on with the conclusion
even your taste moves on from heartbreak
you might Harbor that feeling for a
while of wanting to get back with your
ex but they've changed and you've
changed and even kissing won't be what
it was because your lips have
changed so I find it hard to read Neil
Gaiman honestly he seems kind of crap
now a mediocre and Comm commercial and
obvious and
like so do a lot of things honestly like
apparently the good omen TV show is
totally dis out him for season 3 but I
still don't feel like I was going to be
missing out on much by skipping it and
so I think I still might I tried to read
Neil gamon and he wasn't all that so
then I tried to watch TV and it was also
just garbage what is SEAL Team why are
there three seasons of Seal Team right
now with celebrities cheerleading
genocide and stepping in line behind a
fascist America I just can't handle
being presented all these tank riding
gun shooting beauty standards Land of
the Free commenting on the land of the
free things so I turned it off and I did
nothing I did nothing and it was great I
felt like I won't miss celebrities I
won't miss Neil Gaiman and for the
record I'm not saying that there's a
magical ethical World instead over here
of better writers and creatives who
would never harm anyone and it just
happens to be that their video essayists
and streamers who happen to be my
friends because there's no real
structural reason why a novelist or an
actor would be any more dangerous in
fact I know
unambiguously that video essayists and
streamers are capable of sexual assault
see there's what you can turn your anger
towards there's changing the world
that's why we make Neil Gaiman a pariah
because what he did should be
Unthinkable because the pain that it
activates in you is real because we can
and should imagine a better world
because you don't just get to keep being
below beloved Neil no off you're
out you're not a hero Neil you're a
loser and that's what we do with our
anger what we do with our love is
something else that's where I'm trying
to encourage you to read a better book a
more challenging book to turn off the
screen and listen to some music what we
might do with our love left over and
burned by yet another failed cultural
object is to be excited about it be
open-minded and that love around go
to a poetry reading go to a small gig
find a great video essay find a new
novel and know nothing about the Persona
of its author or just turn YouTube off
and do nothing just do nothing I'm here
singing the Praises of video essays and
that's only partly because I want to
shake up our conception of parasocial
Dynamics it's mostly because I'm excited
about new stuff that we could all fall
in love with the art I'm most excited
about lies Beyond The Event Horizon of
the collapse of capitalism right now at
this horrible late stage I'm just not
interested in the stuff that capitalism
produces to show off how dazzling
capitalism is it's empty and it's crap
and it's disgusting I don't like Agatha
all along I don't care for Deadpool and
Wolverine and I'm not going to watch
Captain America four I don't want to
participate in this slop culture like if
I have to be alive at this point in time
I want to at least have some say in the
quality of beautiful things I consume I
I don't have much control over anything
else we need to be able to imagine what
a post celebrity world might look like I
might not have done a very good job with
that or explaining why we need to but we
do we need to imagine what to do with
ourselves as Geeks and queer people and
neurodivergent and obsessive bookish
fandom types because we're wasting our
 time trying to squeeze Beauty
out of Neil Gaiman so that's your
homework imagine a post celebrity
Society find some new stuff somewhere go
tell someone who never hears about their
art that they're amazing and
that their art matters there's a bit of
manic euphoria that sets in at a certain
point after a breakup when you feel like
you've got you back and you have so much
you that you want to be and that you
want to go show off well maybe we should
break up with not just Neil Gaiman but
the majority of contemporary media we
could do that knowing yes there'll be a
sad bit a terribly sad bit but then
afterwards they'll be a bit where we're
really happy and we're excited about all
the new ways we can enjoy ourselves and
that we don't have to keep doing the
same thing I mean we kind of already are
right there's something in the air mass
media is in Decline we shouldn't be
trying to resuscitate it it is likely on
this long road of life that you will
eventually read a novel that is so
wonderful it makes you think who could
you have been to feel this way about
Neil Gaiman and I hope that for you that
moment is a long way off because in the
meantime there's so much exciting weird
cool and perhaps not even yet created
 for you to get your teeth
into and a whole lot of doing nothing
except imagining that you have to do as
well and be monkey space mon Muk Punk D
mark blank Amy tankers Le Paul offer
Nami Nick Julie gock Manuel Frick
infinite slick Timothy Hicks sha
McCormick Nick P zarn sidekick Fred
Brennon samcha and Ben CR Yandel of
Tristan hold stor and I'm not telling
you Dingle worth Chris noon Harry mcti
Smoky mcbang water bigger gay magic 1993
patreon supporter Jesse Rees
disregulated and EA P my Harriet Sao
Hayes lemonade
1947 the malevolent
weasel moon on her wings Mary Mings Ash
Hutchings Alex nevling haming Chen Ming
L queen of spring Violet cyers space
What face Jace almana Mariana Hernandez
Lana Grace Lacy eil Tom fos Aron can
Narin Arian Nar Ro Shai and Luna abadan
Jen for Dory M waight onion Lori Joe
Natalia Romero Chris wman and
toriia patreon limits usernames to 72
characters but it's
that spingus and Mingo gendle versus
everything and Maxin spider Flash and
Sleepwalk pray altero pikaa Lucio Alia
Warner 137 Milo esoteric fictionalism
SBC V gan artism Diana Gibson Rob
Robinson Reed Davidson Alan mcferson
Mo
no
F authentic quantastic guy bombas Joel
Janssen
pie bye that's enough you're all
loved
bye
bye
L you
do for
