thanks everybody for being here and uh
letting me share some some ideas with
you if anybody's interested in the
details of it you can uh track them down
at this website here's all the papers
the software the data sets everything uh
here is where I put some more
speculative kinds of things where I talk
about what I think the papers mean and
so on um so you're welcome to uh welcome
to check them out um what I I'm going to
talk to you about today is kind of a
weird topic um I'm going to talk about
um a little bit about Ai and the right
way to understand AI through the lens of
collective intelligence in other words
uh we're going to take a kind of a deep
dive into where Minds come come from so
that we can actually talk about this
this notion of whether artificial Minds
uh have the same status as biologically
evolved ones and so on and so we're
going to we're going to look at those
kind of questions so the the main points
of today what I uh what I'd like to do
is uh is this um we're going to uh look
under the hood of biology a little bit
to uh kind of uh clear out some uh view
viewpoints and some terminology that's
persisted with us for for for centuries
basically but I think are going to have
to change in this idea of uh discrete
natural kinds in biology so we'll we'll
we'll talk about that um we'll talk
about uh diverse intelligence in
particular collective intelligence so
very kind of um unconventional minds and
unconventional cognitive systems and I'm
going to argue that all the things that
people argue about today in terms of
artificial intelligence are basically a
a kind of an off-ramp to a much deeper
more difficult discussion about the
really deep philosophical questions
about what we are about freedom of
embodiment and things like that uh it's
actually much more um it's a much more
complicated set of questions than uh
than just to focus on kind of today's
today's AIS and so we'll talk a little
bit at the end about the ethics and the
future of humanity and things like that
so uh let's let's start with uh with
this this is a well-known uh painting
it's called Adam names the animals in
the Garden of Eden and uh so so here he
is so this is the old uh judeo-christian
story where where animals um are showing
up and Adam gets to name them now
something important about that story is
that actually it was on Adam to name the
animals God couldn't do it the Angels
couldn't do it Adam was the one that had
to name them I think that's a very
interesting part of that story and I
think for us it has two lessons one
that we're going to have to break uh I
think as the future moves on and the
other one that's actually very deep and
that we're going to have to dive into
the the part that has to that has to be
given up is this notion that all of
these species are uh discreet uh their
natural kinds everybody knows what each
of each of these are they're separate
from the others in fact Adam is also a
discret entity and and completely
different from all of the others and and
this this idea that you can sort of
number and categorize very very specific
types of beings and and and that's and
that's what they're you can sort of
count count them uh you know count the
the animals in your environment um as
you'll see in a minute I think that that
that idea has to go uh but but what's
deep is this this notion that Adam
because he is the one that has to live
with him uh he is the one that has to
give them names now in these old
traditions giving something a name was
was was very deep and spiritual it meant
that you've discovered their true nature
you know knowing the name of something
means you know their their true nature
and as I'm going to show you at the end
of talk uh because of synthetic biology
and bioengineering and and some other
disciplines we are going to have to name
or discover the true nature of all kinds
of unusual creatures that you guys will
all be living in with in your lifetime
so so so let's uh let's let's start
there here's the part that that has to
break so here here's a normal uh modern
uh human um lots of philosophy talks
about the human mind you know does this
and that and humans have
responsibilities and rights and and all
the interesting things but we know that
now because of because of evolution uh
and also because of Developmental
biology that this is not a sharp
category in other words if you just
track backwards in time you uh the these
modern humans are at the uh at a at a
particular point in the evolution of a
lineage that goes all the way back to
single cell organisms so if you have
something to say about humans you might
ask yourself well what about the humans
of a couple hundred thousand years ago
what about the hominids of a couple
million years ago
uh what about them and uh and and just
understand that all these changes are
are slow and gradual and the same thing
about development whatever you think is
true of humans with their true uh hopes
and dreams and and cognitive um
responsibilities and so on at one point
uh they were a single cell and this
process is again very slow and gradual
and so we know now that there's this
Continuum right it's not it's not just a
discret human but actually a whole
Continuum of forms that you might have
to decide what is the status of these
other forms not only that but there's
this other Continuum going uh horizontal
here in my diagram where we know that
humans are uh going to be modified and
uh improved so for various Health
applications but also for augmentation
Technologies uh there's no particular
reason why anybody's going to want to be
stuck in the body that random vagaries
of evolution left them with so you know
I don't think anybody really thinks that
a mature modern Humanity you know 100
years from now is going to be
susceptible to the same dumb diseases
you lower back pain as stigmatism
viruses you know presumably all that is
going to get fixed there's no there's
nothing magic about where where
Evolution happened to have dropped us
and so uh there are technological
modifications there are biological
modifications that will be made uh and
and that's because at every level of
organization in our bodies from
subcellular materials all the way up you
can introduce different kinds of Novel
engineered components and so all of this
is now possible and again if you have
thoughts about what a human is versus
what a machine is you have to ask
yourself how are you're going to
distinguish this uh when you are
confronted with all sorts of beings
along this
Continuum uh you you you know you're
going to need to find ways to relate to
them and so one of the things that I've
been working on for some years now is a
framework to be able to recognize to
create and to ethically relate to truly
diverse intelligences uh that we can
have relationships with regardless of
their composition meaning what they're
made of or their origin story were they
evolved did they come out of a factory
or or some combination of those and that
means that we need to think about all of
these things so familiar kinds of
creatures like like primates and birds
and maybe an octopus and so on um but
also all kinds of weird organisms like
Colonial organism swarms synthetic
engineered new life forms artificial
intelligences whether robotic meaning
embodied or pure software Ai and maybe
even someday aliens right there's
probably some sort of exobiological uh
life form out there somewhere that at
some point will confront now uh we need
to be able to think about all of these
in the same way regardless of where they
came from or what they're made of now
I'm not the first person to try for this
so so here's uh Rosen blue ther and
Bigalow in 1943 trying for this scale
all the way from passive matter so you
know rocks and sand and things like that
all the way up to different kinds of
active matter and then various kinds of
computational matter and uh agential
materials which is what I'm going to be
talking about today all the way up to
some sort of human metacognition you
know complex complex human kinds of
minds and and and Beyond and the goal of
this kind of framework is not it's not a
philosophy the goal is to first of all
move experimental work forward so part
of my framework is is a um very strong
insistance that when you look at
something and you say that's not real
cognition or that is you know that that
that is real you know this thing really
does have intelligence uh the goal of
this is not just to have philosophical
feelings about it it's to have a a
toolkit for uh interacting with these
systems that may that is beneficial that
gives us new new brings new discoveries
new capabilities biom medicine
engineering and so on and and uh also
puts ethics on a better footing because
these old categories that we've had for
a really long time uh for how we deal
with other beings uh are really not
going to be of use anymore and and the
details are all here if you want to
follow that so so a basic a basic fact
from developmental biology is that uh we
we all make this this amazing journey
from what people call just physics I
really don't like that phrase but people
use it so just physics to a complex mind
so each of us started life here as a
single cell a little blob of of of
chemicals and slowly and gradually uh it
became something like this or even
something like this so you know a
complex metacognitive being who's going
to say things about not being a machine
and and so on this process is gradual
you need to understand developmental
biology gives us no magic bright line at
which point boom you know you weree just
chemistry and physics but Bang there
there that this is where the Mind
appears there isn't anything like that
it's it's a very slow and gradual
process and so what that means is that
scientists and philosophers need to uh
develop a story of scaling we need to
understand how the properties of this
thing which follows the laws of
chemistry and physics ends up being
something that's also describable by the
laws of psychology and and and um
psychoanalysis and things like that uh
the reason that that this is this is
possible is because we are all made of
an agential material unlike Legos and
wood and metal and things like that that
basically just stay where you put them
uh we are made of of a material with
agendas and so this is the kind of thing
we're made of this is a single cell okay
uh this is this happens to be a free
living organism called the lacr Maria uh
you can see that it's extremely
competent in its local unicellular goals
so there's no brain there's no nervous
system there are no stem cells but this
thing is doing every everything it needs
to maintain its physiological its U
metabolic and behavioral
goals so so the first kind of a shocking
thing to some people uh that that you
need to realize is that we are We Are
All Made of This interesting kind of uh
stuff that has its own agendas uh I
don't have time to tell you about it
today but the reality is these things
ourselves can learn they can um actually
have pretty complex problem solving
capacities in different kinds of
environments and so we are uh a very
interesting construction of a of a very
unusual type of material with which we
are just now starting to learn how to
engineer but at least uh you might think
uh at least we are a true unified
intelligence right so so maybe you can
call an ant colony some kind of
collective intelligence but but we have
a we have a brain where you know we we
feel like a single unified being words
so at least we are a true unified
intelligence and in fact um uh Renee
dekart uh really liked the pineal gland
because there's only one of them in the
brain and he thought that that's where
uh the the The Human Experience was was
centralized because you know there's no
multiple uh multiple aspects of it
there's just one in the brain but if he
had had access to a microscope he would
have discovered that inside this pineal
gland is all this stuff it's a bunch of
cells and inside of each of those cells
is all this stuff okay uh there isn't
one of anything in the brain and all of
us our Collective intelligences We Are
All Made of parts that do things and the
and the real trick here again is that
scaling story is to tell uh a convincing
um to give a convincing account of how
it is that all these parts give rise to
something that is a centralized uh that
that has the feeling of being a
centralized unified self and so this is
this is what what my group works on uh
now it's interesting that Alan toring
who is basically the the father of
modern computer science um he uh was was
very interested in in machine
intelligence and in uh computation and
uh and and programmability things like
this but what and so so everybody knows
knows that part but one weird thing is
that he also published this paper called
the chemical basis of morphogenesis
which was basically an attempt to
understand how the chemicals of an
embryo organize into order from the from
their initial disorder now you might
wonder why would a guy who's interested
in computation and intelligence and uh
and and and machine minds and things
like that why why would he be studying
uh the chemicals in an embryo and I
think that although he didn't write
about it I think that um Turing saw a
very profound truth which is that the
process by which bodies come to be in
this physical Universe right by which
your body was self-organized from a
bunch of chemicals in the oite is uh
very closely related in a profound way
to the question of where Minds come from
right so the origin of the self assembly
of your mind and of your body are very
related stories even though even though
uh they're treated by completely
different uh communities so so so uh
Neuroscience uh and and the you know and
the behavioral sciences versus
developmental biology molecular biology
cell biology typically those those folks
do not think they're studying the same
thing and and I think they're studying
exactly the same thing just in different
um different components so so to to to
uh look a little further into where
where we come from so this is a a uh an
embryonic blastoderm so that's basically
a flat um sheet of cells so in the in
the beginning what will happen is that
the egg will get fertilized it will
divide and then eventually uh flatten
out and give and give rise to at least
in amniotes like us it will give rise to
a flat sheet of cells so you can think
about like a little a little disc or uh
something like that that's just a couple
cell layers thick and so so here's your
disc and so let's let's just imagine
there's about 50,000 cells at this point
in this disc and we look at it and we
say ah there's an embryo maybe a human
embryo or a mouse embryo or something
actually a mice have a different
structure than this are kind of weird
but let's say rabbit so human or rabbit
or or some other um amniotes uh you look
at that you say there's one embryo but
there's 50,000 cells what are you
actually counting when you say there's
one embryo well what you're counting is
uh you're you're really counting
alignment you're counting the fact that
all of those cells are committed to the
same story of what they're going to do
in uh in in anatomical space they're all
going to collaborate to build a very
particular kind of of embryo they are
all connected together and they are all
going to uh cooperate to do one specific
thing which is to build that that's what
make this an
what makes this an embryo is that all of
these cells are committed to the same
plan um that doesn't have to be the case
and so so this is some work that uh that
was first done in the 40s I did it again
when I was a grat student um in the 96
or so uh when you take a duck embryo and
you uh use a little needle to scratch
some uh some um some scratches into it
like that what you'll see is these these
little Islands here for the next few
hours before they rejoin again each of
these islands does doesn't realize the
other one is there so what they do is
they self-organize a new embryo each one
of them thinks they're the only one so
they make an embryo and when they do
heal up you end up with this kind of uh
conjoin twin or triplet um you end up
with a a few a few individual animals
coming out of the same uh the same
blader so so the question of how many
beings how many selves are actually in
an embryo is tricky it's not fixed by
the genetics it's anywhere from zero to
probably half a dozen or more depending
on what happens the the selves arise in
this medium this the cellular
blastoderm uh in real time as a as a
process of physiology they are not it's
not hardcoded uh and and and and what
that means is that a self has to put
itself together it has to uh figure out
a border between itself in the outside
world so so here's you know three
embryonic Fields sitting there each of
these cells has to decide am I part of
this one or am I part of that one or or
who am I part of um and this kind of
thing this medium that can fragment or
or come together to form some number of
coherent individuals is not just for
development this happens in the brain as
well so we have uh split brain patients
that have a um a cut between their their
two hemispheres that actually end up
having uh you you then find out that
they have actually in in an important
sense there are two individuals in there
that have different opinions and so on
you can have lots of dissociative
identity disorders and and various other
phenomena that make it clear that it's
it's not so simple as the brain has one
um one cognitive owner and the body has
um you know one is is is one embryo it's
actually not not that simple and you you
you learn about this when you think
about something like this so so here's a
rat you train the rat to press the lever
and get a delicious reward but the thing
is that uh there are cells in this rat
that interact with the lever there are
cells in this gut that get the sugar but
there is no single cell that has both
experiences so who is it that owns this
in this um associative memory the that
the pellet is associated with pressing
the lever who owns that well the owner
of that memory is not any individual
cell it's the entire rat it has to be
because no cell has that experience and
uh there's a there's a there's a kind of
cognitive glue that operates in this rat
which we know as as the nervous system
which allows the rat to know things the
individual cells don't know such as that
these two facts are um are connected so
that cognitive glue is a is a very
interesting thing and we're going to
study that uh more of that momentarily
um but um but I want to be clear that uh
these animals you typically you
typically hear about are uh not the only
game in town as far as some some very
interesting aspects of what the biology
is trying to tell you I'm going to show
you a couple of these examples just to
sort of uh uh expand our Horizons about
what what we need to understand so so
here's a caterpillar this caterpillar
lives in a two-dimensional world it's a
softbed creature it has a controller
specific brain that's very well suited
for driving this kind of soft body
around um but it needs to turn into this
this is a flying uh kind of creature
with with hard elements and uh uh the
brain basically in during this
metamorphosis process when the
caterpillar turns into the butterfly
what happens is that U the brain is
pretty much dissolved so so most of the
connections are broken most of the cells
are killed off huge refactoring
remodeling new cells new brain is built
quite different uh and there's your
butterfly but so so that already is is
is kind of amazing and you can imagine
you know the sort of um philosophical
question of uh what's what's it like
never mind what's it like to be a
caterpillar what's it like to be a
caterpillar changing into butterfly into
a butterfly in real time not just on an
evolutionary time scale but in your
lifetime drastically you know never mind
puberty this is you know this is this is
a major change um so that's that's the
first thing but the second thing is that
it turns out that uh memories persist
through this process so a caterpillar
that learns something uh will still
remember it as a butterfly so that's
that's amazing how how do memories
persist when the brain is basically
getting radically refactored but it's
even more than that because uh let's say
um what what they did was to train
caterpillars to uh look for for leaves
at a particular color disc um that kind
of information is completely useless to
the butterfly because first of all the
butterfly doesn't crawl it flies and
also it doesn't eat leaves so this
process has to be uh not just the
storage of memory it has to actively
remap from uh from from what's important
to the caterpillar to what's important
to the butterfly it has to generalize
from the concept of of leaves to the
concept of food and from specific
crawling motions that you might think is
what this simple animal is remembering
to something much more complex a
navigational process that will actually
be implemented by flying here by by by
completely different muscles and and a
different
architecture so so this so This radical
process of of change and you might you
might think about what happens to the
individual identity of this organism and
uh you know if if what what it would be
like if the if the caterpillar knew what
was coming and said well you're going to
change radically but but don't worry
you'll still have some of your memories
it's just your priorities will be
different you love leaves now but you're
not going to care about leaves at all
later and you'll want this weird nectar
um you know what what what is that like
and and we'll come back to this at the
end of the talk uh how would you
convince a creature like this that this
is a perfectly fine thing for them to go
through and are they still here is that
is this organism actually still here by
the time you get to this stage and and
because because and the reason this is
important for us is because uh humanity
is going to change um in a in a way
that's that's somewhat reminiscent of
this so that's so that's one kind of
example another example are these These
are amazing creatures called PL areia uh
they're flat worms and uh when you train
them to expect food on these little
bumpy circles they uh will remember and
if you cut off their heads with their
brain the tail will sit there doing
nothing eventually the tail will regrow
a brand new head so they regenerate
every every piece will regenerate and
eventually when they regenerate you find
that they still remember the original
information um so the memory not only
does this tell you that the memory can
be stored outside the brain but also
that it can be imprinted onto a new
brain as the brain develops so the
movement of memories through tissues so
all of this is is is possible because we
have this amazing multiscale competency
architecture at every uh scale in your
body from from the molecular networks uh
to the um organs and tissues and and
even groups these different layers are
not just uh biological scales but but
actually they're they're they have the
ability to solve problems in other words
they have competencies different spaces
in the space of possible Gene
expressions and physiological States and
anatomical um layouts all of these
things have have the ability to solve
problems um I don't have time to show
you a whole bunch of um examples today
but but there are some amazing examples
of of these things solving various
problems now the thing to keep in mind
is that we humans are pretty terrible at
detecting uh intelligence I mean we do
okay with middles sized objects moving
at medium speeds in three-dimensional
space you know crows and birds and and
and and maybe a dolphin or something
like that you know we can we can kind of
um uh we can kind of recognize those as
intelligence but there are other spaces
in which uh complex creatures navigate
and uh and uh spend effort and try to
achieve goals and and and so on uh there
are gene expression spaces and
physiological spaces I want to focus
today on what's known as anatomical
morphos space it's just basically the
the a high a multi-dimensional space of
all the different shapes that any
structure can have so in this particular
case here's a here's a a planarian head
and it can have different shapes and
these different shapes correspond to the
different settings of these two control
knobs and so you have this this two
dimensional space that shows you where
all the different planaria shapes are
but this I mean the actuality is for for
for complex organisms very high
dimensional space so what I want to look
at is uh I've told you that we're all
made of of of cells that these cells
underly the emergence or the self
assembly of of of a of a unified self
both of
um cognitively and uh and and
morphologically and I want to look at
how that works so so here we are we
start start Life as a collection of
embryonic cells this is a cross-section
through a human torso so just imagine
um where does this incredible order come
from the structure everything is in the
right place the right uh shape the right
size Rel you know next to the right
thing where does this order come from
and at that point even I mean I've given
a version of this talk to middle
schoolers and even 9year olds will
immediately say well it's in the genome
we know where it is it's in the it's in
the human genome but of course we can
read genomes now and we know that that
isn't what the genome specifies at all
the genome talks about proteins the
genome specifies the the tiny molecular
Hardware that every cell gets to have
this isn't directly in the genome any
more than the structure of a termite
Nest or the shape of a spiderweb is in
the Genome of those species all of this
is the outcome of physiology and
behavior it's the outcome of these cells
doing their thing with the hardware that
they've been given by their genetics so
if the DNA specifies uh the hardware how
do these cells actually know what to
build how do they know when to stop if
we want to convince them to repair
something that's been damaged how do we
communicate that to them and as
Engineers we can ask actually what else
is possible what else could we convince
them to build same exact Hardware but
what what what what more could they
build so um I want to give you a couple
of examples of uh the amazing nature of
this process because see when you when
you look at this you might think that
well the biggest thing this thing has
going for it is reliability that
basically it happens the same every
single time and that's true reliability
is is is amazing here but I want to show
you that it's actually much more than
that um what you're looking at here is
the cross-section of a little tubule
leading to the kidneys of a of a
Salander
and uh normally there's about 8 to 10 of
these that eight to 10 of these cells
that work together and they form this
little this little structure with a
space in the middle you can do this
weird trick where you uh cause multiple
copies of the of the genetic material to
build up in the very early embryo and so
when that happens you still get a normal
animal and it's normal size but the
cells are bigger and when you when you
take a cross-section you find out that
well the cells are bigger and so now
fewer of them created the same kind of
lumen so so so let's let's uh see where
we are so far uh multiple copies of your
chromosome uh no problem uh weird cell
size no problem because you'll scale it
to the number of cells and most of all
if you make truly gigantic cells and you
do these these are I think 5n or 6n
polyploid NES when you do this one
single cell bends around itself to give
you the exact same kind of structure now
that's remarkable because this is a
different molecular mechanism this is
cellto cell communication this is some
sort of cytoskeletal bending and so what
this means is that in the service of a
particular high level anatomical
structure these uh these cells can call
on different molecular mechanisms to
solve their problem okay so so they're
using different Tools in their toolkit
to get to where they're going that is a
very good definition of intelligence to
reuse the affordances you have in the
service of a goal when things change so
when you're a salamander coming into the
world you don't know how many copies of
your genetic material you're going to
have you don't know uh how many cells
you're going to have or what the cell
what the size of the cells are going to
be you still need to be able to get the
job done so this is not a matter of just
being reliable with the uh with fixed
Parts this is the idea that what
evolution is making is problemsolving
Agents it's making a system that is uh
ready for many many unexpected things
and not just environment not just when
somebody bites your leg off in the
salamander regenerates it no this is
unreliability of your own Parts this is
not even being sure of What You're Made
Of You really can't depend on much and
that's that's an amazing thing and it's
quite different than what you normally
get in a biology curriculum where they
tell you that your genome the purpose of
your of your genome is to is to uh carry
information from a long time away with
maximal Fidelity and to minimize uh
minimize errors and and and every cell
is going to do whatever the genome says
and in the end you get this emergent
thing actually that's that's not at all
what's what's what's happening here um
here's another here's another example we
discovered this a few years ago uh these
tpes um need to become frogs and in
order for this tple uh face to make a
frog face all the organs have to move so
the eyes have to move the Jaws have to
move and so on uh and they normally do
this quite reliably but it was thought
to be a hardwired process you know
people thought that well every organ
just moves in the right direction this a
fixed amount and that's it um what we
did was we created these so-called
Picasso frogs because we wanted to test
how how much intelligence is actually in
that process how much what kind of
problems can it solve so we scrambled
everything um you can see here the eyes
on the top of the head the mouth is off
to the side everything is just a
complete mess and these guys still
become normal frogs because all of these
organs will move now in novel paths
paths that these guys don't do uh until
they get to a correct frog face and then
they stop and so what evolution actually
has given you is not a hardwired uh set
of uh set of instructions but a system
for error minimization okay for a way of
wherever you happen to start out do
whatever you have to do to end up in
this particular location this is this
again this kind of gold direct and this
is something else that um you're not
going to see in your in your
developmental biology textbook uh this
is this is not emergence and this is not
um simply an increase of complexity this
is problem solving and that raises an
obvious question uh about how does it
know what the correct face looks like
where is the memory for that um that
that set point of that homeostatic
process um I want to show you a couple
of other things related to the
plasticity of this so just so you get
you understand how how how much uh Play
There is between the fixed Hardware of
your genetics and the actual outcomes
first of all this here uh you might
think this is Photoshop or something I
didn't believe it the first time I saw
it but this this fly is running a strip
down uh ant morphogenetic program on its
wings it's running a virtual ant on its
on its wings and and the idea is that it
it Wiggles uh it Wiggles its um its
wings to simulate these ants scurrying
about and that keeps the um Predators
away because they don't want to deal
with with ants and um this is uh this is
this is amazing of course and it's and
it's striking that that it has this
pattern but it's no more striking than
the than the much more uh intricate
pattern of the actual fly I mean all of
these are specific uh uh morphogenetic
patterns whether 2D or 3D carried out on
this uh on this kind of hardware and you
might think that um the outcomes are
pretty fixed I mean here's here's an
acorn and you know that all the time
what these acorns give rise to is these
oak leaves and you might think that you
know what the oak genome um actually
does it um it encodes this particular
shape but Along Comes A bioengineer and
this is a non-human bioengineer this is
a little wasp and what these wasps do is
they provide some signals that prompt uh
uh the the rest of the um the rest of
the tissue to build something like this
okay they're they're hacking the
morphogenetic competencies of this Leaf
they're not changing the genome uh and
uh what they're doing is providing some
instructions that cause the leaf cells
to adopt a different uh set point in
anatomical space now would you ever have
any idea looking at these flat green
leaves uh and how reliable they are
would you have any idea that they're
capable of building something like this
I mean we have no idea so that just
reminds us that this whole notion of um
developmental constraint is really
probably a constraint in our thinking
it's not a constraint in the biology uh
the option space for morphogenesis is
enormous and uh what we need to do is to
discover the the prompts the the
language that we can use to get them to
build other things and it clearly
doesn't require modifying the hardware
the genetics of this of this thing are
still are still completely intact so uh
now comes kind of the the meat of the
talk which is that um if morphogenesis
is the behavior of a collective
intelligence operating in anatomical
space that's what I've been um getting
at for you know for for for the last few
slides is the idea that that the the the
the act of creating complex anatomical
shapes is really Behavior it's behavior
in a in a an anatomical space of
possibilities and it's done by a
collective intelligence uh we're just
like us we're all Collective
intelligences but that collective
intelligence thinks about shape as
opposed to moving around in 3D space so
now we need to ask how do we communicate
with that intelligence I mean the WASP
did it through through uh you know
millions of years of evolution we would
like to do it faster um and where does
it store its memories these are some
things that we've been um we've been
looking at well we know that one way to
store memories and communicate with a
collective intelligence is is through
the nervous system now the nervous
system does it via VIA computations in
an electrical Network um and you can
actually try to decode those this is the
um the work of people doing a neural
decoding to try to read the electrical
activity of the brain and to know what
thoughts and preferences and memories
and so on uh the system has well it
turns out that uh this this system this
this ability to
store memories in an electrical network
to use an electrical Network to
integrate information across many many
many cells both in space and in time is
something that evolution discovered a
really long time ago it is way older
than nerve and muscle um bacterial
biofilms were probably the first to do
this with so so long predating
multicellularity uh and what we've what
we've done is to develop some of the
first tools to read and write the mind
of the collective intelligence of your
body so so by taking a lot of the
concepts from neuroscientists and really
uh emphasizing this idea that
Neuroscience isn't about neurons at all
Neuroscience is really about scaling of
information from Tiny competent subunits
into much larger coherent selves that
have higher intelligence in other spaces
that's really what what this is about
and and and that doesn't just work in
the brain that works in your entire body
so the first thing I want to show you is
uh some of the techniques uh that that
can be used uh one thing we have is is
this uh this thing we develop called
voltage sensitive fluorescent die
Imaging and that means means that
without having to poke the cells with
electrodes you can get in real time this
is a time-lapse of a frog embryo this is
a frog putting its face together you can
get a map of all the electrical States
and thus you can learn you can try to
learn to decode what the system is
trying to build what what are the uh the
computations that they're doing this
this we call this the electric face this
is a a bioelectric um map of of of the
uh of the face ectoderm long before any
of these organs actually appear you can
see that cells already know here's where
we're going to place the eye uh this eye
the left eye actually comes in a little
bit later um here's where the mouth is
going to go here the plod it this this
is you you are literally seeing the way
you would with a brain scan you are
literally seeing the uh content of the
collective intelligence of morphogenesis
um in in the body of these of these
animals um so this these are normal
patterns in fact these are required for
normal development as I'll show you
momentarily but but here's a
pathological pattern this is induced by
injecting a human enogen into these uh
into these embryos which eventually will
make a tumor but these tumors have an
aberant bi electrical profile because
what happens the first thing that
happens with this with this anene is
that it causes an electrical
disconnection uh from cells from their
um from their environment and when cells
disconnect they immediately lose the
ability to remember these large uh
grandio goals that they were working on
so making you know complex organs and
fixing defects and so on uh they're just
IM now you know that boundary between
self and world has now shrunk that
cognitive lyone where before the goal
was the size of a of an organ or or
maybe the whole organism now it's down
to the size of a single cell and to them
the rest of the body is just environment
now okay so this is metastas this is
where you get metastasis and and and
progression because as far as they're
concerned they're just amibas living
living in a in a in an environment and
they go where they want and they
reproduce as much as they want and so so
once you understand that you can you can
try for really interesting uh cancer
Therapeutics which is what we're doing
in our lab um don't try to kill the
cells with toxic chemotherapy what if we
reinl their sense of self what if we
reconnect them forcibly reconnect them
to the large electrical Network that can
remember what a proper organ is and so
when you do that so so this is this is
the same animal here's the the ENA
protein has this red fluoresence on it
you can see it's it's blazingly strongly
expressed in fact it's all over the
place but there's no tumor and there's
no tumor because we co-injected an ion
channel that modulates uh it it's it's
an RNA that modulates the electrical
property of the cell to force them to
remain in connection despite what the
enene is saying and after that it
doesn't matter that they that they have
this genetic defect uh they behave
appropriately and they build nice organs
and so on so so that so that's a story
at the level of single cells how you how
you scale uh individual cells into a
kind of a larger um larger uh set of set
of goals but I want to show you uh
something something even even uh kind of
larger scale than that which is we we
saw in that electric face there's a
little um there's a little uh eye spot
which tells the the animal that that's
where the eye is going to go so you can
ask a simple question what happens if
you re if you if you reproduce that bi
electric pattern somewhere else can you
tell this this group of cells to build
an eye somewhere else and it turns out
you can here it is we injected some
potassium ion Channel RNA into a
location that normally would make a gut
so here's this this is a tatp here's the
mouth here's the eye here's the gut um
and and if you tell these cells using an
appropriate voltage signal that hey you
should be making an eye boom that's what
they do and these eyes have the normal
lens Reda optic Nerf all the same stuff
and and you you might see in your
developmental biology textbook that only
uh cells in the anterior Nector here are
competent to make I so that isn't true
that's only true if you try to prompt
them with the so-called Master eye so if
you put in pack six the master hene yes
that's true only these cells can do it
but again that limitation of competence
isn't in the embryo that that's on us
that's because we didn't know the
community didn't know the right way to
talk to these cells once you understand
the bi electri code actually turns out
that almost any region in this embryo is
competent to make ey and if you should
happen to only inject a few cells so
here this is a a lens sitting out in the
tail of a tadpole somewhere if you only
inject a few cells these these blue
cells are the ones we injected then they
they know there's not enough of them to
make a good eye so what do they do they
recruit a bunch of their neighbors to
work with them to make an ey just like
ants and termites will recruit their
buddies to solve a problem so so now you
can see that uh that what we're doing is
providing signals we didn't tell these
cells how to build an eye we didn't say
anything about the stem cells or the
gene expression we have no idea how to
build an eye what we did find was a
message that we can transmit through
this bi electrical interface that says
build an eye here and once you get the
cells Buy in so that they are convinced
that that in fact is what they should be
building after that you don't need to do
anything they will they will do what
they do best they'll they'll uh build to
a morphogenetic spec um we we know this
uh I want to show you uh there's just a
couple things left here uh I want to
show you another kind of pattern memory
in these plaria so here's a here's a a
normal flat worm these guys you can cut
them into pieces and they will always uh
regenerate correctly so so every piece
normally makes a a nice one-headed worm
100% of the time but there's a
bioelectric pattern there that we were
able to read out and then we were able
to modify it and when you modif modify
that pattern you make two-headed worms
and when you make these two-headed worms
uh what happens is that you have
Rewritten the memory of what a correct
worm is supposed to look like so that
when these fragments when these middle
fragments go to regenerate they consult
the pattern to say what what should a
normal Worm look like they see that it
says two heads and they go ahead and
they build two heads these two-headed
worms now in plain water meaning no more
manipulation of any kind um are now
forever two-headed if you keep cutting
them they will just continue to
regenerate as two-headed we have
permanently changed the target
morphology the pattern to which they
regenerate but we never touch the DNA
there's nothing wrong with the genetics
here if we were to throw these guys into
the Charles River 100 years later some
scientists would come along they scoop
up some single-headed worms and some
double-headed worms that say oh cool a
speciation event let's sequence the
genome and see what uh see see what made
the difference there's nothing wrong
with their genome that's not where the
information is and so that's really
important that to understand that uh
much as we've been Lear learning from
computer science for you know a really
long time now uh the hardware if it's
good Hardware does not fully uh
constrain what the software is able to
do and so this is a kind of pattern
memory it's long-term stable um it's
rewritable because we can turn these
guys back to onee headed here you can
see what uh you can see what what these
two-headed guys are doing when they U
when they're hanging out and so the so
the question of how many heads should a
planarian have is not uh it's not
written in the DNA what is written in
the DNA is the construction of a uh some
biological material that by default will
develop a pattern memory that says one
head so that's what it does by default
very reliably but you can change it you
can rewrite it and the fact that
biological tissue is reprogrammable in
this way is hugely important for biom
medicine and for other things and so I
hope you're you're starting to to to to
see that that all the emphasis on uh on
on genetics and and on the genome and
all that that's it it it's all very
important because you have to understand
your Hardware but it's just the
beginning it's the same the the you know
the reason that on your laptop if you
want to switch from Photoshop to
Microsoft Word you don't get out your
soldering iron and start start rewiring
right because it's reprogrammable uh NE
neither does biology biology uh is is
using a an incredibly um reprogrammable
medium that solves problems and can be
communicated with using various
interfaces for example this
bioelectrical interface so uh we've
talked about the reliability of
development and what things do by
default we've talked out various ways to
hack communicate with uh and reprogram
the um the collective intelligence of
cells so they can build other variance
on the form but where do these goals
actually come from so so you know when
when we called up a second head here the
second head looks just like the first
head you know where are these patterns
really if it's not in the DNA uh what
what what what what's the space of
possible patterns what else what else
can we do and by the way I didn't show
you but we can actually turn this into
uh turn these worms into uh heads of
other species about 100 150 million
years distance so you know triangular
worms become round become flat you can
you can throw but you can make the
hardware go to other regions of that
space that normally belong to other
species but um but okay those are all
evolutionarily uh defined forms uh is is
that is that it is that where the forms
come from they're basically you know
selected for and then uh there's there's
a a finite set of forms that can be that
can be uh implemented by the hardware
well we decided to to to look at this in
a synthetic kind of bioengineering way
and um what we did was we took some
cells some skin cells from from frog
embryos and we let them kind of reboot
their multicellularity we we we took
them aside we liberated them from their
normal uh interactions with other cells
and what they did they could have done
many things they could have died they
could have uh crawled away from each
other they could have flat made a flat
monolayer like like cell culture what
they did instead is they merged into
something we then named xenobots zenbot
because zenopus la is the name of the
frog and we think this is a biorobotics
platform so they start to swim uh they
have little cilia little hairs that are
normally used to distribute mucus down
the side of the Frog but here they row
so these guys are rowing to the left
these cells are rowing to the right and
as a result this thing moves forward
they can go in circles like this they
can kind of Patrol back and forth like
that they have various Collective
behaviors these two are sort of dancing
around this one's going on some sort of
long journey these ones are doing
nothing uh they have some very rich
calcium signaling you can see that here
which is is usually a sign of some uh
information processing that's going on
in these in these cells um here's one
that uh is navigating this may so it's
going to take this corner without
bumping into the opposite wall so so
there it is it bums and then here
spontaneously for some reason that we
don't know it it turns around goes back
where it came from it has spontaneous
Behavior again remember this is just
skin this is uh this is these these are
just EP epithelial
cells and uh the they have they have
lots of interesting uh all lots of
interesting behaviors that that we can
talk about um but one of the most
amazing things they do is called
kinematic replication so just imagine
we've we've made it completely
impossible for these things to reproduce
the normal froggy fashion they don't
have any of the reproductive organs they
don't have any of that but uh in this
novel configuration they figured out a
way to make copies of themselves and
here's how they do it if you provide
them with loose skin cells this loose
material what they do is they run around
and they com and they sort of collect
those loose skin cells into little balls
like this and because what they're
working with is an agential material
meaning these are not passive pellets
these are cells for the same reason that
we were able to make xenobots they make
the second generation of xenobots and
these little balls that they make mature
and guess what they do they run around
and make the next generation of Cabots
and so on and this is kinematic
replication um it's kind of Von neyman's
dream of a robot that went around and
made copies of itself from materials it
finds in the en environment I mean just
think this uh there's never been any
xenobots there's never been any
selection to be a good zenbot this is
not in the lineage of uh of frogs
um where does this come from their shape
their behaviors the kinematic
self-replication all the other things
they can do where where does that come
from uh it's very hard to say that that
that this was the the the subject of
selection so again I come back to uh
this this theme that while the hardware
was absolutely selected for I don't
think it was selected to make frogs I
don't think that what evolution does is
create solutions for specific problems
or things that are fit in a specific
environment I think that what evolution
does is make creative problemsolving
agents that they'll do the same thing
under default conditions but once uh you
start making changes and challenging
them they often rise to the occasion and
uh solve problems in in very novel ways
that are reflect dynamics that that have
they've not seen before and let and uh
let you think this is some uh some some
trick of um you know unique to frogs or
embryos I mean when we first published
all this stuff some people said well uh
frogs amphibians are pretty plastic and
embryos are especially plastic so maybe
this is some kind of uh specific thing
in in in frog embryology so um the last
thing I want to show you is this
um so uh here's here's this little guy
running around and I will ask you uh
what this is and you might think that
this is something I got off the bottom
of a pond somewhere right some sort of
primitive organism and then I can tell
you that well we've sequenced its genome
and you'll say oh what's the what's the
genome what does it look like and they
say well this is 100% Homo sapiens these
are adult human cells there's no
embryonics here um this is this is adult
uh tracheal cells taken from uh human
donors most of them elderly in their 70s
and 80s and uh when given the chance
they reboot themselves and uh have a new
life as these things we call them anthr
robots for obvious reasons uh and they
have all kinds of Novel uh shapes and
behaviors um I I I call this uh kind of
a technology for personalized agential
interventions because if you ask what
can these things do well one thing they
can do is this if you if you take human
neurons and plate them on a dish and
then put a big scratch through them uh
these anthr robots can settle down we
call this a superbot because there's
know probably 10 of them here um they'll
settle down and within a few days you
lift them up and you see that what they
did was they took the two sides of the
of the of the wound and they knitted the
nerves together okay so they have the
ability to to repair these these kind of
neural wounds I mean who would have
thought that your tracheal cells which
normally sit quietly in your Airway uh
for you know decades that that given the
opportunity taken out of the body they
would actually reassemble themselves um
into into a new kind of creature with
these new capacities and so this is I
think hugely important for the future
medicine because uh just imagine uh once
you once we understand what kind of
healing effects these guys can have they
can be injected into your body they do
not require immune suppression because
they're made of your own cells so
personalized medicine in that way um
they share with your body all the priors
about what health is what disease is
inflammation cancer you don't have to uh
uh build all those detectors from
scratch like you would with some sort of
uh engineered nanobot because these are
your own cells they already uh
understand all those things
and so uh again you see you start to see
this plasticity you know again what what
you just saw is not some some embryonic
developmental stage that they're
recovering uh back to back in their
history there there is no such stage
this is this is completely novel uh set
of behaviors and so now U I'm going to
finish up here with um kind of some some
big picture uh big picture thinking here
what I've been telling you about all of
these stories and all of their kind of
biomedical implications for cancer and
birth defects and regenerative medicine
uh a bigger picture here which is that
what we're talking about is a an example
of how to recognize and how to
communicate with an unconventional
intelligence it is not just philosophy
that thinking about groups of cells as
decisionmaking uh memory having uh goal
directed beings has led us to lots of
discoveries that were not made by the
standard Paradigm which sees them as
simple machines so my point is that uh
along this spectrum I call this the
spectrum of persuadability because it's
it's all about what kind of tools you're
going to use to communicate uh and and
control these various systems right so
here it's you know Hardware rewiring and
maybe some control theory and
cybernetics with things like thermostats
and then here maybe um Behavioral
Science and training and things like
that and then here you know you have a
some sort of Rich relationship with with
cogent reasoning and so on um the idea
is that we can't just have philosophical
feelings about where things fit on this
Continuum most people assume that cells
are somewhere down know down here that
they're basically simple uh simple
machines that need to be treated that
way and uh that leaves a lot on the
table because we're doing all kinds of
interesting things with cell um training
and and uh really taking advantage of
the problem solving competencies of
these things and so we have to do
experiments and so that brings us back
to the issue of uh of AI because it
isn't uh the question of AI isn't about
today's language models you know today
it's pretty easy to say well gp4 isn't
really like like a human mind and and so
on no no it isn't and it doesn't matter
for two reasons first because there are
many interesting Minds that are not
human minds and some of them are are
quite quite alien and second because uh
the whole point is that you you can't
just assume these things you have to do
experiments you have to ask yourself uh
do I know where intelligence comes from
why do simple things and and we've
studied some very simple things that
have amazing unexpected emerging
intelligent behaviors um do do we know
know where that comes from and how to
recognize them and I I'll tell you that
at this moment we don't so this is the
science of diverse intelligence and we
need to be extremely careful and I think
this is where the ethics come in comes
in we need to be extremely careful about
not denying uh uh Moral Moral worth and
and and various um kinds of ethical
protections to beings because they don't
look like us you know humans have a very
long history of uh trying to make uh
separations between ingroup and outgroup
based on really pretty ridiculous
um uh kind of uh very uh surfacy sorts
of um uh characteristics and we are uh
in your lifetime you are going to be
confronted with uh all sorts of Novel
being so so all of Darwin's endless
forms most beautiful here on Earth are
like a tiny corner of this whole Space
you know hbrs and cyborgs and all kinds
of non-neurotypical humans with implants
and and um different kinds of uh
connection to other other creatures and
to other Technical Systems uh you know
pretty much any combination of evolved
material engineered material and
software is some kind of being okay they
are going to be chimeras and cyborgs and
so it's not about uh the language models
of today it's about beings that are
nowhere with you on the tree of life you
cannot decide how you're going to relate
to them in the old ways which was to you
know sort of knock on it and if you hear
a metallic clanging sound you say aha so
so you were made in a factory and you're
and you're boring and I can take you
apart and that's what and and and that's
okay whereas if you heard like this U
you know this the soft woolly thud you
would say ah well you're a real being
like me and I have to I have to treat
you well even though we're not even very
good at that as as humans but but the
point is that uh th those kinds of
categories are going to be worthless
because the space of possible bodies and
Minds is extending radically and uh
we're going to have to develop much
better ethical Frameworks for kind of um
you know I'm sure you've heard of
symbiosis I think what we're really
talking about as a kind of synbiosis
where we have to learn how to relate to
beings that are different than us and uh
that uh you know so we're going to have
to figure out how you uh how you detect
where things are on this Continuum so
that we find appropriate balance points
between objectophilia objectophilia is
the thing where people fall in love with
Bridges and you know they think the
Eiffel Tower is is you know married to
them and so on uh right so so things
down here you're not going to have that
deep relationship with things up here
but other people are really trapped in
the other end of the Continuum where
they see things that are not like
today's standard humans and they say uh
you know those are not those are not
real Minds worthy of of of of care and
respect and so on and that very quickly
devolves to a kind of idea that's
basically love only your own kind and
and I think that's that's that's
probably Lots much worse than this so um
we really need to and if anybody has
questions we can talk about it we really
need to ask you know given all of these
facts uh what are what is a human
actually um and I have a kind of a weird
um answer to that uh and and if you were
going on on a long journey and you
wanted a companion what what is it that
you actually care about you know when
you say you know you don't want a Roomba
uh that's that's not enough but what do
you actually care about it's not the DNA
it's I I don't think anybody has any
allegiance to our particular human DNA
or the specific set of organs what is it
that you do want you know in a in a rich
human level relationship that's that's
very worth I'm thinking about so okay so
I'm going to I'm going to stop here if
anybody's interested in this stuff
here's a bunch of papers that go into um
all of this in uh in great detail uh
most importantly I need to thank um all
the people who uh did the work that I
showed you today so um here are all the
uh all the posts and students and uh and
everybody else who uh who contributed we
have lots of amazing um collaborators um
our funding comes from all kinds of
people I have to do a disclosure here
because there are three companies that
have spun out of our lab that uh are
supporting some of our work so so there
are some business connections here um
but most of all I always thank the model
system because because the various
animals uh and and and plants do all of
the heavy lifting in teaching us about
biology and about ourselves so thank you
so much
