this video is brought to you by imprint
hi welcome to another episode of Cold
Fusion has anyone seen Mark Zuckerberg
lately he looks a bit different the CEO
used to be known as the quintessential
nerd but now the plain teas and dark
hoodies have been replaced with
contemporary style and his timid frame
has now been replaced with that of a
fully fledged MMA fighter this makeover
might just seem like a change in
personal appearance but when you look
deeper it's significant like it or not
Mark Zuckerberg is one of the most
influential people people on the planet
billions of people around the world use
his products moreover no one can
challenge the power he holds within meta
literally meta's corporate board is set
up so that Mark can't be removed against
his will so a rebranding of the Zuck is
more consequential than meets the eye it
could be a clever strategy to redefine
how the public perceives Zuckerberg and
by extension the companies he leads is
it working early signs say yes we'll get
to that later but much of the internet
is already approving the change with GQ
Magazine stating that the Rebrand is so
good that it quote needs to be studied
and it's not just the outside Mark also
appears to have modified his political
views in this episode we'll take a look
at the new era of Zak his journey how he
reinvented himself and how all of this
affects the companies that he runs those
who know a lot of details about meta's
controversies aren't likely to fall for
it but it just might shift opinions for
a lot of people out there
you are watching cold fusion
TV the behavior of humans as a group is
pretty simple if the majority respect a
public figure that positive perception
leaks into everything that public figure
does a great example is the power of a
CEO's Public Image a positive example of
this working was with Steve Jobs if you
think about it he was basically a modern
take on Gandhi from his meditative poses
when answering questions his
philosophical answers even down to the
round glasses it can be traced back to
his love and inspiration from the 60s
when Eastern ideas came into the tech
World during the hippie movement and
computer counterculture in California
for Steve Jobs the Gandhi Aura worked in
his favor for decades hiding his
temperamental and explosive nature
behind the scenes even till the 2000s
the public ethos for Apple remained the
same an alternative tech company made
for the benefit of humans while
according to them everything else on the
market was unnecessarily complicated and
anti-human Zuckerberg is almost the
complete opposite for much of his career
Zuckerberg's Public Image has been
characterized as antihuman and detached
Zuckerberg was in many ways emblematic
of silicon Valley's culture of
innovation without a deep concern for
social impact in the movie The Social
Network which is based on the story of
Mark Zuckerberg and how Facebook was
first founded Mark was portrayed as an
awkward unlikable jerk in a hoodie even
though the movie was released in 2010
that perception would linger for years
to
come zuck's business Acumen would be
demonstrated over the following decade
at the end of that period Facebook had 2
billion users and his Acquisitions of
Instagram and WhatsApp proved to be as
successful he had so much Power Within
These companies that he essentially was
Facebook Instagram and WhatsApp there's
no doubt that his personal brand began
to suffer alongside Facebook's growing
controversies Zuckerberg effectively
became a transnational techar at the
center of privacy scandals as well as
political and cultural debates the
results of which made Zuckerberg one of
the most hated household
names in 2018 the Cambridge analytica
Scandal further destroyed Mark's Public
Image we got to remember that Facebook
was accused of allowing a political
analytics firm to improperly access the
personal data of millions of users
Zuckerberg would testify before Congress
and it was bizarre in many ways his
Behavior was so unhuman that he would be
called a robot or a lizard in a human
costume that sounds pretty bad already
but what was going on internationally
was even worse in some countries
Zuckerberg's companies caused mini
apocalypses in 2017 Facebook contributed
to a genocide against the rohinga people
in myammar in Colombia Facebook has been
a breeding ground for social unrest and
political fighting and then there's Sri
Lanka during its economic meltdown
Facebook was in the crosshairs for
spreading false rumors and conspiracy
theories which only made things worse
meanwhile content moderators both in the
US and developing countries faced poor
working conditions while screening
horrific content often without support
from Facebook then in October 2021
whistleblower Francis haen reveals some
shocking information the company had
internal knowledge of Instagram's
harmful effects on teenage mental health
and its role in stoking political
violence around the world and the same
was true for Facebook I saw Facebook
repeatedly encounter conflicts between
its own profits and our safety Facebook
consistently resolved these conflicts in
favor of its own profits the result has
been more division more harm more lies
more threats and more combat in some
cases this this dangerous online talk
has led to actual violence that harms
and even kills people the leaks painted
a troubling picture a company aware of
its impact but seemingly unwilling to
make any substantial changes and this
ignited public distrust on a global
scale for Zuckerberg now the problem
went beyond negative headlines it was
about facing a new kind of backlash that
threatened the future of the entire
company with so much at stake Zuckerberg
had to rethink not only his personal
brand but how Facebook was perceived on
a global
scale Zuckerberg's first major Rebrand
was not a personal one but a corporate
one in October 2021 the same month as
The Whistleblower leaks Facebook
officially rebranded as meta it was a
move designed to Signal the company's
pivot towards a future of virtual
reality and the metaverse I am proud to
announce that starting today our company
is now
meta however the timing of this Rebrand
was suspicious Facebook just wanted
everyone to forget about their past but
it didn't really make sense especially
when Facebook was still meta's largest
platform and their primary revenue
Source the metaverse meta's namesake was
supposed to be a connected Digital
Universe where people could work play
and socialize through virtual reality
the results were less than Stella clunky
movement and menu mechanics terrible
graphics and a Barren Wasteland was the
best that we got still in 2024 the
metaverse is losing the company billions
this digital selfie of Zak in the
metaverse also didn't do his public
perception any good as the 1010 billion
metaverse was flopping the stock market
reacted we all remember that massive
stock dip of meta in 2022 in the same
year he ranked fourth on the world's
most hated billionaires list this was
his Rock Bottom at this point he was
probably worse off than all those years
ago when The Social Network movie was
released so really even though meta
represented a daring New Direction the
company couldn't escape the shadows of
its past controversies business-wise
though Zuckerberg did miraculously
manage to stabilize the ship eventually
as the rest of the tech World pivoted
towards AI so did Zuck with his open
source llama llm and he would also focus
more on VR and AI headset Hardware as
Zuckerberg forged ahead he faced an
uphill battle of convincing both
investors users and the media that meta
was simply not Facebook with a new coat
of paint but actually a company
genuinely committed to change and to do
this he had to change
himself somewhere in 2023 is where
Zuckerberg's personal rebranding became
evident the CEO once known for being
dweebish and awkward threw himself into
MMA training and athleticism sharing
social media posts highlighting his
martial arts training and gym
routines this transformation was to show
that Zuckerberg was tougher more
disciplined and a determined leader
someone capable of navigating meta
through turbulent times the shift also
helped humanize him in ways where his
previous image failed to do so there
were regular memes of Zuckerberg being a
Droid or a robot but now he's just a
dude that does MMA Mark are the
allegations true that you were secretly
a lizard um I'm going to I'm going to
have to go with no on that I I I am not
a lizard in fact Zuckerberg competed in
his first jiu-jitsu tournament and he
won gold and silver medals and this
achievement actually received positive
reactions from the public this
surprising turn has sparked curiosity
from both the tech world and the public
at large in many ways Zuckerberg's
transformation into a more normal and
accessible figure has softened some of
with the criticism directed at him and
we can't forget the Elon Musk versus Zak
cage fight it never materialized but it
was a surreal moment in history but the
next stage of the transformation came in
2024 The Meta CEO began to look
different in April of 2024 he posted an
Instagram re about updates to The Meta
AI assistant and llama 3 AI model but
people weren't focusing on that they
were focused on something else his gold
chain Street Wear had entered the
picture after 13 years of jeans and gray
shirts Zuckerberg transformed himself
into an unlikely fashion talking point
recently he wore a shirt that
essentially read either Zuck or nothing
a play on an ancient Roman saying either
Caesar or nothing another recent shirt
sported by Zak features Greek words that
mean learning through suffering these
choices in apparel are purposeful and
self-referential a move that some people
like other than his appearance changes
though Zuckerberg particularly over the
last year has appeared in popular
podcasts and shows whether that's
showing up on Lex Friedman multiple
times or more recently YouTube shows
like Cleo Abrams or The Verge these
appearances were generally received
favorably by audiences all right so at
this point you might be thinking okay
yeah but who really cares normally this
wouldn't mean that much but the thing is
Zuckerberg's style directly impacts how
people view him and meta billions of
dollars are on the line here as the CEO
of a a tech giant under scrutiny for
something as serious as child
endangerment His Image is crucial in our
celebrity CEO culture could Zuckerberg's
transformation from an awkward nerd to
an MMA fighter divert attention from
meta's ongoing
issues by presenting himself as more
approachable and dynamic Zuckerberg is
signaling to everyone that meta is
evolving too Amber ven box founder of
the shopping platform ltk explains to
TechCrunch quote we have spoken and
written communication we have body
language and we have drip our appearance
does communicate a lot about us and
influences the way that people feel
about us personal style is a
communication tool just compare this
picture of Zuckerberg to this Droid
pretending to sip water it's not at all
logical but the change up really does
affect how people think about him and
it's not just MMA or sporting certain
clothes because as recently as August
2024 Zuckerberg wrote a letter to
Congress which seemed to express regret
about failing to speak out against the
administration when it pressured
Facebook to censor certain covid-19
posts during the pandemic a move that
Free Speech activists couldn't believe
however this image overhaul has raised
some questions about its sincerity is
Mark Zuckerberg's new persona an
authentic reflection of personal growth
or is it simply a well orchestrated PR
campaign designed to rehabilitate his
tinest reputation either way is there
any evidence that it's working the
answer is actually
yes when talking about Ai and stealing
data to train models Zak argued that
this should be considered fair use and
that quote individual creators or
Publishers tend to overestimate their
value of specific content end quot he
took a Hardline stance saying if content
makers demand payment he' just removed
them already not good but then when it
came to the negative relationship
between mental health and social media
on teens Zuck straight up disputed the
claims and growing controversy a
terrible look but the thing is have you
heard any of this recent news some of
you might but it certainly didn't
receive the same amount of public
scrutiny that it would have if Zak was
still a lizard robot everyone has
basically been focusing on meta's latest
products unveiled by a new transformed
Mark Zuckerberg the new cycle quickly
moved on of course there are a lot of
other variables at play but it's still
very interesting to observe meta's
recent Orion smart glasses unveiling was
perceived very positively by the public
but there's room for pause smart glasses
by their very nature collect vast
amounts of data including the user's
location behavior and even biometric
information this data can be used to
create hyper-personalized experiences
but it also raises concerns about how
much of a user's life will be monitored
and tracked again we have to remember
meta isn't known for respecting user
privacy and another point to consider
two Harvard students demonstrated just
how easy it was to track unsuspecting
people by hacking meta Rayband glasses
welcome back we've all heard about those
smart glasses but did you know there was
a way to use the glasses to learn
personal information about strangers
just by looking at them yeah this is
some frightening stuff here right so
there's two Harvard students that are
now highlighting the Privacy
vulnerabilities that are associated with
these glasses we built glasses that let
you identify anybody on the street the
information or tool collects from just a
photo of your face is
stabing guys I'm scared oh my God wait
to use it you just put the glasses on
then as you walk five people the glasses
will detect when somebody's face is in
frame this photo is used to analyze them
and after a few seconds their personal
information pops up on your phone oh hi
ma'am wait are you a Betsy yes oh okay I
think I uh I think I met you through
like the cambri Community Foundation
right yeah yeah it's great to meet you
I'm Kane the reactions Harvard Junior's
Anu NN and Kane Ario got when they
showed people how quickly they could
learn personal information about them
like their address and family members
names range from amazement to shock is
your address
for
Valley Atlanta Georgia 303 what about
John and Susan are they your uh those
are my parents parents okay cool oh my
God yes they were like oh my god I've
like never seen that photo of me before
so it was pretty clear to us that like a
lot of the data that we were able to
uncover using these like relatively
simple tools is like people didn't even
know that existed they use smart glasses
that anyone can buy sure all of this
data used to recognize the people in the
video is based on information that's
already publicly available on meta's
apps but having someone know your
personal information by just watching
you walk down the street is a point in
society when it comes to user privacy
that we've never ever been at the data
harvesting though goes beyond possible
targeted ads and identification meta has
stated that images and videos captured
by smart glasses could be used to train
its AI models which is a whole another
can of worms so in summary even though
Zak and meta's Rebrand has softened His
Image the bigger issues are still at
large while Zuckerberg's revamped and
tougher image may be grabbing headlines
it doesn't change the fact that meta
still faces some big fundamental issues
meta's business model relies on keeping
users engaged and enraged the longer
people stay on the platforms the more
money meta makes unfortunately
controversial or Sensational content
just tends to do that best dividing
every Society it comes across meta's
Reliance on targeted ads is also a
concern for privacy its impact on
political discourse and mental health
are messing with the lives of billions
he may have changed his appearance but
can we really trust the guy I'd say the
vast majority of people still say no but
it begs the question what could someone
like Zuckerberg do to regain trust after
doing so much harm to so many knowingly
or
unknowingly but credit where credit is
due running one of the most most
influential companies of Our Generation
from such a young age is by no means an
easy feat for meta and Zuckerberg to
truly regain public trust it must go
beyond rebranding efforts they got to
make substantial changes to how the
company operates interacts with its
users and most importantly respects its
users so what's your take on Zak his
transformation and the overall story
surrounding his companies let us know in
the comment section below if you're
watching this channel then you probably
love learning new things but it can
often be ult to find the time that's
where today's sponsor imprint comes in
they offer bite-sized learning in a
style that's both beautiful and builds a
learning habit it features book
summaries courses and articles on
science technology business history
economics leadership and more imprint
breaks down learning into engaging
Graphics animations and lessons that can
replace useless social media scrolling
with imprint each lesson only takes a
few minutes a day I enjoyed the lesson
on thinking like a scientist from the
book think again by Adam Grant it
teaches us that usually when we're
making decisions or communicating with
people we tend to have overconfidence in
our assumptions thinking like a
scientist means that we taken new
information or adjust our views in an
experiment it was proven that Business
Leaders that adopted that mindset vastly
outperform the control group fascinating
stuff so to try everything that imprint
has to offer for free for a full 7 Days
visit imprint app.com coldfusion or
click the link in the description the
first 200 of you will get 20 20% off an
imprint annual premium
subscription also if you're a patreon of
cold fusion be sure to check your
notifications I've just made a big
announcement over there so thanks for
watching my name is toogo and you've
been watching cold fusion and I'll catch
you again soon for the next episode
which will hopefully be on the topic why
is Generation Z so poor it's going to be
an interesting one so keep a lookout for
it okay cheers guys have a good one
cold fusion it's new thinking
