you might think there's a direct
connection between intelligence and
success right it's the material success
Career Success so on it turns out that
there is up to a point after that point
there's no connection is very very
difficult to find a connection so I'm
going to talk to you today about why
super intelligent people super
intelligent people are not the most
successful people you know and the ones
that make it in the corporate world they
tend to be about 10% higher than the
median so let let's talk about it if we
take
IQ as a proxy for intelligence and there
are all kinds of issues with using IQ
and so on but it's well studied and it
actually has a very definite
predictability in terms of U of
socioeconomic class and outcome to a
point only up until about 10 to 15
points above the median so to just to
remind you on IQ
uh it is it is based around 100 being
the IQ median where a 10-year-old takes
a test they they perform like a
10-year-old they get a uh a 100 uh%
right and if they perform like an 11year
old they
get10 so that's just a little bit higher
than uh than the median but the median
is is forced around a normal curve
around 100 for women it's about 4.5
points lower than men look it up it's a
fact but uh but let's just assume 100 as
the median
now that is quite predictable 10 points
below 10 points above in terms of
socioeconomic outcome so whether you do
well in corporations you make you know a
a a
outsized living um versus you know not
doing so
well
and after about 115 points there more or
less you the tracking starts getting
iffy and once you get up to above genius
level which is considered 140 just you
know you figure a 10-year-old taking a a
test like a 14-year-old that's a that's
a big step then then the predictions are
way off and if you and if and and there
as anecdotal evidence right I I I Look
to
Einstein who couldn't get you look into
his life he you know he he didn't speak
didn't talk for years his parents were
super worried about him and um and he
did okay in in education and then
couldn't get a job for like nine years
in physics Albert Einstein couldn't get
a job in physics and he turns out to be
one of the brightest Minds in history
there's another guy William James cittis
you should look this guy up he's
considered the smartest man to that we
know of that is that has lived in in
history and I don't know what his IQ was
but it was outrageous he got into
Harvard I think when he was 11 or 12
graduated when he was
16 and he was a loser he was a loser he
was a clerk he was a child prodigy he
could he could read you know super early
I mean this guy
was out there he was smart and he was
loser he ended up being a clerk um at at
at different companies and just just
grinding away and the newspapers when he
was a kid they would they would all go
around be like wow look at this guy he
is brilliant he must do amazing things
and and let's track him and they tracked
him through his lifetime and by you know
the time he was in this like mid 20s 30s
he was he was doing nothing with his
life and so much so that the Press
ridiculed the guy and I think he ended
up committing suicide and they would
they would find him out he would switch
jobs and then they would go and find him
and and start making fun of them right
this is like the the original social
media um uh
harassment and I think he he committed
suicide and then Einstein like like why
why is it why is it that this guy did
not really thrive in education or in
companies and I'm going to tell you why
this all started getting interesting for
me when I I joined Google I I worked at
Google for like nine years when I joined
when I when I joined Google I met some
of the smartest people I'd ever know
just boom there there's some people that
you know you have a conversation and you
can work up to a level of intelligence
you know within your discourse it's
almost a
shorthand with some of the people that I
met early on
Google Boom we just we just start here
we just it's just d d d do and and you
you smart people know smart people not
saying anything about myself but
the I guess maybe I am but the the the
discourse went immediately to just just
very high level uh discussion it was
very easy it was like it was like
talking in in in shorthand um what I
know noticed was and and I had just come
from the Boston Consulting Group good
amount of smart people there but a
little different um and you know went to
Wharton smart people there Brown smart
people there uh got into MIT smart
people there but like but when I went
into Google I I met people that really
build like really like like think
smart like smart smart and about s years
into my career at Google about
2016 or 17 I guess it was 9 years I
realized all of the really smart people
had
left everybody that I had admired like
as being really smart we all gone and
what was left were this this middle
group and call it you know 100 to 115
intelligent
and they were they were all fighting
over resources they were all doing the
corporate Shenanigans all of the all of
the the
stupid um uh infighting and
politics and it really made me wonder
like what why would all of these
brilliant people leave a a perfectly
good Corporation and then and then I
left shortly
afterwards and it got me really thinking
about in and now when I when I you know
I talk to people at Google and I know
quite a few of them or in corporate
world they they all muddle around the
mean and typically typically these guys
are the like the 105 to 115 take that as
a proxy um and they Thrive there and so
so that's my first
point the
superintelligent don't necessarily
thrive in corporations why is that in in
corporations you have to have a dullness
of spirit you you really have to shut
your mind off to certain things you
can't say you can't say uh you know as a
as a product manager or as an engineer
say hey you know
what when when the when the executives
say hey we need to get growth you can't
turn around and be like you know what
I've analyzed all of the different
projects they're probably not worth our
time to do we're better off looking at
something else
no you you cannot do even if that's the
right answer even if that's the right
answer that is punished that is
absolutely punished in a corporate world
what you have to say is yeah oh wow I I
got some great projects yeah let's do
this let's do that and then and then
blame people for for not executing
properly right cover your ass that's how
you get ahead in in in corporations and
you make friends you get you get buddies
that are that are in in in management
and you shoot the with them and you
get to know them well because nobody
gets promoted because they're they're
more productive than somebody else you
all get promoted everybody gets promoted
because some manager or group of
managers say that person gets promoted
that's it that's
it so it's it's it really is about your
politics and who you know and how you
know them and and getting them to
scratch your
back for the moderate intelligent people
this is doable you can you can turn off
that whole the whole rest of your brain
to say like okay I'm not going for the
right answer I'm going for my answer but
for the Uber
intelligent it's very difficult it's
very difficult because you can see it so
that's one that's one issue the other
issue is that you know I've seen a bunch
of research on um on smart people and
certainly the research is done from
people who are not in that
group they they wow they're trying to
understand you know the the the super
smart in their motivations and uh they
themselves are not it's like putting a
stethoscope to a supercomputer okay you
get you get some idea of what's going on
but but really they draw conclusions
that are absolutely false you might have
seen some of these as
well and one of the researchers goes
something like this um that that super
super intelligent people are not super
successful because when their children
everything is is you know laid out for
them and and everything is easy in
education and understanding some some
things so they they they learn not to
work for things okay that's the How The
Story Goes and then they get into
Corporate America or they get into you
know life and they they haven't trained
this muscle for working
hard that is absolute
now maybe there are examples of that
where somebody's like yeah you know it
was all easy before and now it's a
little bit difficult and I can't no no
no no no the reason why super
intelligent people one of the main
reasons are are not like at the
Forefront of industry and and and push
pushing forward things is because the
highly intelligent can see the end way
before you can or maybe you're in in in
the group but they can way before these
researchers can they can stop and sit
and within a couple of seconds minutes
figure out what their life path would be
if they if they worked hard on this
particular path and it's not that
appealing if you really if you really
think about you know uh about what a
life path would be on on working a a
corporate job 60 hours a week to get
ahead and then and then go do this and
the luck involved and then you go is it
worth the squeeze is the juice worth the
squeeze a lot of people on their
deathbed say me not really not really
and so the the Uber intelligent can look
at
this beforehand a priori and say like no
I'm not why would I do that that why
would I do that and everybody else in
this middling thing right say say 85 IQ
up to 110 it's like well of course you
should do that you have you have the
intelligence you could do it
all yeah but it doesn't matter so what
if you make and and they they they know
even without the research on happiness
uh linked to income which which flattens
out and ASM tootes uh as as soon as you
get enough for a living enough for food
and a roof over your head and a couple
of fun things to do you're your your
happiness connection to money just Asm
tootes on a logarithmic scale it's you
know 10x 100x 1,000x it doesn't matter
your your happiness is kind of
capped and we even without seeing this
research a highly intelligent person can
see this so what's the what's the
strategy of life it's to be down here
it's to work very little it's to it's to
one strategy one strategy right because
you're still looking out of your same
eyes you're still eating food it still
turns to poop you're still like you know
living in a house I remember buying my
first house I was like you know my wife
was super excited oh my God I'm like
this is the same as an apartment it
really is except now I got to do
maintenance and that's life then and and
as a as a super intelligent person they
look I don't know what to call them men
or something but you know you can look
out into the future and and just see
like no that this Human Experience would
be very similar if I if I make a million
dollars a year 10 million 100 million
500 million it doesn't matter it doesn't
matter you you can rent a boat or you
can buy a yacht it doesn't matter you're
still looking out of your same eye still
living in your same skin and this path
you're working 80 hours a week for
someone else for someone
else right so your wife and your kids
can enjoy the nice house they they
didn't do anything for it they're just
like oh yeah such a nice house okay
okay so that's that's one of the first
things so what do they end up doing they
end up doing their own thing and this is
where I see some a bation right of of
highly intelligent people some of them
discover something that is
intellectually uh challenging enough
where they dig into it I me Einstein
could be in this in this category uh
Eric Weinstein uh smart guy could be in
this uh maybe Jordan Peterson don't know
um uh also you know smart
guy they find something that they're
actually interested in and they can dig
into intellectually it's got a it's got
enough surface area where they can
really
take it and they make that that their
life's work because that is fulfilling
you live up here you live right in your
mind on what you're experiencing and
using that brain to figure out you know
complicated things is fun it's exciting
it might not be you know economically
rewarding as it is to muddle through a
career and and work up to you know to be
uh coo or CEO or something like
that but but it's it's much more
interesting and you don't have to you
know necessarily put yourself in a
totalitarian regime to do that right a
corporation so so that's that's a big
one that's a big one and and you'll see
this with with highly intelligent people
that they that they they latch on to
things and they think about them deeply
and for most other people they don't get
it they you can't even explain what
they're thinking you can't even explain
what what you what the language is is so
inefficient compared to what's going up
uh in the brain that bringing it over
what you know having say five different
ideas in your head and then being able
to bring that over to somebody who who
has a moderate sense of intelligence uh
very difficult very difficult and it
just gets frustrating and you're just
like I'd love to talk to you but you
just don't you don't get it the
assumptions are different the the you
know you you you you know people have to
take short hands they have to they have
to accept things as true that that are
not necessarily true because otherwise
they can't they can't you know they
can't have that that cognitive
dissonance in their head and so like for
instance you know having a having
projects that you know are stupid you
you I I know people that are not dumb
but you know they're not in that that
140 area and they just they just turn it
off and they're like oh yeah
so and they're pretty
successful right
monetarily and and Corporation and so on
education's a similar Point education is
did our education system globally is the
dumbest thing now look for
getting you know getting people
um you know some moniker of of an
educated mind okay but it was designed
in the 1830s right by German
industrialists to to to basically get
people to sit at their station and be
able to do their work that's how it was
designed that's why we have bells in our
in our public schools to tell us when
the next station
and going and you you basically are
learning to sit still shut up and do
whatever the master says that is stupid
that is not education and and highly
intelligent people know this immediately
when you were a kid it is like what the
hell am I doing here why is this idiot
talking to me and look you know God
bless the school teachers but they ain't
the smartest people in the world so they
get a super intelligent kid in there and
they have no idea what to do them
they're like the kids running circles
around them and they're just like
the the kid is like
what why do I have to go through this
torture of of learning these things you
you know they are not going to be that
useful right we need to revamp the the
the education system and then when you
get into college it's not about hey let
let let intellectualism Thrive I think
it might have used to be there in some
colleges and then they get um political
like what happened in in pre-nazi
Germany the uh the the universities
there were all top universities and you
know coming up with quantum mechanics
and physics and so on until they got
political and then they were you you
couldn't speak what you wanted to speak
and and an intellectual environment
needs that outside of whatever
whatever's wrong whatever's right or
wrong you have to throw that out in
intellectual discussions and
intellectual curiosity because maybe the
Big Bang is not
correct oh my God you know five years
ago 10 years ago there's no way you
could even whisper that in a physics
department but now with James red
telescopes we were looking at it and
we're like huh we got to modify this
Theory that's science that is how we
make progress and and so
when you're when you're highly
intelligent you get funneled into this
education system that's designed for the
muddling masses and it's awful even the
even the the the gifted course oh my God
even the gifted uh stuff you just do
more work you just do more work you're
like like Hey we're going to do some
some great stuff we're going to learn
more history that what why do I want to
do this are you kidding me yeah and it's
you know taught by bozos nothing against
teachers but most of them are not are
not super highly
intelligent so I'm not looking for
Solutions here I I it's you know I have
other ideas about Solutions um and
there's there's some good research about
uh Solutions but you know you can't
always believe uh sociological and
psychological research my whole point is
this the smartest people that I know
are not the most successful the smartest
people that I know I mean out
there smart smart like bum bum bum up
here smart where you I can have a
conversation with them like that about
all kinds of topics and they've thought
about it deeply and if they haven't
they're thinking about it right then
those people are not the most successful
people I know they really are not the
most successful people that I know are
right around around the middle right say
say 105 to 115
intelligence as a proxy
IQ and you need that you need that that
is what corporations are designed for
they are designed for
cooperation across a
wide segment of society and that widest
segment that largest segment of society
has an IQ right around 100 so everything
a corporation is designed for a person
with 100 IQ and if you fall out of that
either on the high side or the low side
it's very difficult to to make it in a
corporation which is which is the the
bulk of where we get our financial means
so highly intelligent people just check
out they just check out why why would I
spend you know my My Blood Sweat and
Tears trying to figure out this whole
Corp thing when you know the the people
I'm talking to are just they're not all
that does this resonate with you are you
are you in the highly intelligent people
you you probably because of the dun and
Krueger effect you probably don't think
you are and if you do think you are
you're probably
not D and Krueger effect is is you know
when people know just a little bit they
think they know an awful lot you know
anybody like that and when people know
an awful lot they realize how much more
there is to know and they they think
they actually don't know much that's
done in Krueger and one of my favorite
principles in Psychology um so if you
think you're really smart if you think
you know it all you probably don't and
if you think that you're like a cat
trying to figure out calculus trying to
figure out the world and it's just holy
 there's a lot
there you might be a little bit smarter
than you think so I hope you're having a
great day I would love to hear your
comments about intelligence and and how
that affects your life on one side or
other if you disagree with me disagree
with me no problem I I i' love love all
the comments and and you know uh it's
but just you know bring bring experience
bring data bring a a good uh discussion
to the uh to the table and on that I
hope you're having a wonderful day
wherever you fall on the intelligent
scale it's just one part of our our
lives and you can have a wonderful life
any place that you're there you just
live the life that you want to live
don't let anybody judge you don't let
anybody tell you otherwise live you got
one life here that we know of live it
it's amazing it's amazing and you can do
anything with that life you can even
subscribe to this
Channel or like the
video I'm glad you're here I really
enjoy the the comments and the
discussions that we have so have a great
day live long and prosper take care bye
